Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 7

THE ANTEDILUVIAN PATRIARCHS

Adam had Dominion over the Earth. After Adam was driven from the Garden of Eden he "began to till the earth, and to have dominion over all the beasts of the field, and to eat his bread by the sweat of his brow; * * And Eve, also, his wife, did labor with him." There were born unto them many sons and daughters and as their children grew to maturity "the sons and daughters of Adam began to divide two and two in the land, and to till the land, and to tend flocks, and they also begat sons and daughters."—Moses 5:3.

In this way tribes and peoples began to multiply and spread over the face of the earth. Organized government, it was found, even in that early day, was essential to the peace and advancement of the people, notwithstanding they had turned away from the teachings of their fathers which were given by the hand of God.

Men Lived to be Old. In antediluvian days men lived to be exceedingly old. The Bible says that "Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth."

And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years; and he begat sons and daughters;

And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years; and he died.

All the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years when he died. Enos, son of Seth, lived nine hundred and five years and his son Cainan lived until he was nine hundred and ten years of age. All of these antediluvian patriarchs lived to see the eighth, ninth or tenth century from the time they were born. Methuselah, the grandfather of Noah, is rated in the record as having lived the longest mortal life, having traversed a period of nine hundred and sixty-nine years before he passed away. His death came only a few months before the flood and he lived five years longer than his son Lamech.

The belief is very prevalent today among scholars that these ages are greatly exaggerated, and that men did not live in early times to such extreme years, but we have the confirmation in modern revelation of the Bible account of these ages. (D. and C. 107.) In the school of the Elders in Kirtland in 1834, a series of seven lectures on faith were given under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith. In one of these lectures the following occurs:

First, Adam was 130 years old when Seth was born. Genesis v. 3. And the days of Adam, after he had begotten Seth, were 800 years, making him 930 years old when he died. Genesis v. 4, 5. Seth was 105 when Enos was born (verse 6); Enos was 90 when Cainan was born (verse 9); Cainan was 70 when Mahalaleel was born (verse 12); Mahalaleel was 65 when Jared was born (verse 15); Jared was 162 when Enoch was born (verse 18); Enoch was 65 when Methuselah was born (verse 21); Methuselah was 187 when Lamech was born (verse 25); Lamech was 182 when Noah was born (verse 28).

From this account it appears that Lamech, the ninth from Adam and the father of Noah, was 56 years old when Adam died; Methuselah, 243; Enoch, 308; Jared, 470; Mahalaleel, 535; Cainan, 605; Enos, 695; and Seth, 800.

So that Lamech the father of Noah, Methuselah, Enoch, Jared, Mahalaleel, Cainan, Enos, Seth and Adam, were all living at the same time, and, beyond all controversy, were all preachers of righteousness.

Adam called Michael, the Archangel. In confirmation of this we read in the Doctrine and Covenants (Sec. 107:41-52) that Adam ordained Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch and Methuselah. Lamech was ordained under the hands of Seth, and Noah, when only ten years of age, was ordained by Methuselah. All of these men were Patriarchs and faithful before the Lord. The Lord has also revealed to us that:

Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-On-di-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

And the Lord appeared unto them; and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.—Doctrine and Covenants 107:53-56.

We learn from this that these men were all true and faithful preachers of righteousness. Without question their preaching had its effect on many of the people, but we may well believe that most of those who hearkened became members of the City of Enoch. Those who refused to hearken to the preaching of these righteous men also must have been very numerous and they greatly outnumbered those who were willing to keep the commandments of God. We know from the writings of Enoch that there were multitudes who refused to hear these preachers of righteousness. Enoch was called by divine appointment to be a missionary among the peoples of the earth and the Lord said unto him:

Enoch, my son, prophesy unto this people, and say unto them—Repent, for thus saith the Lord; I am angry with this people, and my fierce anger is kindled against them; for their hearts have waxed hard, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes cannot see afar off;

And for these many generations, ever since the day that I created them, have they gone astray, and have denied me, and have sought their own counsels in the dark; and in their own abominations have they devised murder, and have not kept the commandments, which I gave unto their Father, Adam.—Moses 6:26-28.

Wars and Bloodshed through Rebellion. In obedience to this charge Enoch went forth among the people, except the people of Canaan who were descendants of Cain. The descendants of Cain were black and were despised among all other people. As Enoch went forth he stood upon the hills and the high places and cried unto the people, and they were offended at him because of the things he taught. Nevertheless they were afraid of him because of the great power of his words which caused the earth to tremble and even mountains fled at his command, but this did not bring the people to repentance.

And from that time forth there were wars and bloodshed among them; but the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness.

The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people. And the Lord blessed the land, and they were blessed upon the mountains, and upon the high places, and did flourish.

And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them.

And Enoch continued his preaching in righteousness unto the people of God. And it came to pass in his days, that he built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even Zion.—Moses 7:16-19.

The City Zion a Theocracy. This City of Holiness, or Zion, was a theocracy like unto the government established by the Lord in the days of Adam. In it the celestial law prevailed, the commandments of the Lord were respected; there were no jealousies, envyings, immorality or wickedness of any kind. The people were truly happy, and only by obedience to divine law can a people be truly happy. If we, today, had the faith and willingness to serve the Lord and would love God and our neighbor as ourselves, as we have been commanded to do, we would be just as happy and blessed as were the people of the City of Zion. The Son of God would again be willing to do as he did with the inhabitants of Zion, he could dwell in our midst, in other words, we could "walk with God." It is only our rebellion and unwillingness to be obedient in all things, that keeps us from having the companionship of heavenly messengers in this latter day. Eventually this condition will come, but not until the earth is cleansed of its wickedness and the reign of righteousness is ushered in for one thousand years.

A Righteous Government. We are informed that the people of Enoch's city were governed by divine law. Their government was one of righteousness. The willingness of the people to serve the Lord in all things made it possible for him to visit them, and they were constantly instructed by the visions of heaven, and the actual visitations of heavenly messengers for the veil between the mortal and the heavenly world was very thin.

In course of time, and because of the righteousness of the people of this government, they were translated. The Lord took them from the earth to dwell in a more nearly perfect condition where righteousness could prevail.

We have the record of one other time when a similar condition prevailed, that was among the Nephites for nearly two hundred years after the appearing of Jesus Christ to that people. Naturally a condition of righteousness is displeasing to the adversary of righteousness. He is an indefatigable worker; he has lost none of his ambition and is just as determined today as he was in the beginning to destroy human lives. If he can find but one soul who will follow him he has made an inroad into a community and eventually he will find another until disintegration sets in and peace and happiness give way to rebellion and wickedness. The Lord endeavored to establish his government among the primitive Christians, but the odds against them were too great and the experiment in that day could not be carried out.

The Order of Enoch. In our own dispensation the law of Enoch was offered to the Church, but the Latter-day Saints failed to live it and therefore it was taken away and a lesser law instituted until such time as Christ shall come to cleanse the Church, along with the rest of the world, of its wickedness and disobedience, by removing all things that offend. This lesser law—tithing—has been given to be a schoolmaster to prepare us for the time when we will be able to accept the higher law. Moreover, the Lord said that this law which he has given shall be observed until "after her (Zion's) redemption." Those who are impatient and think that the Church is proceeding contrary to divine law because consecration is not at this time adopted should remember this and be true unto the lesser law until Zion's redemption and then there will come the command through the authority of Jesus Christ for the introduction of the law which was given to Enoch and his people. If a man will not abide by the law of tithing now, he will not be counted worthy to enter into the practice of the higher law of consecration when Christ comes in the power of his kingdom.

They Loved Satan More Than God. The history of the antediluvian times is so meager that we are not informed as to the nature of the governments which were first established following the apostasy which set in almost at the beginning. We may presume to say without successful contradiction, based on the meager knowledge we now have, that they copied the order which had been established by the Lord in his Church, the patriarchal order. Cain married his brother's daughter, and with others who "loved Satan more than God," he went to the land of Nod, east of Eden, and there he and his followers established themselves. We have learned also that in course of time the people of Cain became very numerous. Other nations also were formed among the descendants of Adam who did not follow Cain, and these in the main reveled in their wickedness. There were the peoples of Shum, Canaan, Enoch, Heni, Omer, Shem, Haner, and Hannaiah and perhaps a great many more. The Lord made a promise to Enoch that after he and his people should be taken from the earth that he would cause that the seed of Enoch should remain so that the inhabitants of the new order after the flood should come through him. For this reason Methuselah, son of Enoch, was not taken with the City of Zion, "And it came to pass that Methuselah prophesied that from his loins should spring all the kingdoms of the earth (through Noah), and he took glory unto himself." It would seem, however, that all who hearkened to the teachings of Methuselah and Lamech, his son, and others, who, presumably, taught righteousness, were caught up unto the city of Enoch so that evil and rebellion prevailed among all the inhabitants of the earth, who remained.

The Power of Satan on the Earth. We have every reason to believe that Enoch rejoiced because of the righteousness of the people in the City of Enoch, and he talked with the Lord and exclaimed: "Surely Zion shall dwell in safety forever." His thought evidently was that because of the righteousness and obedience of the people that this condition would continue here on the earth and Zion, the pure in heart, would dwell here in safety in their obedience to divine laws. The Lord, however, had other plans. Enoch and his city were not to remain amid the wickedness of the inhabitants of the earth. Because of their faithfulness the Lord had prepared for them another sphere, therefore he answered Enoch saying: "Zion have I blessed, but the residue of the people have I cursed."

And it came to pass that the Lord showed unto Enoch all the inhabitants of the earth; and he beheld, and lo, Zion, in process of time, was taken up into heaven. And the Lord said unto Enoch: Behold mine abode forever.

And Enoch also beheld the residue of the people which were the sons of Adam; and they were a mixture of all the seed of Adam save it were the seed of Cain, for the seed of Cain were black, and had not place among them.

And after that Zion was taken up into heaven, Enoch beheld, and lo, all the nations of the earth were before him;

And there came generation upon generation; and Enoch was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father, and of the Son of Man; and behold, the power of Satan was upon all the face of the earth.—Moses 7:20-25.

A Veil of Darkness Covered the Earth. While Enoch was lifted up, he beheld Satan upon the earth, and he had a great chain in his hand, and it veiled the whole face of the earth with darkness. This darkness was caused by the wickedness of the people and their willingness to serve the prince of darkness, who looked upon his work and laughed, and his angels rejoiced. However, out of this veil of darkness there came some who refused to submit to Satan's rule and out of heaven angels descended to these, bearing testimony of the Father and Son; and the Holy Ghost fell on many, "and they were caught up by the power of heaven into Zion." In this way the Lord blessed the obedient and humble and they were privileged to join the translated city being caught up unto that city from the veil of Satan's darkness. The few righteous who remained tarried because they had a mission to perform, which mission was to preach to those in darkness and to hold authority in the earth in the name of Jehovah, and to perpetuate the race after the destruction of the ungodly should come through the flood.

A Time of Great Wickedness. We read further that the Lord of heaven looked upon the residue of the people after he had taken away those who were willing to serve him, and he wept. Enoch bore record and marveled, saying: "How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains?" Again, Enoch said, "How is it that thou canst weep, seeing thou art holy, and from all eternity to all eternity? The Lord answered him, saying: "Behold these thy brethren; they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge, in the day I created them; and in the Garden of Eden, gave I unto man his agency; and unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood; and the fire of mine indignation is kindled against them; and in my hot displeasure will I send in the floods upon them, for my fierce anger is kindled against them. Behold, I am God, Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also, wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren."

Because men loved Satan more than God it became necessary for the Lord to gather together in the city of Enoch all who were willing to serve him. These in process of time were caught up into heaven and with the exception of Noah and his family, none of the righteous remained upon the earth. Not only was man corrupt but the same was true of all flesh so that the Lord declared: "The earth was corrupt before God, and it was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with violence, and behold I will destroy all flesh from off the earth."

In this early day, the governments of men had failed. They had so corrupted themselves through rebellion and sin that the only remedy was for a cleansing of the earth by a baptism of water.
