Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 8

ANCIENT POLITICAL DESPOTISMS

Man Before the Flood. The only reliable source of information in relation to man before the flood is obtained from the Holy Scriptures. Revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants and in the Pearl of Great Price confirm the story given in Genesis, in the Bible. The history of the ancient nations has come down to us clouded in myth and legend, and full of uncertainty. Outside of the Scriptures we have nothing reliable beyond about 2500 years B.C., and much of that which has been written of these early times is doubtful. Certain nations lay claim to great antiquity, but their beginnings are lost in a maze of tradition, which is not to be received as being authentic.

Moses wrote the account of creation and the book of Genesis. This fact is confirmed in the New Testament in the teachings of our Savior, and also in the Doctrine and Covenants in the word of the Lord spoken to Joseph Smith. The Book of Moses, which some of our scholars believe to be the original of, or to precede, the Book of Genesis, is a revelation containing the words of the Lord to Moses. This record gives us a very clear account of the beginning, although it is but a portion of the greater revelation revised under inspiration by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and known to us as the Inspired Scriptures.

Records Kept from the Beginning. It is reasonable to believe that Moses had before him records of earlier prophets when he did his writing. We have learned that records were kept from the beginning and were handed down from generation to generation. Abraham declared that the records of the fathers were preserved in his hands and it was his purpose to pass them on to his children after him. It is not known how long they were preserved and their contents known to men, but we do know, from what has come to us by revelation, that authentic records were kept and handed down by writers who were inspired by the Spirit of the Lord. It is from such writings that we obtain the reliable information of ancient times.

For many centuries it was the common belief—which prevails even now—that the first and oldest civilizations had their existence in Western Asia and in proximity to Mount Ararat, between the Black and the Caspian Seas; and that from this point civilization radiated after Noah abandoned the Ark. From modern revelation we have learned that the antediluvian civilization was planted in the Western World. It has been made known that Adam-ondi-Ahman is the place where Adam dwelt.—Doctrine and Covenants 116; 117:7; 107:53. It was from this place that the first civilizations began to spread out over the face of the earth.

The Lord's Covenant with Noah. After the flood Noah landed, as history and tradition say, at Mount Ararat, and from there his posterity began to divide and take possession of the earth.

And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying, And I, behold, I will establish my covenant with you, which I made unto your father Enoch, concerning your seed after you. * * *

And I will establish my covenant with you, which I made unto Enoch, concerning the remnant of your posterity. * * *

And this is mine everlasting covenant, that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth, and look forward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy.

And the general assembly of the church of the Firstborn shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come. And this is mine everlasting covenant, which I made with thy father Enoch.—Genesis 9:15, 17, 22, 23. I. S.

From the words of this covenant we learn that the Lord would have kept in close touch with the children of Noah, and that the inhabitants of the translated City of Enoch would have been kept in close touch with the righteous upon the earth, if those who were on the earth had remained faithful. This mingling of the people of Enoch and the descendants of Noah, however, had to be postponed until the days of Christ's second coming, because of the hardness of the hearts of the people and their unwillingness to embrace the truth.

Obedience Not Learned. In chapters 10 and 11 of Genesis we have a very brief account of the generations of the sons of Noah and their scattering over the face of the earth. These chapters cover a period of more than four centuries in approximately 1200 words. In this brief period of time families had grown into tribes, tribes into flourishing nations. The sad comment we have to make on this period is that notwithstanding the destruction of the antediluvian world the lesson of obedience was not learned, and men again began to walk in ways of unrighteousness. There can be no question that Noah and his sons were just as energetic after the flood in teaching their posterity the way of life as they were before that time. It was not long, however, before these teachings fell on ears that refused to hear, and the monuments existing of the great destruction were gazed upon by eyes that were blind to all things spiritual.

The Confounding of Language. Knowledge of the calamity which had overtaken the world was handed down by instruction and tradition so that the people of these generations were familiar with this important event. It was because of it that they determined to build a tower so high that the Lord could not again destroy them with a like cataclysm, for they would build until they virtually reached the heavens. Such was the feeling of these people in their ignorance and rebellion. They had forgotten that the Lord had promised Noah that never again would he cause such a flood to cover the earth. The scriptures inform us that because of rebellion and wickedness the anger of the Lord was again kindled against mankind. The Almighty, therefore, decreed that he would confound the speech of the people and cause them to be scattered upon the earth.

It was at this time that Jared and his brother pled with the Lord to grant them the privilege of retaining their mother tongue, which, we have reason to believe, was the language of Adam which had come down, presumably and naturally, with some changes, nevertheless a language, as we learn from the Book of Mormon, which was powerful in oral expression and also in its written form. These Jaredites, as they were called, were selected to make the journey across land and ocean back to the western world.

In the beginning their government was a theocracy, for they hearkened to the voice of the Lord. They had no king, but the brother of Jared and Jared were their leaders. They were directed by divine revelation. After their arrival in the promised land they followed the custom of the peoples from whence they came, and felt that they would have to be governed by a king. This form of government was opposed by many in the colony, yet it was eventually established. The Book of Ether is a condensed history of the trouble, in iniquity and rebellion, which followed, until the time came when the entire nation was destroyed.

Other nations which gained the ascendency and reached great power in the early generations after the flood were the nations inhabiting the Tigris-Euphrates valley and the road between, connecting Palestine with Egypt. Egypt and Chaldea were some eight hundred miles apart in a straight line but the traveled distance between the two sections was much greater. The route of travel ran along the two sides of a triangle, from Chaldea and Assyria through the Mesopotamia—the country lying between the two great rivers—into Syria, and then down through Palestine into Egypt. This country was well watered and fertile. A direct route from Egypt to Assyria or Chaldea led through the desert of Arabia, where the children of Israel had to spend some of the forty years of their wandering. Naturally it was in the more favored section where the earliest civilizations sprang into existence.

The First Government of Egypt Patriarchal. From the Book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price, we learn that "the first government of Egypt was established by Pharaoh, the eldest son of Egyptus, the daughter of Ham, and it was after the manner of the government of Ham, which was patriarchal." This account, of course, does not harmonize with the generally accepted views which are written in the popular histories of our time. The fact that it has come to us with the stamp of divine approval upon it, however, should be the deciding factor in favor of the authenticity of Abraham's account. We read further in the writings of Abraham:

Pharaoh, being a righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his people wisely and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate that order established by the fathers in the first generation, in the days of the first patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam, and also of Noah, his father, who blessed him with the blessings of the earth, and with the blessings of wisdom, but cursed him as pertaining to the Priesthood.

Now, Pharaoh being of that lineage by which he could not have the right of Priesthood, notwithstanding the Pharaohs would fain claim it from Noah, through Ham, therefore my father was led away by their idolatry.

The Patriarchal Order of Priesthood was revealed from heaven, and we are informed that "the order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made. This order was instituted in the days of Adam and came down by lineage."

From Abraham's story we discover that it was very soon after the flood when Egypt was settled. Evidently Egyptus and her family, and such as were willing to follow, were led by the hand of the Lord into northern Africa, a land which we may well believe was set apart by the Almighty for the descendants of Ham. Egypt was not the only nation, in these early times, which attempted to imitate the patriarchal order of government. We have seen in Abraham's record that this was the order of government in the reign of Adam, and down to the time of Noah.

Forms of Government Perpetuated. Naturally that form of government would be perpetuated in large degree by all tribes as they began to spread over the face of the earth. As men multiplied they organized first in the family group, then into tribes and eventually into nations. The greater powers would naturally occupy the most favored spots. Stronger tribes would overcome the weaker and force them to join the national government, or else they would be subdued and treated as slaves, or placed under tribute. As the patriarchal order was handed down from father to son so also would the political authority be perpetuated with the same claims to authority. We know that in ancient times in Egypt, Assyria, Chaldea, Babylon, Persia, and among all the petty nations of the Mesopotamia and Palestine, the monarch was succeeded by his posterity in hereditary right.

The power of the ruler also became absolute so that the lives of the people over whom he ruled were strictly within his hands. He could make and unmake the laws. His subjects were in duty bound to obey his every edict. They were without political freedom except as such privileges were granted them by the king. Under such conditions in lands of idolatry and wickedness life must have been filled with constant anxiety and fear. The history of these nations is filled with carnage and bloodshed, intrigue and wickedness. The common people sank into abject misery and bondage. No person knew when he might be accused of some infraction of the law, or when the eye of the priest would be upon him, with the approval of the law, to make of him a sacrifice unto the gods. It was under conditions of this kind, and while Shem, son of Noah, was still living, that Abraham found it necessary to move from the land of his nativity and "obtain another place of residence," among the smaller nations and tribes of Canaan.

Men Rebellious from Beginning. Without any doubt the Lord would have continued to bestow the blessings of the Gospel and the power of the Priesthood upon all people, except those who were denied this right by lineage, if they had shown a willingness to continue in their allegiance to him. Under such conditions there would have been but one government, and that the government of God. Such a condition would have resulted in continued peace and happiness. It was because the people refused to hearken to Noah and later prophets, and turned away to the worship of idols and the practices of all kind of abominations and iniquity that the Lord in his wisdom declared that he would call Abraham, a man faithful and obedient to every command, and make of him the head of a special, divinely favored nation. Never at any time has the Almighty forsaken the people. Whenever the people have shown a willingness to serve him and abide in his covenants they have been divinely led and blessed. It has been but seldom in the history of mankind that any considerable portion of the people have been willing to walk in the statutes and judgments of the Lord. From the very beginning his children have been rebellious and unwilling to accept divine commands. Mankind in their selfishness and carnal mindedness have almost always felt that they could govern themselves better by following their own inclinations.

The Worship of Deity Universal. Notwithstanding this fact, yet they have never been able to get away from worship. Refusing to worship the true and living God, which they were taught from the beginning, and to walk in the light of divine revelation, they chose for their worship the forces of nature and set up idols representing such forces because they had to have visible aids to guide them in their religious rites and ceremonies. It is doubtful if these ancient peoples actually worshipped the images which they made with their own hands. These images merely represented the gods who were invisible; and they believed that the real god whom the image represented accepted this image worship. This was the condition in the days of Abraham. Governments had lost touch with the heavens. The anger of the Lord was kindled against them and he declared that he would call one who was faithful and make him mighty in posterity, conferring upon him the blessings of the Priesthood which right, through obedience, should continue in his seed after him unto the latest generations.
