Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 9

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE JAREDITES

The Scattering of the People. Our Scriptures reveal to us that the earth was made purposely for the habitation of man, and at present serves him in his mortal probation. There were many spirits in the beginning who were destined to come to this earth to receive their tabernacles and enter into all the vicissitudes of mortal life. It was the desire of the Father that they should possess all parts of the earth. This is implied in the great commandment given to Adam and Eve and again repeated to Noah and his sons, to multiply upon the earth. It was also the purpose of the Father in the beginning that the people, as they scattered over the face of the earth, should be given every opportunity of salvation. The Gospel was declared in the beginning and was taught earnestly by the ancient seers. After the flood the same commandments were renewed and all men were offered the privilege of the Gospel.

It was also decreed that in the scattering of peoples over the earth the western continent should again be inhabited. The Lord has revealed to us that America is the land where Adam dwelt. Civilization was transplanted on the eastern hemisphere after the flood. The American continent was reserved by the Lord for a choice people, for it is a very choice land above other parts of the earth. The scriptures which have come to us in our dispensation indicate that the Father and the Son exhibited a very righteous jealousy in relation to this hemisphere and the character of the people who may inhabit it through all ages of time.

The People of Jared. Shortly after the flood the Lord called a small colony of people and commanded them to take their journey into the wilderness away from all other people. This occurred at the time of the confounding of languages and the building of the Tower of Babel. The Lord directed them in their journeyings, declaring that he would lead them to a land which is choice above all other lands. These people later became known as the people of Jared. The prophet-leader of this people is unnamed in the record, but is spoken of as "the brother of Jared." We have been informed that the Prophet Joseph Smith on one occasion said his name was Mahonri Moriancumer, but in the Book of Mormon he is known as the brother of Jared. This prophet cried unto the Lord in mighty prayer and was answered as follows:

And it came to pass that the Lord did hear the brother of Jared, and had compassion upon him, and said unto him:

Go to and gather together thy flocks, both male and female, of every kind; and also of the seed of the earth of every kind; and thy families; and also Jared thy brother and his family; and also thy friends and their families, and the friends of Jared and their families.

And when thou hast done this thou shalt go at the head of them down into the valley which is northward. And there will I meet thee, and I will go before thee into a land which is choice above all the lands upon the earth.

And there will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth. And thus I will do unto thee because this long time ye have cried unto me.—Ether 1:40-43.

In harmony with this instruction the people of Jared gathered beasts of every kind in the Valley of Nimrod, where the Lord had commanded them to tarry. They also laid snares and caught fowls of the air, and they carried with them fish taken from the waters, and among other things they took with them "deseret," or the honey bee. They also gathered seeds of every kind, and when they were fully prepared to take a long journey the Lord came to the brother of Jared and commanded him to take his colony and journey across land and water until they should find themselves eventually in the promised land.

And the Lord would not suffer that they should stop beyond the sea in the wilderness, but he would that they should come forth even unto the land of promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people.

And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them.

And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off.—Ether 2:7-10.

Jesus Christ Revealed. When this colony reached the seashore the Lord commanded them to build barges in which to cross the ocean. These barges were to be "tight like unto a dish," hence, being without windows and so constructed that they could ride under the water as well as on the surface, they had no light in them. To overcome this difficulty the Brother of Jared carved, or melted, out of rock sixteen small stones, or crystals, then taking these stones up into a mountain he called upon the Lord in earnest prayer and received the most wonderful manifestation of divine power ever granted up to that time. While he was praying the Lord Jesus Christ came to him. The brother of Jared did not see him, but knew he was in his presence, and he conversed with him manifesting the faith that if the Lord would but touch the stones they would have power to shine forth in the barges and give light. Because of this faith the Lord complied with this request and as he did so the brother of Jared saw his finger. It would seem, from the record, that he did not have a very clear idea as to the form of God before this event. Seeing the finger, which appeared like the finger of a man, the brother of Jared fell to the earth in fear.

And the Lord said unto him: Arise, why hast thou fallen?

And he saith unto the Lord: I saw the finger of the Lord, and I feared lest he should smite me; for I knew not that the Lord had flesh and blood.

And the Lord said unto him: Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger. Sawest thou more than this?

And he answered: Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me.

And the Lord said unto him: Believest thou the words which I shall speak?

And he answered: Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the truth, for thou art a God of truth, and canst not lie.

And when he had said these words, behold, the Lord showed himself unto him, and said: Because thou knowest these things, ye are redeemed from the fall; therefore ye are brought back into my presence; therefore I show myself unto you.—Ether 3:7-13.

The History of the Earth Revealed. Because of this great faith the brother of Jared saw that Jesus Christ, while a spirit, was in the likeness of the body of flesh which he was to take upon himself later in the Meridian of Time. Moreover, because of his faith the Lord revealed to the Brother of Jared the history of this earth from the beginning to the end and had him write it in a language which none could read. He also gave to this prophet the interpreters by which this record, and other records, could be read; but commanded him to also seal up the interpreters, for this great prophetic history was not to come forth among the children of men in the days of their iniquity. "For the Lord said * * They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord. And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are."—Ether 4:6-7.

A Favored People. From this record we see that the Lord led a people back to this land almost immediately after the flood. He gave them special commandments to serve him. They had the plan of salvation and were made acquainted with the history of mankind from the beginning. They were promised that through their willingness to obey the Lord they should become as great as any other people on the earth. The land assigned to them as an inheritance was choice above all other lands, but the God of that land, who is Jesus Christ, would demand that the inhabitants, during all time, should serve him. If they should deny him and his power, and turn to evil, when the cup of their iniquity was full, they should be destroyed.

The Lord made himself known by personal visitation to their first prophet, who was authorized to write the greatest and most wonderful revelation ever written—the history of man and his destiny from the beginning to the end of time. This history, however, was so important and sacred that it was not to be revealed in the days of wickedness. For that reason it has been kept hid from us, for we have not exercised the faith sufficient to receive this revelation, to this day. Eventually it will come forth and will be made known, but not until all the people are full of faith and willing to accept Jesus Christ as the Son of God even as did the brother of Jared when the revelation was given.

Formation of a Government. The people of Jared were made acquainted with the power of the Lord and the way of salvation. They arrived on the promised land in humility. When they arrived the question of government came up before them in the natural course of events. They had been taught in the traditions and customs of the people in the land from whence they came. It was natural, therefore, that they desired to perpetuate the form of government which they had understood before their great journey was undertaken. The story of the beginning of their government is given in the following words:

And they did land upon the shore of the promised land. And when they had set their feet upon the shores of the promised land they bowed themselves down upon the face of the land, and did humble themselves before the Lord, and did shed tears of joy before the Lord, because of the multitude of his tender mercies over them.

And it came to pass that they went forth upon the face of the land, and began to till the earth.

And Jared had four sons; and they were called Jacom, Gilgah, and Mahah, and Orihah.

And the brother of Jared also begat sons and daughters.

And the friends of Jared and his brother were in number about twenty and two souls; and they also begat sons and daughters before they came to the promised land; and therefore they began to be many.

And they were taught to walk humbly before the Lord; and they were also taught from on high.

And it came to pass that they began to spread upon the face of the land, and to multiply and to till the earth; and they did wax strong in the land.

And the brother of Jared began to be old, and saw that he must soon go down to the grave; wherefore he said unto Jared: Let us gather together our people that we may number them, that we may know of them what they will desire of us before we go down to our graves.

And accordingly the people were gathered together. Now the number of the sons and the daughters of the brother of Jared were twenty and two souls; and the number of sons and daughters of Jared were twelve, he having four sons.

And it came to pass that they did number their people; and after that they had numbered them, they did desire of them the things which they would that they should do before they went down to their graves.

And it came to pass that the people desired of them that they should anoint one of their sons to be a king over them.

And now behold, this was grievous unto them. And the brother of Jared said unto them: Surely this thing leadeth into captivity.

But Jared said unto his brother: Suffer them that they may have a king. And therefore he said unto them: Choose ye out from among our sons a king, even whom ye will.—Ether 6:12-24.

A Kingdom and Oppression. In this manner their political government began and also their captivity, according to the prediction of the brother of Jared. Now it was the natural order for the people to choose the oldest son of their leader, and so they called for Pagag, the firstborn son of the brother of Jared, to be their king, but he refused. In turn the office was offered to each of the sons of the brother of Jared, and in their faith and humility each refused to be the king. Likewise the sons of Jared refused until they came to Orihah, and he was anointed to be their king. Orihah was a faithful man and executed judgment in righteousness all his days, but when the people reached the third generation their trouble began. Corihor the grandson of Orihah rebelled against his own father Kib, and after he had flattered away a large number of the people took his father captive. From this time on bloodshed, unrighteous ambition, captivity, and sin of all kinds entered into the lives of the people.

There were times of occasional repentance with accompanying peace and happiness which brought prosperity. When the people began to prosper they forgot the Lord, which is the custom common among all other peoples, for it seems that this is a part of human nature. For some reason it is difficult for people to remember their duty unto God in the time of their blessings and prosperity. When sore trouble comes upon them, and they are afflicted, then they humble themselves. It has been so from the beginning. Even today we will not profit by the experience of those who have gone before, in matters of this kind. Well has Mormon stated the situation in a comment in the Book of Helaman. After recording the tribulation which came upon the people and their repentance, he makes the following comment:

And thus we can behold how false, and also the unsteadiness of the hearts of the children of men; yea, we can see that the Lord in his great infinite goodness doth bless and prosper those who put their trust in him.

Yea, and we may see at the very time when he doth prosper his people, yea, in the increase of their fields, their flocks and their herds, and in gold, and in silver, and in all manner of precious things of every kind and art; sparing their lives, and delivering them out of the hands of their enemies; softening the hearts of their enemies that they should not declare wars against them; yea, and in fine, doing all things for the welfare and happiness of his people; yea, then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity.

And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him.

O how foolish, and how vain, and how evil, and devilish, and how quick to do iniquity, and how slow to do good, are the children of men; yea, how quick to hearken unto the words of the evil one, and to set their hearts upon the vain things of the world!

The Jaredites Destroyed. Following the course of all others who had gone before them, and those who have followed after, the Jaredites continued in their practice of evil until about six hundred years before the birth of Christ. During their history they had developed into a mighty people. They had been greatly blessed by the Lord. The principles of the Gospel were taught among them, and the power of the Priesthood had been given to them, but they turned to serving Satan and fell into such grievous sins that they were utterly destroyed. Coriantumr, their last king, survived his people. This was a promise made in a prophetic declaration by Ether, the last of their prophets. Ether stood in a similar calling to that of Moroni among the Nephites. He was preserved to write the history of this fallen people. He kept the record and made the final entry before he passed away. This record was later found by the people of Limhi, a branch of the Nephites, and preserved by the Nephite prophets, and when Moroni, the last of the Nephite prophets, was finishing the record of his people he added to it an abridgment of the history of the people of Jared from their call from the Tower of Babel to their destruction. Coriantumr lived to see another people possess the land which had been given to his people, and he lived with these people—the people of Mulek—for nine months before he passed away.
