Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 10

THE STORY OF ANCIENT ISRAEL

The Call of Abraham. Some nineteen hundred years before the birth of our Savior there lived in Ur of the Chaldees a young man who found himself very much out of harmony with his surroundings. The city of Erech, or Ur, as it is called in the scriptures, was a place of considerable importance in the land of Chaldea, about two thousand years B.C. At the time of which we write it was under the dominion of Pharaoh, king of Egypt. The inhabitants of the land had turned from the worship of the true God to the worship of the gods of the heathen. Abraham, the man of whom we speak, writes of these times as follows:

My fathers having turned from their righteousness, and from the holy commandments which the Lord their God had given unto them, unto the worship of the gods of the heathen, utterly refused to hearken to my voice;

For their hearts were set to do evil, and were wholly turned to the god of Elkenah, and the god of Libnah, and the god of Mahmackrah, and the god of Korash, and the god of Pharaoh, king of Egypt;

Therefore they turned their hearts to the sacrifice of the heathen in offering up their children unto their dumb idols, and hearkened not unto my voice, but endeavored to take away my life by the hand of the priest of Elkenah. The priest of Elkenah was also the priest of Pharaoh.—Abraham 1:5-8.

Now Abraham had refused to follow the teachings of his fathers for he had in his hand the records which had come down from the earliest fathers, containing the history of the patriarchs from the days of Adam to his own time, which the Lord had preserved in his hands. In this manner, and perhaps because Abraham had also listened to the teachings of Noah and Shem, he understood the truth. Under all these conditions, and finding opposition even in his own household, Abraham found it necessary to leave his place of residence. Abraham was a prayerful man, and it was in answer to his fervent prayer that the Lord spoke to him saying: "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee." Therefore he left the land of Ur to go into the land of Canaan, taking with him his wife, his brother's son and his wife, and also his father who had consented to go because of the severity of a famine.

Through Abraham All Families Blessed. For a time Abraham and his colony dwelt in a place which they called Haran, presumably named after Abraham's brother who was the father of Lot. In the land of Haran the word of the Lord came to Abraham again: "Arise, and take Lot with thee; for I have purposed to take thee away out of Haran, and to make of thee a minister to bear my name in a strange land which I will give unto thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession, when they hearken to my voice." Terah, the father of Abraham, found Haran a pleasant place and he remained there having turned again to his idolatry. Abraham, in answer to this call, journeyed on until he arrived in Canaan. Here Abraham manifested his faith and integrity before the Lord in his willingness to sacrifice his dearest possession, his son Isaac, upon the altar of sacrifice, at the command of the Lord. Thus being proved and found not wanting, Abraham was greatly blessed. The Lord said unto him:

My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal.—Abraham 2:8-11.

We have already mentioned the fact that the Lord would have gladly conferred the blessings of the Gospel and the power of the Priesthood upon all peoples, if they would have received it, but in their failure he called Abraham and placed upon him this wonderful blessing, because of his faithfulness. This honor and blessing places Abraham as the father of all those who receive the Gospel from his day forth to the end of time. No person can receive the Gospel and the Priesthood without becoming of the seed of Abraham. The scattering of Israel, which came because of rebellion, the Lord turned into a blessing in behalf of all other nations by infusing the blood of Abraham among all other peoples. Notwithstanding the peoples of the earth in ancient times turned away from the truth to the worship of false gods, yet the Lord continued to reach after them and to extend to them the blessings of salvation. This has been done both by the scattering of the blood of Israel and by adoption. At any event, when an individual, even today, receives the Gospel he has to come into the fold of Israel and thus become a son of Abraham.

A Chosen Lineage. Then, we are informed that there were certain intelligences who were entitled to come to the earth through a chosen lineage. These are the spirits who have belonged to the house of Israel and which were separated before the Lord divided the inheritances among the nations.

The promised blessings given to Abraham have come down more particularly through the seed of Isaac and Jacob, son and grandson of Abraham, respectively. Let us not think, however, that the blessings of the Gospel were solely confined to the descendants of Jacob. Ishmael, from all we can learn, did not value the rights of Priesthood. Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, was a Midianite, in other words a descendant of Abraham through another branch of his family, that of his wife Keturah. Jethro gave the Priesthood to Moses, we learn from the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Midianites had the blessings of the Gospel. There may also have been other tribes so blessed, but history does not record the fact. The Gospel and its privileges, however, have come down from generation to generation through the chosen seed, and the chosen seed are the descendants of the sons of Jacob.

The House of Israel. Jacob, son of Isaac, is spoken of as the founder of the house of Israel. His name was changed by divine edict from Jacob to Israel, because the blessings of his progenitors were placed upon him. Jacob had four wives and twelve sons. These twelve sons became the heads of the twelve tribes of Israel, with this exception: When Jacob went down into Egypt and found Joseph there, who had been sold by his brothers, he also found that Joseph had two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. The Lord directed Jacob to adopt these two grandsons as his own and the record of it in the Bible is as follows:

And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,

And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.

And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.

And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritances.

Jacob here by blessing and adoption took these two sons of Joseph and numbered them with his own sons saying that all the other children of Joseph should also be named after Ephraim and Manasseh and be numbered among the tribes issuing from these two sons. The choosing of these two grandsons to be the heads of tribes in Israel did not increase the number of tribes from twelve to fourteen, however. The Lord blessed Joseph with a double portion because of his faithfulness and the ill-treatment he had received from his brethren. Later, when the children of Israel came out of Egypt, the Lord instructed Moses to take the males of the tribe of Levi and make them the priests of the people. In this capacity, officiating in the Aaronic and Levitical Priesthood, they were not to be numbered as a tribe, but were to be scattered among the people, officiating as priests. Joseph, also, does not appear by name as a tribe, but is represented in his two sons. We see, then, that the number of the tribes remained at twelve, two of the sons of Joseph replacing two of the sons of Israel in the reckoning.

The Sojourn in Egypt. When Jacob and his family, at the invitation of Joseph and Pharaoh, went down into Egypt they numbered seventy souls. It was decreed by the Almighty, according to the promise to Abraham, that the Israelites should remain in Egypt for a period of four hundred years. During this time they were to grow into a mighty people. In the wisdom of the Lord the inheritance given to Abraham was not to be bestowed upon him and his posterity, so far as the land of Canaan was concerned, until they were strong enough to possess it as a nation. At the time of Abraham this land was occupied by several petty nations which, eventually, were to be destroyed because of iniquity, but in the time of Abraham their cup was not full. When the Lord gave this land to Abraham, he said:

Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not their's, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;

And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.

And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.

But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full. * * *

In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates.—Gen. 15:13-18.

In keeping with this prediction Israel went down into Egypt and there remained four hundred years and in the fourth generation under Moses a great multitude of people came out of Egypt, for the time had come for them to possess their inheritance in the land of Canaan.

The Government of Judges. From the days of Moses until the days of the prophet Samuel, Israel was governed by judges raised up from among the people. There were times when they turned from the worship of the Lord and fell into the grievous sins against which the Lord, through Moses, had warned them. Much of this time, however, they were judged by prophets. When they entered into the land to possess it, the Lord gave them definite and pointed instruction regarding his commandments. They were admonished and commanded to keep the statues and judgments thus given unto them. They were promised if they would do so that they should always possess the land in peace and safety. The Lord promised them that they should stand at the head; other peoples should serve them and the land would produce in abundance; peace, happiness and prosperity should follow them all their days; and besides the material blessings, they would have the constant companionship and blessings of righteous leaders, and the revelations of heaven. They were to teach these commandments, statutes, and judgments to their children. After enumerating these commandments the Lord said unto them:

Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to possess it:

That thou mightest fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.

Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and honey.

Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:

And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates.

And it shall be, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou buildest not,

And houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be full;

Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.—Deut. 6:1-12.

Israel Demands a King. Israel was duly warned that if the people rebelled against the Lord, and refused to accept his statutes and judgments, and to hearken to his prophets, that a curse would be placed upon the land. It should not yield in its strength; the worms and pests should destroy their crops, all kinds of trouble and sorrow were to be meted out to them, and they should find themselves in bondage to other peoples. Nor was this all, it was predicted the time would come when they would be driven forth from the land and scattered among all peoples.

The Lord purposed that this nation should be holy and obedient to his counsels; but in time they rebelled against him. Israel struggled for hundreds of years through repeated rebellion and repentance. Because of their iniquities they were constantly placed in bondage wherein they were humbled. Their humility would last until their prosperity began to return, and then the scene would be enacted over again. The Lord endeavored to keep them under the control of his constituted and divinely appointed prophets. He established his sanctuary among them, which they failed to appreciate.

In the days of Samuel they demanded a king. They desired to be in the fashion, for all around them were kingdoms. They had stood out alone, the only people governed by prophets. They were peculiar, and desired to bring to an end, this peculiarity. There were some other circumstances which led to this demand, for the sons of Samuel who had been made judges did not walk in the ways of their father. Nevertheless, this did not justify the people in the course pursued. In the eight and ninth chapters of Samuel, we have a vivid account of this request, which was virtually a demand for the establishment of a kingdom. In this scripture we read:

And (they) said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us like all the nations.

But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the Lord.

And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.

Now therefore hearken unto their voice: how be it yet protest solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.

And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked of him a king.—I Sam. 8:5-10.

Then follows a detailed forecast of the trouble and bondage which should come upon them if they should choose a king. The recital did not deter the people. They were determined to have a king, and thus they rejected the Lord and his prophet. This vivid story (I Samuel 8-9) should be carefully read.

Saul and David. So Israel got a king. Saul, son of Kish, of the tribe of Benjamin, was chosen. His story is a sad one. When he was called, he was a humble youth—"a choice young man, and a goodly; and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he; from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the people." But the bestowal of power was the undoing of Saul, as it has been with multitudes of others; for few are the men who can exercise dominion in righteousness. In course of time Saul became arrogant, selfish and cruel, and lost his kingdom. He was succeeded by David, son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah. Once again a righteous and goodly person was chosen. David was a man of exceptional faith and great ability. Not only was he a great warrior, but also a tender-hearted lad, and a sweet singer. Yet, even with David, power brought him to the verge of destruction. Even to this day he is paying the price of a dreadful sin, notwithstanding his sore repentance.

Division and Captivity. Then following the reign of the third king, Solomon, who was honored with the duty of building the temple, there came a division among the people. In the reign of Rehoboam, son of Solomon, because of oppression, ten of the twelve tribes rebelled, and under Jeroboam, an Ephraimite, set up another kingdom. This was about 975B.C., and these two kingdoms existed side by side until about 730, when the ten tribes, known as the kingdom of Israel, were carried off captive into Assyria by Shalmaneser. From that captivity they never returned to their own land, and are known as the Lost Tribes to this day. From the time Jeroboam rebelled to the time of the captivity, the kingdom of Israel never had one righteous king. The people walked in the example set them by their rulers. The Lord sent prophets among them, but their warnings were not heeded and the Lord fulfilled his promise made through Moses that they should be banished from the land.

The other kingdom comprising the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and known as the kingdom of Judah, remained in their inheritance until about the time that Lehi left Jerusalem, 600B.C. This kingdom had shown more repentance. They had among them a few righteous kings. The people were inclined to repent more readily and therefore the Lord spared them a little longer than their kinsmen of the northern kingdom. Eventually, however, their iniquity brought this kingdom to its end. They were carried off captive by Nebuchadnezzar in the reign of Zedekiah and planted in the land of Babylon.

The Return to Jerusalem. Here they remained seventy years. Then under the reign of the Persians, they were privileged to return. In the land of Babylon, under their suffering, they lost their besetting sin, that of idol worship. The books of Ezra and Nehemiah tell of the return of the Jews from Babylon, after that land had fallen under the rule of the Medo-Persian Empire. Again they built the temple. Again they were willing to hearken to the voice of prophets, and again a measure of prosperity came to them. And again their repentance did not last very long before once more they had fallen into grievous sin. The last of the old prophets was Malachi. He had to rebuke the Jews for their failure to pay their tithes and offerings, and for other errors which had crept in among them. This was about 400 years before the birth of Christ.

A State of Apostasy. During the period between the history and prophetic writings of the Old and the New Testaments, the Jews were subject to the rule of four different dynasties. Under the Persians, and by the edict of Cyrus, they returned and rebuilt the Temple. This rule continued from 536 until 333B.C., when they became subject to the Greeks until 167B.C. From that time until 63B.C. they were under the influence of the Asmonaeans; and then Idumean Antipater, and Herod the Great, who ruled at the time of the birth of Christ. Much of this time was spent in spiritual darkness, and a portion of their subsequent history is recorded in the Apocrypha. For a time they valiantly struggled to free themselves, under the Maccabees, from the dominion of their oppressors.

When Christ came he found the Jews in a state of the most wicked apostasy, perhaps such as had never been known among that people amidst their darkest hours of unbelief while governed by their kings. When they cried out against the Son of God, who came to bring them the fulness of salvation, the anger of the Almighty was kindled against them and they were persecuted, driven and scattered, until they became a hiss and a byword among all nations.

Today the words of the prophets are being fulfilled. Judah is being gathered. Jerusalem is being rebuilt and the Lord is preparing to redeem his ancient people. Eventually they will be sitting under their own vine and fig tree, enjoying the fulness of the Gospel, and the blessings of the house of the Lord, in fulfilment of the words of Ezekiel:

Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.—Ezek. 37:26.
