Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 12

MEDIEVAL KINGDOMS

The Confounding of Speech. "And the whole earth was of one language and of one speech." This is written in the Bible of the people as they began to multiply after the flood. While the memory of this great cataclysm was still fresh in their minds the reason for it seems to have faded, notwithstanding the fact that Noah and his sons were still among the people. In a few short years, and when the people again began to multiply, the great majority of mankind had turned from the teachings of Noah and his sons. In iniquity the people defied the Almighty and said they would build a tower that would reach to heaven so that a flood could not destroy them again. Therefore the Lord confounded their speech. This story is ridiculed by many of the learned today who receive it as an ancient myth without foundation in fact. Modern revelation confirms the Bible account of this momentous event. The Jaredite civilization dates from the time of the confusion of tongues.

No doubt the Lord had reasons other than the one expressed for confusing their tongues and scattering the people over the face of all the earth. In the beginning he had commanded men to multiply and fill the earth, and this commandment was reiterated in the days of Noah.

Noah had three sons who survived the flood. This is the order of their birth as recorded in the Book of Moses:

"And Noah was four hundred and fifty years old, and begat Japheth; and forty-two years afterwards he begat Shem of her who was the mother of Japheth, and when he was five hundred years old he begat Ham."

That Noah had other children may be inferred from what is also written in the record of Moses.

"And the Lord said unto Noah: The daughters of thy sons have sold themselves; for behold mine anger is kindled against the sons of men, for they will not hearken to my voice * * And thus Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God, as did also his three sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth."

The Scattering of Tribes. Our limited history records that Noah and his wife and his three sons and their wives, because they were willing to hearken to the voice of the Lord, were the only persons who survived the flood. It is understood generally that the ark landed on Mount Ararat near the head waters of the Euphrates, and that civilization, after the flood, radiated from some central place in the Mesopotamia. All authentic history confirms this view. From this central point the descendants of Shem scattered towards the east, the land of Shinar, and towards the south, and in the Mesopotamia. The Hamitic family journeyed towards the southwest and into Africa. The Japhetic branch migrated to the north-west and eventually into Europe. We know from the Pearl of Great Price that Egyptus, the daughter of Ham, settled with her sons in Egypt.

The oldest civilizations, according to our historians, were founded in Egypt and the Mesopotamia. The credit given by many historians to the great antiquity of these civilizations cannot be maintained. Without doubt the traditions of the early dynasties of Egypt and other early races find their substance in the history and traditions coming down from the antediluvian patriarchs and peoples, before the flood. This is shown in writings of the early Babylonians, found in recent times on cuneiform tablets. From such tablets the following information is taken: "In the beginning rulership from heaven descended. It was in Eridu where rulership began, and Alumim was king. Later the rulership was established at Larak, and passed to Sippar. The Deluge came up and after the Deluge had come rulership again descended from heaven, and at Kish there was rulership." Naturally traditions of these earliest times would be handed down and be found in the folklore and traditions of all ancient peoples.

The Decay of Ancient Nations. It was about 1900B.C. that the Lord called Abraham out of Chaldea. His descendants, after their emancipation and their settlement in Canaan, dwelt in that land with varying conditions of national success and failure, freedom and bondage, until the year 70A.D., when Jerusalem was destroyed by the Romans and the remaining Jews were scattered over the whole earth. During this great stretch of time from 1900B.C. to 70A.D., Israel came in contact with the civilizations of Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, Rome and several minor nations.

It was not long after the dispersion of the Jews that Rome, the last of the great nations of old, also fell into decay. Rome, in the days of our Lord, ruled the greater part of the known world. It was a pagan empire maintaining the worship of many gods. It was the nation "from afar" and of "fierce countenance" spoken of by Moses, which was to bring the final punishment upon the Jews before their national existence should come to an end. Rome, like the nations which went before, sank into the depths of sin and depraved wickedness which brought about her political end.

Rise of the Kingdoms of Europe. On the ruins of Rome there arose the kingdoms of the "toes" of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, and the strength and power of government was shifted to the west among the various nations of Europe. These nations partook largely of the laws and governmental forms they had been taught by the Romans. The period of history known as the Middle Ages is generally understood to extend from the fall of Rome, 475A.D., to the capture of Constantinople by the Turks in 1453. During this thousand years some of the chief events in European history were: Migrations of the northern barbarian tribes; the rise of Mohammed and the spread of the Islamic religious power; the invasion of the Saracens in Europe; the rise of the kingdoms in modern Europe; the Crusades; the Hundred Years War; the rise of the Feudal system; the spread of Christianity and the gradual supremacy of the Papal power.

The fifth century is known as the era of the Great Migration. During this time Alaric the Goth, Attila the Hun, and the Vandal leader Genseric were responsible for the great migrations and governmental changes which occurred at that period. The glory of Greece and Rome had come to an end. The barbarian hordes were contending for supremacy, yet, out of all this, there came the modern nations of Europe.

In the sixth century the Teutons held sway in Rome; the Vandals had taken possession of northern Africa and the Visigoths were ruling in Spain. The Franks had established themselves in Northern Gaul; the Burgundians in south-eastern Gaul, which country was later to be known as France. The Anglo-Saxons had crossed the channel and taken possession of a large part of Britain. In most of these countries the invaders did not expel the earlier inhabitants but in time absorbed them.

Origin of the Peoples of Europe. In the year 324A.D., Constantine became sole ruler of the Roman Empire. He embraced Christianity and made it the state religion. From this time on Christianity spread rapidly, but not until it had mixed with the doctrines and practices of the primitive Christian Church many of the customs and practices of the pagan world which preceded it.

When Europe was first settled we have no authentic record. In the early centuries people known as Indo-Europeans, or Aryans, had taken possession of most of Europe. When the Greeks and Romans were at the pinnacle of their civilization and culture, these people of Europe were only barbarians. Evidently, from what we know today, they had retrograded because of sin and disobedience in turning from the commandments of the Lord. Like many other peoples under similar circumstances, they had fallen into a state of semi-savagery. It is known today that much of the blood of scattered Israel was mixed among these tribes, especially those who occupied northern Europe, but they had fallen into abominable idolatry.

The Rise of Feudalism. Through the Roman conquest these tribes in Europe came in contact with Roman civilization and it left its mark upon them. Then, also, in the early centuries of the Christian era, the doctrines of Christianity were carried among them and in the course of a few centuries most of Europe had been Christianized, but, unfortunately, with a Christianity which had lost much of its righteousness and truth through the corrupting influences of pagan rites and ceremonies.

During these early centuries, and after the death of Charlemagne, the peoples of Europe were held under the dominion of petty kings and emperors who were shorn of much of their power due to the fact that in their own dominions the real power lay largely in the hands of great nobles who were independent of each other and only in some degree subject to pay homage to their kings.

The Teuton freemen who followed their leaders shared in the land acquired by conquest. The portion allotted to each man was called his allod and became his personal property, which he was responsible to defend. It was the custom in those days for a king to grant portions of his territory as fiefs or feuds to his nobles. The receiving of this fief or feud meant that the possessor held ownership of the grant on condition of service to be rendered to his superior, especially in case of war. In this way the king, instead of maintaining a great standing army to guard his domains or to prosecute foreign wars, had the right to call upon his nobles who were pledged to give him the required service. The king as their suzerain, or overlord, promised to them protection and justice, and they, as his vassals, agreed to serve the king and furnish him at his call a certain number of armed men fully equipped for active service.

Lords and Vassals. These lords or barons in like manner were almost sovereign rulers in their own right, and frequently paid indifferent allegiance to their kings. These great barons in turn parceled out their estates and their holdings to others of lower rank than themselves, and these in turn let the land again to others less fortunate. Each man who received a fief was a vassal, or liegeman, to those whom he served, while the great lords were in their turn vassals to the king.

Kings, themselves, were often vassals to other kings due to the fact that they owned estates within the general domain or kingdom of other rulers. The lords, or barons, in their own right, levied taxes, kept troops, coined money, and engaged in commercial pursuits. Such privileges were not granted to the secondary landowners who were forced to pay homage to the upper or great lords.

This system of land tenure was called feudalism and was very extensive in all of Europe during the middle ages. In theory all of the soil of a country was held by the king as a fief from God, granted on condition that he would show fealty to the Lord. Should the king be unjust or wicked he forfeited the fief which could be given to another. In practice, however, this was not the case. The days of feudalism saw some of the most wicked of all rulers upon the face of the earth. As the king received his fief, so he granted parcels of land to his chief men, and they in turn to others who served as vassals to them. Should these men prove untrue to the king, then they forfeited their fiefs which could be bestowed upon others. In the reign of wicked kings the forfeiture of fiefs by nobles, often on flimsy pretexts, was sometimes brought about. But not so with the king. No matter how wicked he became, if he had power in his trusty sword and followers enough he could maintain himself.

Freemen and Serfs. Fighting in the middle ages was considered a noble and exalting occupation. The great mass of the people performed the manual labor. They tilled the land and cared for the flocks and herds and engaged in industrial pursuits, having to make a living for their masters as well as for themselves. This system of feudal tenure and servitude grew out of the Roman system. The common people were divided into two classes, freemen and serfs. The serf, as the name implies, was in subjection to his master and was attached to the estate to which he belonged. When the estate changed hands the serf went with it, he literally belonged to the soil, and his children inherited this same condition after him. The freeman was also a peasant, but he had freedom to move from place to place and was not welded to the soil. Many of the freemen of their own free will became vassals, feeling more contented knowing they were under the protection of an overlord, notwithstanding the service they were called upon to render to him in times of need.

Centralization of Power. It seems to be a failing of most men that when they receive some little power they seek for more. The greater the power received the more intense is the desire to augment it. In course of time the kings endeavored to strengthen their positions and increase their influence and power, ever at the expense of the lords or barons. In these ambitious desires it was not difficult for the ruling monarch to call to his service powerful lords by making promises to them of greater influence, power and possessions for themselves. Wars were frequently fought, unjustly, and on the merest pretext, by ambitious rulers seeking dominion and power.

From the very earliest times monarchs claimed the right to rule by divine right. This "right" was augmented by the claim, which was, unfortunately, impressed upon the people, that these rulers had absolute jurisdiction and power over the lives and fortunes of their subjects. This thought still prevailed in medieval times, and kings endeavored to increase their power to make it absolute in every respect. Unjust and wicked dominion was often exercised. Men were frequently put to death through motives of jealousy, hate, envy, or for some other trivial reason, or because they were regarded as rivals for a crown, when within their hearts there may have been no such ambition.

It was during these times that chivalry and knighthood flourished. There was much in this age that was commendable, but the great ambition of a knight was to wear a coat of mail, have a shield with a coat of arms emblazoned upon it, ride a prancing steed, and fight. When enemies could not be found to fight, frequently great tournaments were held where armoured knights on horseback rushed at each other in mimic war, but this mimicry too frequently ended disastrously when some of the combatants were killed.

Christianity Overshadowed. Christianity in those dark days was greatly overshadowed by selfish desire and wickedness. While knighthood stood for honor, integrity, loyalty to God and to country, love of virtue and truth, and the defense of the weak against the strong, yet many of these knights as overlords were very cruel in the treatment of their vassals. There were, of course, many honorable exceptions. Bravery and fearless action in the face of danger no matter what the odds, was encouraged. History is replete with stories of the bravery of the noble knights and their generosity to a defeated foe. Unfortunately it is also filled with the stories of dastardly and wicked acts. In the midst of the constant teaching that there was honor and virtue in war and mortal combat, the soul-uplifting principles of the Gospel naturally were lost. There could not be engendered in the souls of men that love for their fellow men which the doctrines of the Redeemer taught the world. Even the priests themselves partook of the spirit of their times and indulged in all the practices of selfishness, greed and personal advantage which were peculiar to that age.

The Great Charter. History records that William the Conqueror, when he came to the English throne, easily curbed the powerful English vassals whom he had created. During succeeding reigns, and under weaker kings, these barons acquired great power, "and their castles became mere robbers' nests, whence they plundered the common people without mercy." When Henry II, came to the throne, he reformed the courts, overthrew the tyrannical nobles and created others in their stead of English descent, but in the reign of his son John things went from bad to worse. John was one of the most depraved and wicked of all of England's kings. He imposed taxes that were unbearable upon the people, wronged the poor and plundered all who had substance that could be taken from them. His brutal murders, and executions under legal pretense, are appalling. The people, both the nobles and the common people, stood this tyranny as long as they could and then rose up in their might against this wicked king. The barons marched against him and, at a place called Runnymead, a meadow on the south side of the Thames in the county of Surrey, on the fifteenth day of June, 1215, forced him to sign the famous Great Charter, which granted to the people greater political freedom than they had exercised at any time previous to that day.

By the provisions of this charter the king had no right to demand money when he pleased, to imprison and punish when and whom he pleased. The courts were to be open to all and justice to be dispensed without favor. The serf, or villein, was to have his plough free from seizure; and the church was to have protection against the interference of the king. All classes of the people benefited by the Great Charter.

Later kings attempted at times to destroy or repeal the Charter but without success. It became the foundation of English liberty and has been jealously guarded by the people against the attacks of kings who between thirty and forty times have tried to break it. In fact the rights of the people have been strengthened from time to time and parliamentary government has replaced the despotic government of kings.

This spirit of liberty which forced concessions from King John gradually spread to other lands, and from this beginning justice, mercy and right received an impetus which did not end. In time the fullest freedom to the individual came as civilization continued on its westward course across the waters to this blessed land which was in the beginning dedicated to freedom and the worship of the true and living God; a land choice above all other lands reserved for a righteous and Godfearing people.
