Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

chapter 13

THE CHURCH IN THE WILDERNESS

Apostasy Before the Days of Christ. When Jesus commenced his ministry in Palestine he found a sad condition of apostasy among the Jews. All who had held authority of the Priesthood had practically disappeared. The spiritual leadership of the Jews was in the hands of enemies of the Savior's doctrines and mission. The Melchizedek Priesthood, of course, had been taken from Israel with Moses, and the Aaronic Priesthood had continued on through many stormy scenes and was still to be found to some small extent at the time of the birth of Jesus Christ. We naturally think that Zacharias, the father of John, and one of the priests who officiated in the Temple was clothed with the authority of this Priesthood at the time John was born. Moreover, we are informed in the writings of Luke that at the time of the birth of Christ there was one Simeon, a righteous man, "who was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him." Simeon was a prophet and it was revealed to him that he should not die until he had beheld the Son of God in the flesh.

And he came by the spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,

Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said,

Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word:

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation,

Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people;

A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.—Luke 2:27-31.

Other things this righteous man uttered in relation to the mission of Jesus Christ, having the full understanding that he was in very deed the Only Begotten Son of God. There was also in the temple at Jerusalem a prophetess named Anna. She had been a widow for about four score and four years. She also recognized the child as the Son of God and praised the Father, speaking of the Son to all those who "looked for redemption in Jerusalem."

Thirty-three years later it appears that John the Baptist and Jesus Christ were all that could be found who held divine authority. Certainly there was no divine authority remaining among the priests and leaders of the Jews. For this reason Jesus was forced to speak these words to his disciples:

Saying, the scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat:

All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.

For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.

But all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments,

And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,

And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.

But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren.—Matt. 23:2-8.

Had these scribes and Pharisees who sat in Moses' seat been true disciples of Moses, they would have accepted Jesus as their Messiah—the Son of God. Christ came in the Meridian of Time when the wickedness among his own people, the Jews, was at its highest point. Notwithstanding his many mighty works and the fact that he spoke as one having authority, and "never man spake like this man," there were very few among the Jews, and especially their leaders, who were willing to receive his word. His words and his mighty works fell upon deaf ears that would not hear and upon blind eyes that refused to see. The rebuke of the Master was timely and merited:

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him two fold more the child of hell than yourselves.

* * *

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous.

And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets.

Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.

Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?—Matt. 23:15-33.

The Ministry of Jesus Christ Confined to Israel. From among the few who gave heed to his doctrines Jesus selected officers and clothed them with authority and sent them forth to proclaim the Gospel in his name. As he sent them forth he said: "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." He declared that he was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and therefore his ministry in Palestine was confined to the Jews. It was seldom that he entered into conversation with those not of Israel or ministered to them, and then only as they crossed his path and sought blessings at his hands.

The Disciples Sent to all Nations. After our Lord passed through the resurrection his commandment to proclaim the Gospel was given to his disciples on a much larger scale. No longer was the saving message to be restricted to the borders of Israel. Isaiah centuries before had predicted that the Redeemer would come and be a "light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth." Moreover he further said:

Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.

And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.—Isaiah 60:1-3.

When Jesus instructed the apostles after his resurrection, he said unto them: "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world."

After the days of Pentecost when the power of the Holy Spirit came upon them, his disciples carried out this important commission. It was hard for them to overcome their inherited prejudices, for they had been taught the exclusiveness of Israel. They could hardly understand that salvation was for the Gentiles. The Lord had to teach this fact to Peter, the chief apostle, by an impressive lesson.

When the full significance of the Savior's commission dawned upon them, these twelve men and their companions in the ministry went forth to fulfill their mission. History does not record in any certain terms where they went individually in their preaching of the Gospel, but there are traditions in which we find some truth informing us that they carried the message to all parts of the earth as it was known to them. The ministry of Paul, who, as he said, was as one born out of due time because he first persecuted the Church, is better known. His ministry carried him into Asia Minor and to the Greeks and Romans. We have the record in small degree of the branches which he organized. These branches, more than any others, became the nucleus out of which Christianity in later times was mainly built.

The Gospel Preached to Every Creature. How rapid was the growth of the Church in the first century we do not know; that the work spread and many received it, there is little doubt. Eusebius, who wrote in the early part of the fourth century, said that the Gospel, "like the rays of the sun, quickly irradiated the whole world. Presently, in accordance with divine prophecy, the sound of his inspired evangelists and apostles had gone throughout all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world." This idea was also expressed by Paul in writing to the Colossians some thirty years after the death of Christ. He said; "If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven; whereof I, Paul, am made a minister." Just what he meant by this we may not know, but he evidently believed that it had been quite generally proclaimed so that all men had received the privilege of hearing it.

It is doubtful if very many out of the multitudes in those times received it. Branches were raised up in all parts of the land, but we may safely believe that in the dispensation of the fulness of times, more people have heard the Gospel, and more have received it during the first one hundred years of this dispensation, than received it in the first hundred years of the meridian of time. Our facilities and opportunities have been much greater than were those of Peter and the apostles of the former dispensation. There is every evidence, however, that the apostles and their associates in that day labored industriously and their words were listened to with great attention in many climes. Persecution followed them and thousands of the Saints lost their lives for the Gospel's sake.

The Apostasy Predicted. It was well understood in the days of the apostles that there was to come a "falling away" from Gospel truth, and that spiritual darkness would be enthroned over all the earth. This darkness would bring to a close the dispensation of the meridian of time. A few of these predictions are here given.

The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.

Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.—Isaiah 24:5-7.

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord.

And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it.—Amos 8:11-12.

And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many. * * * Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not.

For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.—Matthew 24:4, 5, 23, 34.

For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers having itching ears;

And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.—2 Timothy 4:3-4.

But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

And many shall follow their pernicious ways: by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.—2 Peter 2:1, 2,3.

The Church Driven Into the Wilderness. So we might go on with any number of passages taken from the prophetic warnings of the apostles and prophets. John the Revelator saw this great apostasy, and the Church driven into the wilderness, in other words, taken from among men. This vision is so significant that it is strange why any can fail to understand it. John saw in his vision a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars. This woman was about to be delivered of a man child who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron. Then he saw another wonder in heaven, for a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his head, came upon the scene, and prepared to devour the child as soon as it was born. This dragon, we are informed, was so powerful that his tail drew one-third of the stars of heaven and cast them to the earth. The Latter-day Saints have no difficulty in understanding the meaning of this. The dragon is Satan who drew one-third of the spirits in heaven away in his rebellion, when he was cast out into the earth. The woman is the Church of Jesus Christ. The child who was appointed to rule all nations with a rod of iron is the Priesthood. We learn from the Book of Mormon that the rod of iron is the Gospel by which the nations were to be ruled had it not been for the interference of the dragon. We are informed in the vision that protection was given to the woman who was given "two wings of an eagle," by which she had power to fly into the wilderness, where she was to be nourished for "a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent." When the dragon discovered that the woman had escaped his power and that her child had been caught up to the throne of God, he was "wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ."—Rev. 12.

The Priesthood Taken Into Heaven. The history of the first fifteen hundred years after the birth of Christ completely fulfills this prophetic vision. Satan in his wrath drove the woman into the wilderness, or from the earth; the power of the Priesthood was taken from among men, and after the Church with its authority and gifts disappeared from the earth, then in his anger the serpent continued his war upon all who had faith and sought the testimony of Jesus, desiring to worship God according to the dictates of conscience. So successful did he become that his dominion extended over all the known world, and every creature was forced to worship according to the manner which he prescribed. Free agency, the inherent gift of God to every soul, was taken from men, and they were shackled to the plan which Lucifer proposed in the heavens at the rebellion. This is the plan of compulsion and the destruction of that personal liberty which God has given to every creature.
