Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 14

THE TIME OF APOSTASY

When the Apostasy Commenced. It is plain to understand from what we see in this present day, that the departure from the Gospel commenced even in the days of the apostles. How easy it is for the people to fall into forbidden ways and errors of a serious nature when they are not kept in constant contact with the Spirit of the Lord, and when they do not have the constant contact with the presiding authorities of the Church? We can see the possibility in our day that might come upon the members of the Church were they not visited constantly and kept in communication with the general authorities of the Church. It would not be very long before errors would creep in and changes would be made, if each branch was privileged to go its own way independently of any supervision and direction. In the days of Peter and Paul, it was impossible for these inspired leaders to reach the scattered branches of the Church except through infrequent visits and by letters which could be sent only occasionally. There was no postal system in those days. The fact is that these several branches were left very largely to themselves without the constant and general supervision which was essential to their success and unity. Epistles, such as were sent out by Paul, would impress the members in the branches for a little season, and then would be forgotten in the general course of things. The personal contacts which were so vital then, and are vital today, could not be given. The result was in the Primitive Church of Christ that false doctrines and false teachers inevitably crept into the Church. In this way branches soon found themselves drifting from the fundamental principles established by the Savior and his apostles.

It is readily seen how, in this way, the ordinances of the Gospel would be changed, and the principles of the Gospel would be contaminated by the influence of surrounding peoples and beliefs. Then, again, when the inspired leaders who were taught by our Lord all passed away, and another generation came on the scene, the dangers were multiplied. This same danger confronts the Church today. The world is just as full of vain philosophy and false theory today as it ever was. This is the very time spoken of by Paul when the Lord would permit strong delusion to come among the people, "that they should believe a lie," even all "who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." Moreover we are living in the day when men would be "traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. * * * Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." We are, therefore, confronted by as many problems today as the Saints were anciently, but we have the great advantage of the personal contacts and all the modern conveniences and aids to keep the membership of the Church in close touch with the inspiration of heaven as it is revealed through the authorities of the Church.

As long as we hearken to the inspiration and revelation of the Lord, as it comes through the one who is authorized to speak, we have little to fear, although there will arise among us, as there arose among the saints in primitive times, some who will not abide in the doctrines of the Church and will try to lead others into forbidden paths. We have the assurance that the Gospel of the Kingdom has been revealed and established on the earth for the last time, never again to be taken away although there will be some who will turn to modern fables and deny the power of God. Today all parts of the Church can be reached, even to the most remote part, in the course of two or three weeks, and the greater part within one or two days. Our advantage in this respect, should keep us from the errors which crept into the Primitive Church of Jesus Christ and proved its overthrow.

Paul's Warning to the Ephesian Saints. After Paul had completed his final missionary journey and had visited again the branches he and Barnabas first organized, and he was about to return to Jerusalem to attend the feast of Pentecost, he sent for the elders at Ephesus to come and meet him at Miletus as he did not have time to go to them. When they came Paul gave them some very pointed and important instruction. Among other things he said:

And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.

Wherefore, I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men.

For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.

Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.

For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.

Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.

Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.—Acts 20:25-32.

It is clearly seen from the epistles of these ancient apostles that they fully understood by the power of the Spirit that there was to come a falling away, or departure from the faith, and that they were not living in the day of the restoration of all things. Paul warned Timothy that the Spirit had expressly spoken to him declaring that "In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils." Moreover these would have their consciences seared so that they would speak lies in hypocrisy; "forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth."

Restoration Not For Their Day. Jesus informed his apostles on the day of his ascension that some things pertaining to his work were not intended for that dispensation. We read that on this occasion when they were come together they asked him, saying, "Lord, wilt thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?" His answer was, "It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power." In other words, they were not to be concerned with matters which were intended for a later dispensation. A short time after this Peter seemed to get the inspiration of this when speaking to the Jews who were guilty of crying out against the Son of God. He told them that there was no forgiveness or remission of sins for them at that time, hence they could not be baptized; but if they would repent perhaps there would come a time when some measure of forgiveness would be granted them. This time would be "when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord," which would be at the time of "restitution of all things." This time of restitution was promised by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began, and Paul declared that this was to be in the dispensation of the fulness of times. These prophets clearly understood that the dispensation of the fulness of times was another dispensation remote from their dispensation.

The Seven Churches. The implication is very strong in the first three chapters of Revelation that at the time John received the vision there were only seven churches (i.e. branches of the Church) worthy of mention by the Lord. Moreover, it was necessary for the Lord to rebuke these churches which were the branches at Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea. While these branches were worthy of commendation for some things, yet most of them had to be rebuked for permitting iniquity to creep in among them, and be warned that unless repentance came their candlesticks would be removed. One of the seven, Laodicea, because it had shown indifference to the truth and was "neither cold nor hot," the Lord said he would "spue" out of his mouth. This charge to these seven churches gives us a fair insight into the conditions which prevailed among the members of the Church at the close of the first century. Is it not reasonable to believe that if there had been other branches of the Church worthy of recognition, the Lord would also have recognized them, either with commendation or rebuke? After this charge was given the Lord delivered this hopeful promise: "As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be zealous, therefore, and repent. Behold I stand at the door, and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches."

Persecutions of the Early Christians. From the days of the crucifixion until the beginning of the fourth century, persecution followed the Saints. There were, of course, times of comparative peace, but Satan in his anger against the woman and her child, continued his labors of destruction until he thought he had accomplished his work. It was not long after the day of Pentecost that James, the son of Zebedee, was put to death. The activities of the Jews resulted in driving many of the disciples out of Palestine. This work was completed in the siege of Jerusalem by Titus. The greatest persecutions came, however, from the Romans. The strange thing about these persecutions is the fact that Rome had always been tolerant and unmindful of the religious beliefs of all nations. In their polytheistic worship they conceded the right to others to worship the gods of their own lands. Gibbons has said: "Rome gradually became the common temple of her subjects; and the freedom of the city was bestowed on all the gods of mankind. * * * The various modes of worship which prevailed in the Roman world were all considered by the people as being equally true; by the philosophers as all equally false; and by the magistrates as equally useful. And thus toleration produced not only mutual indulgence, but even religious concord."

But with the true religion this was not so. The dragon was seeking to destroy the woman. He certainly stirred up the Roman rulers against the Church. While toleration was granted to all others, there was no mercy for Christians. The first persecution, commencing in A.D.64, took place under Nero, one of the lowest and most depraved of all reprobates. It was during this persecution that Peter and Paul suffered martyrdom. The second persecution came under the edict of Domitian, in 94A.D., and the third under Trajan. Others followed under Marcus Aurelius, Severus, Decius Trajan and down to the close of the reign of Diocletian at the beginning of the fourth century. The cruelties and horrors of these persecutions beggar description, and are passed over without any reference to detail.

Effects of Persecution on the Church. These continued persecutions, some of which were given with exterminating edicts against all Christians no matter where they were found, brought thousands of the Saints to martyrdom. Many thousands renounced the faith to save their lives. Such methods, to bring to an end the work established by our Lord, proved to be unavailing so far as destroying the Church was concerned. That they weakened it, there can be no doubt, for many of the leading characters were removed by death, the officers were sought out and destroyed. But Satan discovered that there are other weapons far more effective than the sword, and fire, and burning at the stake.

The Conversion of Constantine. In the year 306 Constantine came to power in Rome. His father had protected the Christians in Gaul during the persecutions of Diocletian and the son, when he came to the throne, not only continued the policy of his father, but became a Christian. From that time on persecution ceased, and Christianity became a popular religion. In becoming popular, the Church lost its vitality and became clothed in the vestments of the Pagan world. The simplicity of the Gospel was lost in the maze and fog of mystic rites and ceremonies to the bewilderment of the people. With the power of the Roman government behind it, Christianity became the dominant religion in all of Europe.

Rise of the Roman Pontiff. It is said that Constantine offered rewards to all who would become Christians. Rome being the capital of the government, it was but natural that in the city of Rome there would be, under the circumstances, the greatest number of new members added. In course of time the local ecclesiastical government in Rome claimed pre-eminence and the right to direct in the affairs of all other branches of the Church. The story of the fight for this distinction and how, eventually, other branches of the Church submitted to the domination of Rome, is too long a story to be given here. It is sufficient to say that by weight of influence and numbers, Rome succeeded in impressing this upon all other branches and subjected them to her will. In the days of the apostles the several branches, called churches, were presided over by local officers, who in turn were presided over by other officers, similar to the order in the Church today. These were all subject to the regulation of the Twelve Apostles. The authority in Rome assumed greater and greater power until the claim was made that the bishop of Rome was, and had been since the death of Peter, the successor to the chief apostle in the government of the Church. From that day this order was submitted to, and, to this day, that doctrine has been maintained in the Catholic Church.

Changes in the Church. The Church established by our Lord and his apostles was a simple organization free from all pomp, mystery and ostentation. Its members were humble and met on a common plane. The priest was no better than the member, although he was respected in his calling. All were one in their simplicity and brotherly relationships. The Church was free from pride and class distinction. All of this was rudely changed after the death of the apostles. Offices never dreamed of in the true Church were created. Ceremonies foreign to the Gospel were added. Ordinances instituted for the salvation of men were discarded or changed. By the multiplicity of changes in ordinances, principles, and church government, the Church of Jesus Christ ceased to exist on the earth. Satan had accomplished far more effectively, in times of peace, what he failed to do by persecution and making martyrs in the Church. Power, wealth, pride and the wearing of costly raiment became the order of the times. This splendor and magnificence displayed by the officials in the church as it then existed surpassed anything the world had seen before. The people were taught to bow in reverence and awe of their priests, contrary to the order of heaven and which an angel would not permit John to do before him, because he was also one of the brethren who had the testimony of Jesus.

The Savior brought an accusation against the scribes and Pharisees and the rulers of the Jews of his day, because they sought after all of these worldly things, but the fifth century saw the Church of Rome surpassing all things in its wealth and splendor. The Gospel ordinances had been changed; the new and everlasting covenant had been broken; the Priesthood had been taken back to God; the Church had fled into the wilderness, and the true government of God had been driven from the earth, to remain until, in the dispensation of the fulness of times, it was to be restored again.
