Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 15

DECLINE OF KNOWLEDGE THROUGH TRANSGRESSION

Man Was Intelligent in the Beginning. We have learned from the writings of Abraham and Moses, which the Lord has restored to "as many as believe," that man in the morning of time was an intelligent being. Adam was chosen for his mission in this mortal life before the foundations of the earth were laid. His appointment came because he was one of the greatest of the intelligences in the spirit world. He merited, by his faithfulness and intelligence, according to our scriptures, the right to be chosen to come to this earth as "the first man" and "father of all." He was the Ancient of Days because he was the first man, and by virtue of his calling became a prince over his posterity forever. He was "Michael, the prince, the archangel," who helped to form this earth for himself and his posterity.

Adam the Ancient of Days. Speaking of Adam the Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in Daniel as being the Ancient of Days, or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great grand progenitor of whom it is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times, i.e., the dispensation of all times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of all the dispensations that are to be revealed. * * *

And again: God purposed in himself that there should not be an eternal fulness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever, that should be gathered together in one in those dispensations unto the same fulness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus; therefore he set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them. * * *

These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord.—History of the Church 4:207.

Adam Holds Keys of All Generations. On one other occasion the Prophet Joseph Smith, discoursing on Priesthood, said:

The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the creation, before the world was formed, as in Genesis 1:26-28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael, the Archangel, spoken of in the scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood, he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven. * * *

Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He, Adam, is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council.—History of the Church 3:386-388.

These sayings of the Prophet's concerning Adam are confirmed in the Doctrine and Covenants. In a revelation given in March, 1832, we are informed that Jesus Christ established Adam-ondi-Ahman, and "appointed Michael, your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and gave him the keys of salvation, under the direction of Jesus Christ, the Holy One who is without beginning of days or end of life." (D. and C. 78:15-16.) We are also informed (D. and C. 107) that "three years before the death of Adam he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all High Priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel. And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever. And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation."

Adam Had a Perfect Language. We are also informed in the writings of Moses that Adam was taught a perfect language under the tutelage of God, while Adam was in the Garden of Eden. Moreover, in that day when men began to multiply Adam was still among them—

And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration. And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled.

Some centuries later when Enoch was teaching the people he said:

And death hath come upon our fathers; nevertheless we know them and cannot deny, and even the first of all we know, even Adam. For a book of remembrance we have written among us, according to the pattern given by the finger of God; and it is given in our own language.

From these writings we discover that in the very beginning men were intelligent, possessed of knowledge and wisdom and were clothed upon by the power of the Holy Ghost. Moreover, the Gospel in its fulness was had among them. They had a powerful language, for it was the language of God, perfect in both the spoken and the written word. We also learn that those antediluvian patriarchs from the days of Adam were acquainted with the creation of this earth and with the heavenly bodies, their revolutions and the purpose of their creation. All of these things were made known by revelation.

The reason for presenting in some detail these facts at the beginning of this lesson, is to impress upon the reader that God did not leave man in an ignorant, helpless and uncivilized state, in the beginning of this world; and to show that the Almighty is ever ready to teach the people and to give them intelligent understanding of many things considered in the world to be in the realm of science and art, with which it is said by many today the Creator does not bother himself, but leaves man to work out for himself. If men will only hearken to the Spirit of Truth and accept the revelations of the Lord as they have been made known to the prophets, he will inspire them in all things for their temporal as well as for their spiritual salvation.

Abraham's Knowledge. From Abraham we receive further light regarding the knowledge and wisdom of Adam and his posterity before the flood. Abraham says:

But the records of the fathers, even the patriarchs, concerning the right of Priesthood, the Lord my God preserved in mine own hands; therefore a knowledge of the beginning of the creation, and also of the planets, and of the stars as they were made known unto the fathers, have I kept even unto this day, and I shall endeavor to write some of these things upon this record, for the benefit of my posterity that shall come after me.

In these writings of Abraham we discover that he had a most wonderful knowledge of the heavens and of the earth and their relationship to each other. Part of this he obtained from the writings of the fathers and part from his own research and from revelation. No astronomer since his day has been in possession of such knowledge of the heavens as was revealed to Abraham by the Lord through Urim and Thummim. By this means Abraham learned of the relationship of the stars to each other and that there were great governing ones which were set "near the throne of God." The earth upon which we dwell is subject to the governing influence of Kolob, as are all those of our solar system. Kolob is the greatest of all the Kokaubeam and is nearest the throne of God. Abraham saw these great stars and learned of their revolutions, their days and years, according to their reckoning. Abraham taught this knowledge of astronomy to the Egyptians. We know from these ancient records that in the beginning and down through the ages among the people of God there was a correct understanding in relation to the universe.

The Nephite Knowledge of the Universe. From the Book of Mormon we learn that this knowledge was had among the Nephites. Mormon, commenting upon the power of God and the weakness and ingratitude of man, has said:

Yea, and if he say unto the earth—Move—it is moved.

Yea, and if he say unto the earth—Thou shalt go back, that it lengthen out the day for many hours—it is done;

And thus, according to his word the earth goeth back, and it appeareth unto man that the sun standeth still; yea, and behold, this is so; for surely it is the earth that moveth and not the sun.

The knowledge of astronomy was well developed among the ancients upon the American continent. There were scholars among them acquainted with the arts and sciences, which truth is shown in their wonderful buildings, monuments and sculptures. Among the evidences of their advanced knowledge of the heavenly bodies and of mathematics, we have before us their wonderful system of canals cut for hundreds of miles through the Andes and in other parts of the land, and the Mayan Calendar Stone, superior to anything known on the eastern hemisphere. So accurately was this calendar worked out that the people could fix any date within a period of 374,000 years. In their excellent work on "The History of the Maya," Thomas Gann and J. Eric Thompson have this to say: "The Maya calendar can rightly be described as one of the greatest, indeed one might say the greatest, achievement in the line of pure reason science ever achieved by a people of the same cultural horizon as the Mayas." The historian Prescott has spoken of this culture and civilization as being equal to that of the Spaniards, and in many respects superior to that of their conquerors who came from the Old World.

False Ideas of Today. We know, then, that the prevalent notion in the world today that the ancients from the dawn of history to the days of Galileo believed that the earth is flat and the center of the universe, around which the sun and stars revolve, is a most stupendous error. The ignorance made manifest in the days of Galileo and Columbus, and for centuries preceding their time, was the result of apostasy from and rebellion against the truth which in the beginning was plainly revealed from the heavens.

We know that Jesus Christ—Jehovah—framed this earth under the command of his Father. Moreover, worlds without number he created. This was taught to Adam, Moses, Abraham, and John the Beloved, the latter having written:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made.

In him was life; and the life was the light of men.

When our Lord was in his ministry he organized his Church and taught his Gospel. Surely, he who made the earth, and all things, was not ignorant of the nature of the universe. The truth regarding the earth he taught to his disciples. They understood it as they understood the fundamental principles of the Gospel. But after they had passed away, and the author of sin and wickedness had taken possession of affairs and had driven the Church into the wilderness, as predicted by the prophets, then there set in a reaction which culminated in gross ignorance of heavenly things. This falling away also had noticeable effect upon the arts and sciences. This loss of knowledge concerning God, the fundamental principles of the Gospel, the earth and the heavens, came about in a most natural way. Darkness always follows in the wake of sin. Ignorance is the offspring of rebellion against light and truth. Idolatry is Satan's weapon aimed at the destruction of belief in God and the atoning sacrifice of his Only Begotten Son. The history of the Lamanites and Nephites upon this American continent has been paralleled many times in other parts of the earth when men rejected revealed truth. The descendants of the Mayas and Aztecs, in the day of the Spanish conquest, could not build the magnificent monuments and calculate as did their enlightened fathers.

The Lord Always Willing To Impart Knowledge. It is true that many of the false ideas and erroneous scientific theories and beliefs of the dark ages were held by various peoples before the time of Christ; but these false teachings and practices were always developed from the seed of transgression and apostasy. Our Father in heaven has always been willing to aid his children in correct understanding, not only of the plan of salvation, but of all other essential things, to aid man in this mortal life. He has commanded us to seek diligently "words of wisdom," out of the best books, and to seek learning "even by study and also by faith."

Elder Parley P. Pratt in his inspired little work, "The Key To Theology," has very clearly pointed out that through the science of theology—which is the greatest of all sciences—the prophets of God have been taught not only to understand the plan of salvation, but many things pertaining to their temporal salvation as well. Elder Pratt declares that the science of theology is:

The science by which worlds are organized, sustained and directed and the elements controlled.

It is the science of knowledge, and the key and power thereof, by which the heavens are opened, and lawful access is obtained to the treasures of wisdom and intelligence—inexhaustible, infinite, embracing the past, the present, and the future.

It is the science of life, endless and eternal.

It is the science of faith, reformation and remission of sins, whereby a fallen race of mortals may be justified, cleansed, and restored to the communion and fellowship of the Holy Spirit.

It is the science of spiritual gifts, by which the blind see, the deaf hear, the lame walk, the sick are healed, and demons are expelled from the human system.

It is the science of all other sciences and useful arts, being in fact, the very fountain from which they emanate. It includes philosophy, astronomy, history, mathematics, geography, languages, the science of letters, and blends the knowledge of all matters of fact, in every branch of art, or research. It includes, also, all the scientific discoveries and inventions, agriculture, the mechanical arts, architecture, shipbuilding, the properties and applications of the mariner's compass, navigation and music. All that is useful, great and good, all that is calculated to sustain, comfort, instruct, edify, purify, refine or exalt intelligences, originated by this science, and this science alone, all other sciences being but branches growing out of this, the root.

Rebellion of Men Against God. Elder Pratt continues and shows that the Almighty taught man the art of agriculture; he made coats and introduced the tailor's art. He commanded and gave pattern for Noah's Ark, thus introducing shipbuilding. He revealed the pattern of the Tabernacle, and afterwards the plan of the Temple of Solomon. The Lord wrote with his own finger the Tables of Stone on Mount Sinai. The Lord introduced the surveyor's art in the building of cities, temples and other buildings, and by this science all things are made known.

And so, we see from the revelations of the Lord, that he is ever willing to guide the people and teach them the useful arts, sciences, and his eternal word, by which the fulness of knowledge comes, if the people will but have it so. Unfortunately the people almost everywhere on the earth from the beginning have not willed it so. They have rebelled from the beginning because Satan came among them saying: "I am also a son of God; and he commanded them saying: Believe it not; and they believed it not; and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual and devilish." This course of unbelief and willingness to follow the prince of darkness who was, we are told, "a liar from the beginning," and would that all men might be miserable like unto himself, led mankind to do all manner of wickedness which resulted in ignorance and spiritual darkness concerning the things connected with the kingdom of God. We are taught that it is only through the power of the Priesthood that the Gospel is administered and the keys of the knowledge of God and of his power are made manifest. Without the ordinances and the Priesthood the power of godliness is not made manifest to men in the flesh. (D. and C. 84:19-21.) Therefore, when men turn from the power of the Priesthood—through which the heavens are opened and the Creator is revealed—and refuse to accept the ordinances of the Gospel, darkness takes hold of their minds and drives out the light of truth. This is the reason why the Savior said: "Take heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have."

The Gospel Ordinances Changed. It was not long after the death of the Apostles that the evil influences which had been predicted by Peter and Paul, yes, and by our Redeemer also, set in and soon accomplished their work. When Christianity was made the state religion of Rome, then Paganism was mixed with the Gospel and material changes were made in the principles and ordinances. Mankind lost the true knowledge of God and the power by which that knowledge is manifest. It was not long afterwards when the creed of Athanasius replaced the simple and understandable doctrine of God taught by his Only Begotten Son. Not only was this knowledge lost and the principles of the Gospel corrupted with the philosophies of the Pagan world, but there came also a decline in all the spiritual gifts. The ordinance of baptism was wickedly changed; sprinkling and pouring were substituted for the burial in the water in similitude of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. The declaration was made that the bread and wine became actually by transubstantiation the actual body and blood of Christ. Likewise other grave and fatal changes were made in the ordinances and doctrines of the Church.

There came also a decline in art, science, literature, and all things uplifting and beneficial to the mortal life. Only a select few were granted the privilege of an education, such as those times afforded. Few outside the clergy were educated enough to read and write. For this reason the priests became the lawyers, diplomats, instructors, dictators to kings, and controllers of affairs of state. Moreover, the temporal, social and spiritual affairs of the people were controlled by the priests. All learned men talked and wrote in Latin, which the common people did not understand; nor was it intended that they should understand. It was the teaching of the times that the people must not comprehend and properly interpret the sacred word. The scriptures were said to be the exclusive property of the priests, or clergy, and their use among the laity was frowned upon. No part of the scriptures was to be read in public or in private by those not of the clergy. Neither was any part of fragment of the scriptures to be in the possession of the common people on pain of death. Discussion of the word of the Lord was forbidden in the home and prayers were prescribed by the clergy for the people. Many other abuses were introduced and the rights and freedom of the people taken away. Is there any wonder that under such conditions there should come an age of darkness and ignorance upon the land?

Erroneous Belief Regarding Learning. For centuries the opinion has commonly prevailed that in the days of Christ and in olden times, the art of writing and reading was confined to the few who were designated as scribes, lawyers, and the rulers of the people. Recent archeological research has corrected this view. It has been discovered from the abundance of records which have now been found that the common people in these ages could read and write and that other knowledge was widely disseminated even back in early times. Dr. Camden M. Coburn, in his valuable work, "The New Archeological Discoveries," page 99, has said:

In the lifetime of our Lord there was a widespread habit of writing among all classes of the population, and no doubt the leading facts were written down and circulated "almost as soon as they took place,"—though doubtless at first in fragmentary form—so that probably the first account of the death of Jesus "must be presumed to be written in the year he died." (Milligan). As soon as the converts became so many that the original apostles could not easily carry authoritative facts personally to all Christian communities, a need of records would be felt which, because of this general habit of note taking and writing, could be readily supplied.

He also adds, as have other archeological investigators, that "the Gospels were all written before the destruction of Jerusalem, 70A.D." Other writers have declared that writing was common even in the days of Moses and before, not only among the Israelites, but among other nations.

The Dark Ages. Attention is called to this to show the contrast which came upon the so-called Christian world during the time known as the dark ages. It is generally understood that the dark ages commenced with the fall of Rome and continued during the greater part of the next thousand years. The first five or six hundred years of this period are considered the darkest. Professor Myers, in his History of the Middle Ages, has said:

Long before the fall of Rome there was a very observable decline of the Latin intellect. Science, literature, philosophy—the entire intellectual as well as political side of Roman civilization,—showed evidence of weakness and decay. Then came the inrush of the barbarians, and the countries that had been brought under the influence of Latin culture and refinement sank back into almost primitive ignorance and rudeness. The lowest point of depression was touched probably in the seventh century: Hallam calls that the nadir of the human mind in Europe.

Some modern historians have tried to account for this decline in the fact that the barbarian hosts swept over Europe and subdued Rome. They have said that these barbarians were not sufficiently developed in intellect in those times to grasp the high culture and civilization which had existed during the days of the glory of Greece and Rome. Nothing could be farther from the truth. The intellect of the barbarian was just as keen and alert and capable as were the intellects of the civilizations which had gone on before. The reason for this age of extreme darkness was due to the fact of apostasy and departure from the light of truth—a turning from the simple and enlightening principles of the Gospel. Neither should we lose sight of the fact that in that period the learning which had been freely granted to peoples in other times, including the privilege to worship, read and write, had been denied the people. Their very prayers were prepared for them. Their form of worship was made incomprehensible, and they were so overawed by the pomp and mysticism of the clergy as to be held in abject ignorance and superstition. This condition was only natural, considering the times.

Another writer, Dean R.W. Church, in the History of the Middle Ages, has brought in this indictment of the times:

The times, from the fifth to the eighth century, offer an example of a real catastrophe of strange and rare violence in the progress of mankind. On such a scale and with such results it has only happened once. It stands alone, as far as we know, among the revolutions and changes of the world. * * * Changes as great have been since, but they have been gradual. Convulsions almost as terrific have also happened; but they have been partial. But then for more than three centuries, it seems as if the world and human society had been hopelessly wrecked, without prospect or hope of escape. And what gave to this misery additional bitterness, was that there was always a considerable number of persons, sufficiently imbued with the ideas and imagination of a happier time, to be alive to the contrast, and to feel more acutely the wretchedness and despair of the present. The language of the Psalms along adequately represents such feelings: "The earth is moved, the hills are carried in the midst of the sea. All the foundations of the earth are out of course."—p. 43.

They did not care in such days to cultivate the powers and refinement of language, and they soon lost what they had inherited of those powers and refinements; they lost, too, with this, the generalizing and comparing faculties, the value for exactness, for proportion, for adequacy of statement. The Teutonic conquest was followed by centuries in which we see an increasing literary depression, and a universal incapacity for efforts of strong and fruitful thought.—p. 61.

The condition of mental and spiritual stupor and stupidity was not due to a lack of mental capacity, but to the power which Satan exercised over the people. As the Lord said to the Nephites after the great hour of destruction which came to them, so we may in truth say of the people of these times. Satan laughed, and his angels rejoiced because of the power which they had obtained over the fair sons and daughters of the people, and this because of transgression of the sacred laws of divine will which had been proclaimed by the Son of God to lift the human family to a higher plane through the blessings of the Gospel.

Fortunately there was to come the dawn of a better day.
