Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 16

THE BEGINNING OF THE RENAISSANCE

Indifference Towards Learning. Henry W. Elson in "Modern Times and the Living Past," has said: "The great majority of the people during the Middle Ages were wholly without an education. They lived their simple life on their farms as their fathers and grandfathers had done; they had their games and their festivals, they served their feudal landlords and paid heavy taxes, but they cared nothing for books and learning and knew little of the great world around them."

During these dark times there was very little to give encouragement to or create an incentive for the common people to seek learning. Since all books were written by hand, a very tedious practice, and were therefore limited and exceedingly expensive, all such were beyond the meager means of the common people. Moreover, such publications were in the Latin language. Translations of the Bible were chained to the pulpits in the churches and accessible only to the priests who guarded them with a jealous eye. In those days if a man was accused of a crime and he could read and write, and of course this would be in Latin, he was entitled to a trial before the ecclesiastical courts, where to convict required the testimony of numerous witnesses. If a layman was accused two witnesses only were sufficient to convict. Learning on the part of the common people was discouraged and looked upon as the special prerogative of the clergy.

Springtime of the Renaissance. Conditions of this kind could not endure forever. The Lord never intended that man should be kept in ignorance. The time had to come when the minds of men were to be freed from the chains that enslaved them. There came then, the time for a revival of learning which is generally spoken of as The Renaissance, or new birth. This period marks the division between the Middle Ages and what we are pleased to call the beginning of modern times. John Addington Symonds in "The Beginning and Progress of The Renaissance," has said: "The word 'Renaissance' has of late years received a more expanded significance than that which is implied in our English equivalent—the 'Revival of Learning.' We use it to denote the whole transition from the Middle Ages to the modern world; and though it is possible to assign certain limits to the period during which the transition took place, we cannot fix on any dates so positively as to say between this year and that the movement was accomplished. To do so would be like trying to name the day on which spring in any particular season began and ended. Yet we speak of spring as different from winter and summer.

However, it is generally stated that near the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth century formed the real springtime of this era. Following the twelfth century the first dawn of light began to appear. The world was like a great giant who gradually began to stir from a long drunken stupor, sit up, rub his eyes and look about him, hold his aching head and try to work the stiffness out of his joints, and realize the awful plight he had been in; then gradually as the blood began to course normally he began once again to find himself and put himself in order with his surroundings. Let us not forget that the hand of the Lord was over the people and the set time for the dawn of a better day had come by divine decree.

"Nothing Takes Place by Accident." Henry George Bohn has very truly said when speaking of these times: "Nothing in the great world which concerns the well being of man takes place by accident, but is brought forward by divine will, precisely at the moment most suitable to our condition. So it was with astronomy, the Mariner's compass, the steam engine, gas, the electric telegraph, and many other of those blessings which have progressed with civilization. The elements were there and known, but the time had not arrived for their fructification."

We know that the Lord opened the spiritual eyes and understanding of Enoch and Moses so that they each beheld the inhabitants of the earth to the end of time. It is written:

And it came to pass, as the voice was speaking, Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God. And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sands upon the sea shore.

Enoch saw the inhabitants also to the end of time. Both of these prophets saw the times of peace, rebellion and wickedness of the peoples which brought to pass, or will bring to pass, their destruction. Similar visions were granted to the brother of Jared, to Nephi and to John the Beloved, each of whom wrote concerning the history of the inhabitants of the earth to the end of time. It can hardly be disputed that these prophets so privileged saw the manners and customs of the peoples of future generations, their wars and contentions, their methods of warfare and means of transportation, and many other events showing modern discoveries and inventions. Isaiah must have seen in vision our railroad trains and other means of rapid transportation. It seems that he saw the western hemisphere as it would be in the last days, the land "shadowing with wings," or in the shape of wings, sending ambassadors in swift vessels to a "nation scattered and peeled," to proclaim to them the gathering to their home land once again. Nahum apparently saw the modern automobiles as they "jostled one against another in the broad ways," and as they ran like lightning and seemed like torches. The Lord certainly has known the end from the beginning. All discoveries and inventions have come because he willed it and as said by Dr. Bohn, these things did not take place by accident, but in the time place of the appointment.

The Spirit of the Lord Among the People. In these latter days it is easy for members of the Church to understand how the Spirit of the Lord was working among the people in those former times. The awakening in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, which took on momentum in the following three centuries, was the dawning of the day in which the fulness of freedom and religious liberty was to be ushered in. All the discoveries and inventions which followed so rapidly one upon another, were to make preparation for the restoration of the Gospel once again in its fulness. Of this, however, more will be said in another place. At this time we will consider some of the outstanding events belonging to the period of the Renaissance.

Long before the awakening in Europe there had been progress in literature, art and science, among the Saracens, who "during the dark ages, were almost the sole repositories of the scientific knowledge of the world. A part of this they gathered for themselves, for the Arabian scholars were original investigators, but a larger share of it they borrowed from the Greeks. While the Western nations were too ignorant to know the value of the treasures of antiquity, the Saracens preserved them by translating into Arabic the scientific works of Aristotle, the treatises on medicine by Galen, and the astronomical writings of the Alexandrian Greeks; and then, when Europe was prepared to appreciate these accumulations of the past, gave them back to her." (Myers.)

Effect of the Crusades on Learning. The Crusades were great military expeditions by the Christians of Europe intended to wrest from the Mohammedan the Holy Land. They were inspired by religious fervor and fanaticism and the love of adventure on the part of the soldier who was trained to war. The first Crusade was undertaken in 1096 and there were seven others from time to time until 1272. These Crusades, while they failed in the purpose for which they were conducted, did result in an enlarged view and understanding on the part of the people of Europe. East and West were brought nearer to each other. The knights and soldiers who engaged in these wars brought to the people of Europe many thoughts and ideas about the world that were new to them. These experiences also had a tendency to break down the feudal aristocracy and enlarge the powers of the kings. The increased knowledge of geography, a better understanding of the Mohammedan and the contact with the learning of the East, through the Crusades, stimulated the desire for further knowledge.

The Adventure of Marco Polo. Another influence which stimulated the sluggish European mind was the remarkable tale told by Marco Polo in the last quarter of the thirteenth century. Marco Polo, a Venetian traveler, returned to Italy after some twenty years spent in the far East. He wrote a book containing many remarkable experiences, describing the people, their customs, industries, etc. Then in the middle of the fourteenth century another adventurer appeared; he was Sir John Mandevil, an Englishman, who, according to his account, spent some thirty years and more among the peoples of the East. His tales also stimulated the minds of the people to seek further knowledge of the strange peoples living in lands of far off mystery.

Trade With the East. As the knowledge began to dawn upon the Europeans regarding the peoples of other lands, and as there were brought into their communities many new things in the form of merchandise, the desire was increased to have more intimate intercourse with these people of the East. In very early times, drugs, silks, spices, etc., were obtained by the Greeks and other peoples from India. Such articles had to be brought by caravans. The long tedious journeys, which were fraught with much danger, made such journeys very difficult. During the Middle Ages the volume of this trade was very small and consisted of articles of luxury for the wealthy classes. The Crusades and the adventures of such men as Polo and Mandevil, stimulated the desire for trade. When the Ottoman Turks in the fifteenth century captured Constantinople, trade overland became too precarious. Some other means of approach to the East had to be devised. Most of the trade had been carried on by the cities of Venice and Genoa, which, during the Crusades, reaped a rich harvest. When the trade routes were threatened by the hostility of the Turks, the Genoese sought a way by sailing through the Straits of Gibraltar. Prince Henry of Portugal was one of the earliest navigators in the Atlantic Ocean. Following his expeditions down the African coast, Bartholomew Dias in 1486 rounded the Cape of Good Hope, thus proving that the wonderful nightmares which had afflicted the people concerning the tropical seas, were imaginary. In 1498, after Columbus had been to the western world, Vasco de Gama made a successful voyage to India from whence most of the merchandise from the East had come.

The Mariner's Compass. These extended voyages resulted in the building of better ships, and when the Mariner's compass came into general use, long voyages could be safely taken. Before this time the mariners endeavored to keep their ships within sight of land, or, if venturing beyond, to be sure they knew their position by the stars. Dreadful stories were current in relation to the dangers of the sea beyond the European shores. Dragons and dreadful monsters, enemies of man, infested the Sea of Darkness, as the Atlantic was called. Should a vessel venture too far to the west, it could never return for it would become a prey to these awful monsters. Then, again, when men began to consider that perhaps the earth was a globe, they declared that no ship could stay on the under side and should they get down they never could come up to the top again.

When the Mariner's compass was first discovered is not certainly known. It has been said that the Chinese knew something about the polaric influence of the loadstone before the Christian Era, but this is not positively proved. The discovery that a loadstone will tend to direct itself towards the north and the south was known long before the compass was brought into use for navigation. This knowledge seems to have been derived by the Europeans from the Arabs. Whatever the origin may be, the fact remains that some time in the twelfth century the use of the magnetic needle in navigation was known, but not generally used until a later time. This principle was well understood in the days of De Gama and Columbus.

The Discovery of Gunpowder. Like the discovery of the compass and many other wonderful things, the origin of gunpowder remains a mystery. The Chinese have been given credit for this discovery. Whether or not this is so is immaterial, but the proof is lacking. The use of gunpowder is thought to be a development rather than a sudden discovery. As early as the seventh century an incendiary composition known as "Greek fire," was used in the navy of the Eastern Empire. This consisted of salt, sulphur, pitch, rosin and oil. The salt and the petroleum were obtained from the vicinity of Constantinople. This substance was thrown or placed in tubes and dropped on the vessels of the enemy at the time of ramming them. These tubes used were similar to the breechloading guns of later days. The first mention of the composition of dry powder is made by Roger Bacon in the thirteenth century. Its application in times of war is ascribed to a German, Schwartz, by name, in 1330, but it is also claimed that even before this time it was used by the Turks. At the battle of Crecy in 1346, it is said the English had three small cannon. The use of gunpowder, when it became general, brought to an end the age of Chivalry and its medieval castles with moats and bridges. No longer was it possible to conduct the splendid tournament with its knights tilting and rushing at each other on gaily caparisoned horses amidst the excited shouts of the assembled throng. The use of plated or chained armor and the shield came to an end. Eventually it also brought the introduction of more powerful weapons of war. Then ships had to be reconstructed on a larger and stronger scale. The horrors of war became more terrible, the end of which, unfortunately, the world has not seen.

What a shame it is that useful things have to be perverted to unnatural and evil ends and to add to the sorrow and affliction of the people!
