Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 17

THE REVIVAL OF LEARNING

Benefits From Accumulated Knowledge. It is not the purpose of this discussion to chronicle all the important steps taken in the development and revival of knowledge known as the Renaissance, but merely to point out some of the high lights which played such an important part in this revival. We must pass by hurriedly many important events with scarcely a mention, such as the part played by Lorenzo De Medici, under whose influence Florence became the center of learning and has been called by some writers the "Modern Athens;" the wonderful skill of Michael Angelo and Raphael in the field of art; the early reformers and the skillful teachers in different parts of Europe, such as Erasmus, Colet, More, and many others, whose influence was felt not only in their own but succeeding generations. From the commencement of the revival many agencies were at work, each doing its particular part in the great work of reconstruction and restoration which was to bring back to the world much of the culture and knowledge which had been lost through darkness which came naturally because of the rejection of the inspiration of the Holy Spirit and the revealed word of the Lord.

The world has benefited wonderfully by the accumulation of knowledge and experience coming down from the distant past. If men had continued to walk humbly in paths of righteousness this knowledge and experience would have saved the world from the spiritual and educational darkness which fell upon it with such force following the death of the apostles and early elders of the Primitive Church of Jesus Christ. Much that is vital to the welfare of mankind was lost because of rebellion, stubbornness and greed. The Lord has declared that he gives to "every man that cometh into the world," the "Spirit of Jesus Christ," which is also known as the "Light of Truth." This Spirit is given to guide "every man through the world that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit. And every one that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit cometh unto God, even the Father." Because of the rebellion of men this Spirit withdraws from them and therefore they do not come unto God; neither do they accept his commandments as they have been given in olden times, even from the beginning. In this way man fails to take advantage of the teachings and experiences of the past and is forced to suffer many trials and partake of many deprivations because of his stubbornness and hardness of heart.

Records From the Earliest Times. We have learned that records have been kept from the very earliest times. In fact the keeping of records has been definitely and sacredly commanded by the Lord and required of his people in all ages since man was first placed upon the earth. The keeping of such records was not merely for the benefit of the generation in which the writings were made, but for the benefit of all future generations. It is very refreshing to the Latter-day Saints to know that in the beginning of the history of this world the Lord taught his children to read and write. Moreover, that the records which were written were in a language pure and undefiled. In this language all matters of doctrine, history and genealogy, having a bearing on the welfare of the people through the ages, were inscribed. Many of these important matters have been withheld from the world in its days of wickedness. We, today, are still waiting for the restoration of the words of the Lord to Enoch and to the Brother of Jared and others who received important information and doctrine which they were commanded to write. This history and doctrine is withheld from us because of the wickedness of the generation in which we live, for the Lord has said it "shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord." In the days of Adam a "book of remembrance" was kept, and it was intended for the benefit of future generations if they would repent, as the title of the book implies. Enoch rejoiced that there was such a record, and that it had been handed down so that the people in his day might know how the word of the Lord came to the fathers in the very beginning. Of this he wrote in his own record: "And death hath come upon our fathers; nevertheless we know them, and cannot deny, and even the first of all we know, even Adam. For a book of remembrance we have written among us, according to the pattern given by the finger of God; and it is given in our own language."

Abraham also had the record which came down from the fathers, and he rejoiced in the knowledge of the truth pertaining to the earth, the creation, and the Gospel. Moreover, he declared that it was his intention to add to this record the word of the Lord given in his day, that it might be of benefit to his posterity.

A Noble, Uplifting Thought. How much more inspiring and noble is the thought that man, in the beginning of the world, was taught a perfect language in the presence of God, and that all who desired it were instructed to read and write in a language which was spoken in the heavens, than to believe, as many now do, in the foolish, stagnant philosophy of the present day, that man in the beginning could not even speak, much less read and write in a language that was pure and undefiled! Why men will follow the mistaken theories of the world, rather than accept the inspiration from the heavens, is strange for some of us to understand. We speak of the "dark ages" of the world, and the "revival of learning" which followed, and in this we speak truly, for the light which came in the beginning was taken away and was followed by gross spiritual darkness, and then again, when the Lord saw fit to bring it about, he again revived the minds of men in preparation for the restoration of his divine truth in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

How Ancient Records Were Kept. In what manner these ancient records were kept, history does not fully reveal. Whether the recorders wrote on parchment, on metal, or the tablets and cylinders of clay, the fact remains that records were kept and handed down from generation to generation from the days of Adam. We know that Abraham kept his record on papyrus according to the custom of the Egyptians going back beyond his day. The Lord gave to Moses commandments, written by the finger of the Lord, on tables of stone, and we know that the Hebrews kept records on parchment and vellum, and also on metals, which was a custom among other nations. Henry George Bohn has said: "Writing seems also to have been common, at a very early period, on palm and olive leaves, and especially on the bark of trees—a material used even in the present time in some parts of Asia. * * Tabula, which properly means a 'plank' or 'board,' now also signifies the plate of a books and was so used by Addison, who calls his plates 'tables.' Folium ('a leaf') has given us the word 'folio;' and the word liber, originally meaning the 'inner bark of a tree,' was afterwards used by the Romans to signify a book; whence we derive our words, 'library,' 'librarian,' etc."

Much of our knowledge of the past coming from the nations which "knew not God," has been recorded on stones, baked clay tablets, and cylinders and broken pottery. There are some instances of records having been kept on plates of brass as well as of gold, confirming the account in the Book of Mormon.

The Discovery of Printing. It is declared by many scholars that the discovery, or invention, of printing is the greatest of all inventions. Whether or not this be true, it must be conceded that printing has had a most powerful effect upon the civilization of the world. While the idea is erroneous that in ancient times very few of the people were educated enough to read and write, the incentive for knowledge increased with leaps and bounds after the invention of printing. It has been taught that few people could read and write before this time. It is true that in the "dark ages" this accomplishment was limited to comparatively few, but the reason for this is that such knowledge was denied the common people. They were instructed that such accomplishments were not for them, and that they should depend upon their priests for knowledge.

Movable Type of Modern Origin. Printing with movable type is of comparatively recent times. Printing from blocks and clay tablets was practiced in China and other lands before the Christian Era. The great discovery was that of forming each letter separately, so as to make possible the rearranging and forming of the words, lines and pages of a printed book, thus avoiding the cutting of new blocks for each page. The claim of Johannes Gutenberg to the invention of this kind of type is generally conceded, although there has been some dispute in relation to this matter. Printing dates from about 1438. In the middle of the fifteenth century there were several books printed by means of movable type, and before 1500 printing presses had been set up in some 220 different places in Europe.

Knowledge of Paper Making. The art of printing would have been greatly hampered had it not been for the discovery of how to make paper. The making of paper dates from, at least, the twelfth century, and from very early times papyrus and the costly parchments and tables of wood and stone could not be continued in the time of printing with any degree of success. It was about the time of the invention of printing that the perfecting of paper making out of rags was accomplished. This discovery did away with the expensive means of making books by hand which was the custom in the days when scribes had to write each volume with a pen.

Early Publications. The first printed book from movable type was a Latin edition of the Bible which appeared between 1450 and 1455. We are informed that in the last thirty years of the fifteenth century 10,000 books and pamphlets were published in Europe. This does not appeal to us as being anything very remarkable in this day when thousands of tons of printing are given to the public every day, but in that day it was a wonderful accomplishment.

The schoolmen, who were ecclestiastics, looked upon all learning as a part of theology and pertaining to the church. All matters were supposed to be settled by an appeal to the clergy, and they, in turn, were to interpret according to their understanding of the Scriptures. But since the Spirit of the Lord was not guiding these Schoolmen they made, at times, serious mistakes in their interpretations. All of the writings, as we have said, were in the Latin tongue. In their day the Christian religion, says Frederick Seebohm, had been changed and that "which in the days of Christ and the apostles was a thing of the heart (Love of God and man's neighbor), had grown into a theology—a thing of the head." The desire of the clergy, which was impressed upon the people by physical force, was to prevent the common people from learning to read and write for fear they would demand the privilege of reading and interpreting for themselves the Bible.

Henry George Bohn, discussing the "Origin of Printing," has this to say:

It may be wondered that Claxton (who was the earliest printer in England), like many of the foreign printers, did not begin with, or at least some time during his career, print the Scriptures, especially as Wycliffe's translation had already been made. But there were good reasons. Religious persecution ran high, and the clergy were extremely jealous of the propagation of the Scriptures among the people. Knighton had denounced the reading of the Bible, lamenting lest this jewel of the church, hitherto the exclusive property of the clergy and divines, should be made common to the laity; and Archbishop Arundel had issued an enactment that no part of the Scriptures in English should be read, either in public or private, or be thereafter translated, under pain of the greater excommunication. The Star Chamber, too, was big with terrors. A little later, Erasmus' edition of the New Testament was forbidden at Cambridge, and in the country of Surrey the Vicar of Croydon said from the pulpit, "We must root out printing, or printing will root out us."

The Art of Printing Spreads Over the Earth. No matter how much pressure could be brought to bear by those in authority against printing and the reading of printed Bibles, the ability to read and write continued to grow among the people. The publication of books, including the Bible, was too great a force to be stemmed by the puny arm of tyranny. Like an irresistible flood, printing, and the desire to read what was printed, swept over the entire land. This flood-tide spelt the doom of the Latin language as the language of literature. Books in the everyday speech of the people began to multiply. Moreover, no matter how severe the threats were against the translating, printing and reading of the Bible in the native tongues, this work continued to go on, leaving in its wake, it is true, the mangled and charred bodies of those who had marked the way.

Wycliffe gave to the English people their first translation of the Bible in their own tongue. This was before the days of printing. Others arose to carry on his work. To Richard Grafton is due the credit of becoming the first publisher of the Bible in England. He did this at the peril of his life. His first publication was of Coverdale's and Tyndale's translations of the Bible. Printing of the Bible had to be done secretly in those days, and most of the time no one knew where it was done. As time went on and other changes came among the people, more and more copies of the Bible appeared in the vernacular tongues and the tide could not be stemmed. Finally, through the increase of light and freedom which was brought about by the "Reformers," the work of disseminating copies of the Bible among the people continued openly and steadily until all the people had the blessed privilege of owning copies of the Scriptures. So the time came that instead of it being considered a crime for a man to read the Bible to his family, which had to be done under cover and in fear of the most painful punishment, men were taught to reverently read the Scriptures. This reading was taught as a duty which every man owes to his faith and to God.
