Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 18

THE RELIGIOUS REFORMATION

Bound by "the Chains of Hell." Alma, when instructing Zeezrom on things pertaining to the kingdom of God, said: "And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction." Now this is what is meant by "the chains of hell." During the period spoken of as the "Dark Ages" Satan had bound the souls of men in the depths of ignorance and superstition. This condition had come about because men had hardened their hearts against the things of the kingdom of God. The prophetic words of Isaiah were verily fulfilled: "For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people."

There is no darkness so black and heavy as spiritual darkness. Such darkness comes through the transgression of divine law. There is no ignorance so fatal as the ignorance of the saving principles of the Gospel. Great learning does not always savor of salvation. The fact is that few among the learned are willing to accept the simple principles of divine truth. Well did the Savior say, "Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." Jacob, the brother of Nephi, also said: "O the cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God."

False Ecclesiastical Power. The awful condition of superstition and ignorance of the knowledge of God which covered the earth for so many centuries after the passing of the apostles, was encouraged and guided by those who professed to be representatives of the Son of God upon the earth. There had arisen in those times an ecclesiastical power which controlled kingdoms and principalities. It had restricted by severe and painful edicts the privileges and individual rights of religious worship. It had bound, as far as it had power to bind, the consciences of men. It endeavored to set the bounds of individual thinking within the narrow limits of its creed. It pried into the sacred and private relationships of the home. It decreed when and how a man should pray. It punished with excruciating agony many who defied its power. No king was safe upon his throne without its sanction and approval. By the Dictatus of Pope Gregory VII it was declared that the church, "has never erred, nor will it err to all eternity," therefore all its edicts were to be obeyed, and it reserved the right to annul all other contracts, vows and obligations. Charles IV who, at the age of twenty, held dominion over the greater part of Europe, stood with his head and feet bare and scantily clothed, doing penance for three days in the midst of winter at Canossa, Italy, for giving offense to the ecclesiastical power. Such was the dominion exercised by this power over nations as well as the souls of men.

Beginning of the "Reformation." During the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries many things happened to cause the people to question the absolute power and divine authority of the Church of Rome. The spirit of independent thinking had been turned loose among the people. This spirit continued to increase until it gained flood-tide in the sixteenth century, and brought to pass a rupture in the existing Church which led nearly half of the people of Europe from its jurisdiction. One of the leading causes of this disruption was the existence of scandalous acts on the part of the church and its ministers. The selling of "indulgences" in a shameful manner with the promise of absolving men from sin, was another. Then again, kings and rulers were glad to break the yoke which bound them and this led some of them to give aid to the brave but rebellious men who defied this great power.

In the fourteenth century there came what is called the Great Schism in the church. Several centuries previously there had been a split which had created the Eastern and Western Catholic Churches, but this did not stop the power and influence of the Pope of Rome in Western Europe. When the Great Schism came the church was again divided and two presiding heads were chosen, one with headquarters at Rome and one at Avignon in France. Later the attempt was made to depose both of these ecclesiastical rulers and make a third, and for a time there were three Popes, each claiming authority! This condition prevailed for some forty years. The squabbling and contentions among these church heads gave to the Protestant forces a power which they could not have had under other circumstances. It also had the effect of making many of the people dissatisfied, and so this schism became one of the important factors in bringing to pass the revolution in religion which took from this power much of its authority.

"The Morning Star of the Reformation." John Wycliffe (or Wiclif) was born in England in 1320. He has been called "The Morning Star of the Reformation." He graduated from Oxford and then became a professor in that university. He was a learned man and also a priest, and as a priest took part in public affairs. He became a notable preacher and writer and early in his life he began to doubt some of the doctrines of the Catholic Church. He was a brave man and openly advocated his principles. This resulted in a summons for him to go to London to stand trial for heresy. He found a powerful friend in the Duke of Lancaster, who saved him at this time. The next year the Great Schism in the church began, and through this he was again protected, since the rival popes were too busy with their own affairs to bother him. This schism gave Wycliffe additional argument and power in his contention against the Popes. Through his zeal and knowledge he gathered many followers, who were known by their enemies as Lollards, or babblers. While later efforts were made to stamp out these Lollards, the effort failed before the days of the "Reformation," and then it was too late to deal with all the heretics. Wycliffe gave to the people a translation of the Bible in English which was widely read. He died in 1384, after having passed through a most eventful and stormy life, but a fortunate one because of the troubles existing in his time which saved him, without doubt, from being burned at the stake.

John Huss. After the death of Wycliffe his work was continued by John Huss, in Bohemia. These two men never met, but Huss obtained translations of Wycliffe's writings which had been spread all over Europe. Huss was also a teacher and a preacher. He declared that no man on earth had power to forgive sins, and he taught the people to search the Scriptures for the words of eternal life, a thing forbidden by the ruling ecclesiastical power. Through his activity he converted thousands of his countrymen. He was summoned to a church council at Constance and unwisely went (although it was with the sacred promise of King Sigismund that he should be returned in safety), was condemned for heresy and in July, 1415, was burned at the stake. Because of his death the Bohemians rose in rebellion and carried on a war for several years which was finally concluded through a compromise.

The spirit which Wycliffe and Huss had given to the movement of reform went on; it could not be stopped for there were unseen powers greater than the power of men at work among the people. The same council that condemned John Huss resorted to the expediency of taking the bones of Wycliffe from their resting place, burning them and then throwing the ashes in a stream called the Swift. It is written that "the Swift conveyed them into the Avon, the Avon into the Severn, the Severn into the narrow seas, and they into the main ocean; and thus the ashes of Wycliffe are the emblem of his doctrine, which is now scattered over all the world."

Martin Luther. The foremost figure among the "reformers" was Martin Luther, an Augustine monk, and teacher in the University of Wittenberg, Germany. Luther was born in Saxony in 1483, of humble parentage. Amidst the struggle which poverty imposed upon him but with a determined will, he rose to be renowned as a scholar long before his rebellion against Rome. His study and reflections while in the service of the church awakened in his mind many grave doubts and he was led to question many of the doctrines of the church. He gradually reached the conclusion that the system of penance and forgiveness of sins through indulgences was wrong. Before this time, Erasmus had written his "Praise of Folly" in which he described indulgences as "the crime of false pardons," and he later wrote to his colleague Colet:

I have made up my mind to spend the remainder of my life with you in retirement from a world which is everywhere rotten. Ecclesiastical hypocrites rule in the courts of princes. The Court of Rome clearly has lost all sense of shame; for what could be more shameless than these continued indulgences!

The Leaven At Work. We see that the leaven was at work which was destined to correct, in part at least, many of the abuses which prevailed at that time. Wittenberg was an old-fashioned town in Saxony. The University of Wittenberg at which Luther was an instructor had been founded by Frederick, the Elector of Saxony. In the year 1510, Luther visited Rome and in keeping with the custom at the time ascended the sacred stairs of the Lateran on his knees in penitence when he seemed to hear a voice saying: "The Just shall live by faith." While in Rome he was shocked by the scandalous stories being circulated about Pope Alexander VI and Julius II and the unchristian acts of many churchmen. These stories made an everlasting impression upon his mind. In October, 1517, a Dominican monk named Tetzel came to Saxony granting indulgences in that land as he had done in other lands. These indulgences were authorized by Pope Leo X for the purpose of raising funds for the construction of the great church of St. Peter in Rome. Those who purchased were expected to pay in proportion to their ability, thus the rich were required to pay a considerable sum for these benefits which were also extended to the poor for smaller sums. The result of months of serious thinking had brought Luther to the opinion that forgiveness of sins was due to humility and faith in God and could not be procured by a pardon obtained through the paying of sums of money. The activity and doctrine of Tetzel were challenged by Luther who wrote out ninetyfive theses, or statements, which he posted on the door of the Wittenberg Church inviting anyone so interested to engage in a discussion of the subject of indulgences with him. By posting these theses upon the door Luther had no intention of attacking the church but to correct what he saw an evil which had crept into the church. These ninety-five statements were written in Latin and therefore were addressed to scholars. They were soon copied and printed and circulated all over Europe, copies coming to the hands of the ecclesiastical powers in Rome.

The Pope's Bull. The result of this publication and the discussion of the matter by Luther soon brought to him a summons to appear at the papal court in Rome to answer for heresy. Knowing what had happened to Huss and Jerome of Prague, Luther was in no hurry to go to Rome. He found a powerful friend in Frederick, Elector of Saxony, and the result was that Luther was permitted to consult with the papal emissaries in Germany. By these emissaries Luther was induced to keep silence for a time, but in 1519 John Eck, a German theologian, came into the land with a challenge to Andrew Carlstadt, a friend and colleague of Luther in the university, and again Luther was drawn into the controversy, and again his writings began to be published in all parts of the land. The result of this was that the Pope issued a papal bull against Luther. By this time all Europe had become aroused over the controversy and many of the people in Northern Europe in spirit sympathized with Luther. His writings were condemned by the church as being heretical and all people were warned against him; he was given sixty days within which time he was ordered to recant and repudiate his errors or be seized and delivered to the church for punishment. Instead of becoming fearful and showing alarm, in defiance he wrote other pamphlets and continued with greater vigor to advocate his doctrines in opposition to the prevailing ecclesiastical views. One pamphlet was addressed "To the Nobility of the German Nation," and the other "On the Babylonish Captivity of the church." While the printing presses were scattering these writings Luther received the papal bull, but, receiving encouragement from Melanchthon, a fellow teacher at Wittenberg, Ulrich von Hutten and Franz von Sickingen and others, he had no intention of heeding the mandate and journeying to Rome. Luther showed his contempt for the summons by burning the papal bull in a public manner December 10, 1520, amidst the shouts of the populace who assembled to witness the scene.

Luther at the Diet of Worms. Such a deed as this would have brought Luther to a speedy end had it not been for the powerful influence of Frederick of Saxony and other friends. Pope Leo invoked the aid of Emperor Charles V to suppress heresy in his kingdom. Through the influence of powerful princes and because of the temper of many of the people Luther did not go to Rome but was summoned to appear before the Diet of Worms, an assembly of princes, nobles and clergy of Germany. His friends tried to dissuade him from going to Worms, but he declared, "I would go, though there were as many devils there as there are tiles on the roofs of the houses."

Before this august body of nobles and prelates Luther steadfastly refused to recant unless the teachings he had promulgated were shown to be in conflict with the Bible. In confusion and without accomplishing its purpose of compelling Luther to recant, the diet came to an end, declaring Luther to be a heretic and worthy of excommunication. Some wished to consign him to the flames, but he had been pledged a safe return by Emperor Charles. When Charles was informed that heretics were not entitled to any such pledge, and that pledges so made to a heretic were not binding, he replied: "No, I will not blush like Sigismund at Constance;" so Luther was permitted to depart in peace, with the edict of being a heretic and outlaw hanging over him. Fortunately the people were of such mind that this edict fell without the force which it would have carried some years before. On his way home he was suddenly seized by the soldiers of the Elector of Saxony and carried off to Wartberg for safety. Here, where he was unknown except by a few of his closest friends, he undertook the translation of the Bible into German.

The Augsburg Confession. While this struggle for religious liberty went on, Frederick of Saxony died and was succeeded by his brother John. Frederick had been a powerful factor in holding off punishment from Luther unto whom he extended faithful friendship. John was also loyal to the "reformation"and gave it his protection. In 1529, another diet assembled at Spiers for the purpose of suppressing the doctrines of Luther. This body issued an edict forbidding any person from doing anything to promote or spread the teachings of the "Reformation." A number of the German princes entered a protest against the action of this diet, denying the authority of any power to bind men's judgment and conscience. From this protest has come the word "Protestant," which is generally applied to those who broke away from the Church of Rome. In this way the work of rebellion against church dominance went on to a successful conclusion and eventually Luther and Melanchthon, at the instance of the German princes, drew up a confession of faith. This confession is known as the Augsburg Confession. It consists of twenty-eight articles stating the doctrines of the Protestants and their reasons for withdrawing from the Church of Rome.
