Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 19

THE PROTESTANT REVOLUTION

The "Reformation" in England. As we have seen, one hundred and fifty years before the time of Luther, the breaking away from the Church of Rome commenced in England under John Wycliffe, and then was continued by John Huss in Bohemia. The seed thus sown had found root and in the days of Luther and other reformers commenced to bear fruit. At this time the "Reformation" had gained a strong foothold in much of Western Europe, except in Spain and Italy which were strongly Catholic.

In England the break from the Church of Rome came about in a very peculiar way. While Martin Luther was carrying on his work in Germany, Henry VIII of England was showing himself very zealous for the doctrines of the Mother Church, and had written a book against Luther. For this act he was given the title of "Defender of the Faith." It was not long, however, until Henry VIII desired to be rid of his wife, Catherine of Aragon, of whom he had grown tired, notwithstanding she had been a faithful wife to him for many years. The ground on which this separation was sought was the fact that Catherine at their marriage was the widow of Henry's brother Arthur. After long negotiations and the sending of a special delegate, or papal representative, from Rome to England to consider the merits of the case, the decision of the Pope was adverse to Henry. The real reason for the desire for a divorce was not that Catherine was the widow of Henry's brother, which some had interpreted as contrary to Bible teachings, but because Henry sought the favor of another woman, named Anne Boleyn. Greatly disappointed at the refusal of the Pope to hear his plea, and having become very tired of the association of Catherine, who had been faithful to him through their married life, Henry decided to take matters in his own hands, and get rid of Catherine by a divorce without the consent of the Church of Rome.

Due to this action there naturally came a breach between the English Government and the Church of Rome. The early reformers in England had prepared the way so that many of the people were ready to leave the Church of Rome when this opportunity was afforded them. Moreover, it should be remembered that the work of dissatisfaction was spreading over the greater part of Europe and this made it comparatively easy for Henry VIII to make a bold stand and successfully carry out his plans. A Parliament was called composed of puppets who were ready to do the king's will. Therefore at the request of the king acts were passed forbidding the making of payments to "the Bishop of Rome," and declaring Henry to be the "only supreme head on earth of the Church of England." The divorce was also sanctioned and immediately Henry married Anne Boleyn. At the request of the king hundreds of monasteries in England were dissolved and their wealth confiscated. Some of this wealth, it is said, was taken to found hospitals and schools, but we may be sure that the larger part of it was seized and confiscated by the crown.

One good thing that came out of this rebellion by King Henry was the introduction of the Bible in the English language into all the churches. The doctrine of purgatory, and some other beliefs which prevailed in the Catholic Church, were declared to be false and were discarded. All of this was not accomplished without the shedding of much blood. Prominent persons who held to the old faith were cruelly put to death. Priests were allowed to marry, contrary to the established custom of Rome. The English Prayer Book and Thirty-nine Articles which govern in the Church of England to this day, came into existence and were adopted as the guide in the English Church over which Henry VIII was acknowledged by Parliament as the "only supreme head on earth."

Henry soon tired of Anne Boleyn and had her executed in order that he could marry again. In fact the marital relations of Henry VIII furnish one of the greatest blots on the fair name of Great Britain, but it is not our purpose here to enter into any discussion of this question.

After the death of Henry VIII his son Edward VI came to the throne at the age of nine years. He was Henry's only son and the child of his third wife, Jane Seymour. Edward being but a child, the kingdom was ruled by the Protestant princes who were in accord with his father. Edward died while yet a child and his sister Mary, the daughter of Catherine of Aragon, came to the throne. Mary was a devout Catholic without any sympathy for her father, which was natural considering the character of his life and rule, for he did little that would merit sympathy or confidence even from his own children.

When Mary came to the throne all things religious were again changed. The Protestants had to be punished as the Catholics had been in her father's reign. Once more the English fires of martyrdom were kindled. Mary was an extremely cruel, vindictive queen. A Parliament of her choosing was assembled, a thing easy of accomplishment, which helped her to undo all that her father had done. In this reign England was received back into the Catholic fold. In her bitterness Mary brought more than two hundred and seventy martyrs to the stake, about one-half of whom were put to death for conscience sake.

Fortunately Mary died and was succeeded by her sister Elizabeth, the daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn. Elizabeth was a Protestant, so again there came a change. The Catholic government of Mary was overthrown and replaced by one that was Protestant, and the Church of England was re-established as the national church. Elizabeth was now considered the head of the Protestant party in Great Britain. She came to the throne in 1558 and reigned until 1602, and during these years Protestantism became firmly established in Great Britain. The Elizabethan period in English History stands out most brilliantly as the age of letters. It was the age that produced Shakespeare, Bacon and many other of England's great writers, poets and historians. In this age also England achieved great success upon the sea, defeating the Spanish Armada and extending the influence of the British Empire in the American hemisphere. During this reign of some forty-five years many others became religious victims and were burned at the stake or lost their heads through the bigotry of those times.

The Reformation in Other Lands. The reformation began in Switzerland some years before it did in Germany. Ulrich Zwingle, who was born in Wildhausen, Switzerland, in 1484, attacked many of the doctrines of the prevailing creed. He declared that the Bible was the only guide for religious beliefs. He opposed the sale of indulgences and drove those who advocated them from Zurich. He presented sixty-seven doctrinal propositions for discussion which he successfully defended by an appeal to the Bible. In 1531 his followers were attacked by those who did not accept his views and in the battle Zwingle was killed and his body burned, but the work which he commenced went on.

John Calvin. From the ashes of Zwingle another reformer, John Calvin, arose. While he did not accept many of the views of his predecessor, yet with great effect he carried on the work of rebellion against the Church of Rome. Calvin was a Frenchman who was forced to flee from France on account of religious persecution. He found refuge at Geneva where he established himself with considerable power. Zwingle believed in a gradation of offices in the church, but Calvin maintained that all should be equal, and that the church should be governed by the elders, so out of this doctrine came the Presbyterian Church, or the church of the elders.

John Knox. In Scotland the work of the "reformation" was carried on by John Knox, who was a disciple of Calvin. The Scotch Covenanters were followers of Calvin as were also the Puritans. The Pilgrim Fathers took with them from England to New England across the Atlantic, the Calvinistic creed, and alas, its intolerance also. So ingrained was it in their theological mind that, even though they were fleeing from persecution, Frederick Seebohm has declared, "they themselves persecuted in the land of their refuge. Under the rule of the Boston saints there was as little religious liberty as under the rule of Calvin in Geneva."

Divisions and Disagreements of Protestants. The Protestant revolution spread into all the Teutonic lands—northern Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Scandinavia, Britain and Scotland. In Celtic Ireland, France, Spain and Italy, it did not meet with much success. The Latin nations in the main remained loyal to Rome. One great weakness among the "reformers" was the fact that they worked independently of each other in these several lands and could not agree on doctrine and church government among themselves. The followers of Zwingle refused to accept the doctrines of Luther, and Luther and his followers refused to accept the teachings of Zwingle. The Presbyterians of John Calvin and John Knox could not see eye to eye with the reformers in Germany. In each land views peculiar to the particular locality were maintained and opposition developing to such views was vehemently denounced. This naturally led to the formation of numerous sects and much contention detrimental to the cause of truth and righteousness. The contentions between the sects at times became very pronounced and bitter. Persecutions ensued and intolerance was made manifest on the part of those who had been seeking for religious freedom and the right to worship according to the dictates of their conscience. Many of these same people who rejected the teachings of the Church of Rome, and cried out against the intolerance there manifested, when they obtained sufficient power were just as guilty in their opposition towards those who disagreed with them and with equal vigor attempted to stop the worship of God in any way other than that which they themselves prescribed.

Myers in his "Mediaeval and Modern History," says:

The influence of these sectarian strifes and divisions upon the progress of the reform movement was most disastrous. They weakened the Protestant party in the presence of a united and vigilant enemy. They afforded the Catholics a strong and effectual argument against the entire movement as tending to uncertainty and discord. "The variations of Protestants," as Fisher observes, "were depicted in such a way as to inspire the feeling that, to renounce the old church was to embark on a tempestuous sea, with no star to guide one's path. The timid among the reformers were thus alarmed, drew back, and placed their necks again under the yoke of ecclesiastical authority."

Benefits of the "Reformation." Notwithstanding these failures of the many peoples who protested and came out of the Church of Rome, much good was accomplished by the revolutionary movement, commenced in the days of Wycliffe and others, and augmented by the revival of learning and the inventions which stimulated the powers within the people to think for themselves and to understand that religion is a matter of the soul, and the right to worship a divinely given right bequeathed upon man even before the foundation of this world was laid. The Lord said he had given to man his agency by which he had the right to act for himself. It was this agency that Satan endeavored to destroy among the spirits of men, or intelligences, before the earth-life began, and which he has endeavored to take away from mankind since Adam was driven out of the Garden of Eden.

By and through the revolutionary activities of Martin Luther and all the other "reformers" religious liberty was again brought back in part, at least, and bestowed upon mankind. Individual freedom of thought and action was insured. The Bible was introduced into the homes of the common people and thus the privilege was extended to them to read the scriptures in their native languages. In time governments which had been despotic lost much of their power and the rights of the people were gradually increased and maintained. Intellectual progress was also made in all other lines as well as in the understanding of the writings of the prophets. These changes were not confined to the Protestants for the Catholics themselves were convinced of the benefits of many of the lessons which they had been taught through the Protestant rebellion and so it resulted in reforms for them.

Limitations of the Reformers. While Martin Luther and all others who took a stand for religious freedom were aided by the Spirit of the Lord, or light of truth, they were without the divine aid of the Holy Ghost, which had been lost through apostasy in earlier times. None of these revolutionaries claimed that they had received divine authority from on high by an opening of the heavens. In their simple understanding of things and without the guidance of the Holy Ghost, they reached the conclusion that divine authority was something which any man could assume who had such a desire. In other words, any man was called to be a minister for Christ, and to officiate in his name, without following the admonition of the writer of the Hebrews, that "no man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron."

The time for the full restoration of the Gospel had not come in that day. These noble men, who were God-fearing and sincere, were sent to prepare the way; they were forerunners sent of the Lord to mark the path over which freedom and religious liberty could travel and eventually find the goal they were seeking in the Western World at a time when the Lord should send forth his power from the heavens and restore it upon the earth in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.
