Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 20

THE WORLD'S STRUGGLE FOR INDEPENDENCE

Two Theories of Government. President Calvin Coolidge, in one of his addresses, has given us the following excellent thoughts:

Our government rests upon religion. It is from that source that we derive our reverence for truth and justice, for equality and liberality, and for the rights of mankind. Unless the people believe in these principles they cannot believe in our government. There are only two main theories of government in the world. One rests on righteousness and the other on force. One appeals to reason, the other appeals to the sword. One is exemplified in a republic, the other is represented by a despotism.

The government of a country never gets ahead of the religion of a country. There is no way by which we can substitute the authority of law for the virtue of men. Of course we can help to restrain the vicious and furnish a fair degree of security and protection by legislation and police control, but the real reform which society in these days is seeking will come as a result of our religious convictions, or they will not come at all. Peace, justice, humanity, charity—these cannot be legislated into being. They are the result of a Divine Grace.

These two forms of government date back before the foundation of this earth. One of these is based upon righteousness, good-will and common consent, on the part of the governed. The other, which is the doctrine of Lucifer, is the government of despotism, or force. The intelligences awaiting the earth-life had the privilege of accepting or rejecting the plan presented to them for their guidance in this present world.

The Law of Common Consent. This law of common consent is one of the foundation stones in the structure of the Church and the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This doctrine the Church was commanded to practice. The Lord said that no officer should be ordained to any position without the vote of the portion of the Church which was immediately concerned, neither was any member to be received, after removing from one branch to another, without the vote of the branch where the member was to reside. "And all things," the Lord declared, "shall be done by common consent in the Church, by much prayer and faith, for all things you shall receive by faith, Amen." It is also written: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned."

Satan Introduced the Law of Force. When life commenced upon this earth, Lucifer immediately set about to destroy what he failed to destroy in the spirit world—the agency of man. He is the great advocate of the law of force. From that day to the present, in some parts of the earth, despotic government has prevailed. We see on the earth among the nations today the same old struggle which was advocated by Satan in the heavens. Ambitious men are seeking power through the oppression of the people and their own exaltation through the law of force. Dictators have arisen in unexpected places where it was hoped that the voice of the people might be maintained. This form of government has been the root of evil causing most of the suffering of mankind. The pages of history are filled with the deeds of horror and cruelty practiced in the name of justice and right by despotic tyrants. The fight between right and wrong, truth and error, force and persuasion, will go on until the end of time, or the end of the present world.

During the past seven centuries and more, the struggle for religious and political freedom has been relentlessly waged. It is a well established fact recorded on the pages of history that before that time despotism ruled the greater part of the world with an iron hand. We have presented some of the history dealing with these unhappy times, when men struggled and fought for freedom, and how the shackles of cruel despotism were broken, that men might live and move and have a being, where before they existed merely as pawns in the hands of tyranny. This battle is not over. Satan is not dead, neither is he idle. Today he rages in the hearts of the people leading the vast majority of them astray. The fight against his rule of force and evil must go on to the glorious end, for there can be but one ending to this struggle, the eventual triumph of the right.

By the Shedding of Blood Liberty is Born. All loyal citizens of the United States are very proud and jealous of their form of government. Especially is this true of latter-day Saints. They have been taught that the Lord "established the constitution of this land, by the hand of wise men," whom he raised up for this very purpose. Moreover, he has said that the land was redeemed by the shedding of blood. It seems that liberty can only be enthroned by the sacrifice of blood. Despotism can neither be dethroned nor maintained without the shedding of blood, for tyranny is built upon blood and carnage.

While the American citizens may be proud of their form of government, let them not forget that form is still on trial. The United States in only at this time one hundred and sixty years age, quite a youth as nations go. Then again, their government, while it sets standards that are exalted, nevertheless depends for its success upon the voice of all the people. The danger lies in the fear that the majority may become unrighteous, and evil thoughts and ambitions enter into the hearts of those who are appointed to rule. A republic may become just as despotic as any other form of government, and may lose its power as a republic, if the people sink into wickedness and forget their God.

Neither should citizens of the United States forget that the great boon which has come to them in the fruit of the harvest of liberty of conscience and political suffrage, is from the seed which was sown by and fertilized in the blood of thousands of patriotic martyrs. This struggle commenced in the far distant past and has been carried on in many lands. Thousands upon thoustands of sincere, devout souls, many of whom struggled and fought in the darkest and most wicked despotism that this world has ever seen, laid down their lives in this cause of liberty. Let it not be forgotten that they loved liberty, and the privilege of worshiping God according to the dictates of their conscience, as dearly as it is possible for us to do, and this great divinely appointed gift was denied them. Humbly and faithfully should we cherish the heritage which they bequeathed to us. Sacredly and honorably should we hold this heritage in our keeping and pass it on to our children unsullied and undefiled.

The Struggle in the Netherlands. Other lands as well as the United States have been redeemed by the shedding of blood. We have no record at any time or place of a more heroic and desperate struggle than the struggle of the Dutch in the Netherlands. They fought the fight of the just in a cause which seemed to be hopeless because of the tremendous odds arrayed against them, but the God of Israel heard their cries.

That we might more fully appreciate our heritage, and to some extent realize the suffering of these noble people, a suffering which beggars any description, it may be well to cite one or two examples. The historian, John Lothrop Motley, gives a very vivid picture of the heroic struggles of these people. The inquisition, generally designated as the Spanish Inquisition, reached its greatest ferocity in the Netherlands. The inquisitor, Titelmann, was the most active of all the agents in this region, and Motley has given us some account of his deeds from which the following is taken:

The martyrology of the provinces reeked with his (Titelmann's) murders. He burned men for idle words or suspected thought; but rarely waited, according to his frank confession, for deeds. Hearing once that a certain schoolmaster, named Geleyn de Muler, of Audenarde, "was addicted to reading the Bible," he summoned the culprit before him and accused him of heresy. The schoolmaster claimed, if he were guilty of any crime, to be tried before the judges of his town. "You are my prisoner," said Titelmann, "and are to answer to me and none other." The Inquisitor proceeded accordingly to catechize him, and soon satisfied himself of the schoolmaster's heresy. He commanded him to make immediate recantation. The schoolmaster refused. "Do you not love your wife and children?" asked the demoniac Titelmann. "God knows," answered the heretic, "that if the whole world were of gold and my own, I would give it all only to have them with me, even had I to live on bread and water and in bondage." "You have then," answered the inquisitor, "only to renounce the error of your opinions." "Neither for wife, or children, nor all the world, can I renounce my God and religious truth," answered the prisoner. Thereupon Titelmann sentenced him to the stake. He was strangled and then thrown into the flame.

About this same time Thomas Calberg, tapestry weaver, of Tournay, within the jurisdiction of this same inquisitor, was convicted of having copied some hymns from a book printed in Geneva. He was burned alive. * * * In the same year one Walter Kapell was burned at the stake for heretical opinions. He was a man of some property and beloved by the poor people of Dixmuyde, in Flanders, where he resided, for his many charities. A poor idiot, who had been often fed by his bounty, called out to the inquisitor's subalterns, as they bound his patron to the stake, "Ye are bloody murderers; that man has done no wrong; but has given me bread to eat." With these words, he cast himself headlong into the flames to perish with his protector, but was with difficulty rescued by the officers. A day or two afterwards he made his way to the stake, where the half-burned skeleton of Walter Kapell still remained, took the body upon his shoulders, and carried it through the streets to the house of the chief burgomaster, where several other magistrates happened then to be in session. Forcing his way into their presence, he laid his burden at their feet, crying, "There, murderers! Ye have eaten his flesh, now eat his bones!" It has not been recorded whether Titelmann sent him to keep company with his friend in the next world. The fate of so obscure a victim could hardly find room in the crowded pages of the Netherlands martyrdom.

Another graphic story is as follows:

In the next year Titelmann caused one Robert Ogier, of Ryssel, in Flanders, to be arrested, together with his wife and two sons. Their crime consisted in not going to mass, and in practicing private worship at home. They confessed the offense, for they protested that they could not endure to see the profanation of their Savior's name in the idolatrous sacraments. They were asked what rites they practiced in their own house. One of the sons, a mere boy, answered, "We fall on our knees, and pray to God that he may enlighten our hearts, and forgive our sins. We pray for our sovereign, that his reign may be prosperous, and his life peaceful. We also pray for the magistrates and others in authority, that God may protect and preserve them all." The boy's simple eloquence drew tears even from the eyes of some of his judges; for the inquisitor had placed the case before the civil tribunal. The father and eldest son were, however, condemned to the flames. "O God!" prayed the youth at the stake, "Eternal Father, accept the sacrifice of our lives, in the name of thy beloved Son." "Thou liest, scoundrel!" fiercely interrupted a monk, who was lighting the fire; "God is not your father; ye are the devil's children." As the flames rose about them, the boy cried out once more, "Look, my father, all heaven is opening, and I see ten hundred thousand angels rejoicing over us. Let us be glad, for we are dying for the truth." "Thou liest! Thou liest!" again screamed the monk; "all hell is opening, and you see ten thousand devils thrusting you into eternal fire." Eight days afterwards the wife of Ogier and his other son were burned; so that there was an end of that family.—"The Rise of the Dutch Republic," Vol.1, pp.283,284,285.

It is very probable that the youthful martyr did see the heavens opened and angels smiling over them, for they were dying for the truth. These incidents, so dreadful and filled with horror, depict some of the milder scenes in these struggles for freedom. They are given here that we might, in this day of peace and freedom of religious worship, realize more fully what we owe to these heroic souls who, in this and other lands, paved the way for us that we might enjoy the blessings which come to us as a heritage.

Motley further states that this iniquity was the gift of Charles V to the Netherlands:

For this, his name deserves to be handed down to eternal infamy, not only throughout the Netherlands, but in every land where a single heart beats for political or religious freedom. To eradicate these institutions after they had been watered and watched by the care of his successor was the work of an eighty years' war, in the course of which millions of lives were sacrificed. Yet the abdicating emperor had summoned his faithful estates around him, and stood up before them in his imperial robes for the last time, to tell them of the affectionate regard which he had always borne them, and to mingle his tears with theirs.

Could a single phantom have risen from one of the many thousand graves where human beings had been thrust alive, by his decree, perhaps there might have been an answer to the question propounded by the emperor amid all the piteous weeping. Perhaps it might have told the man who asked his hearers to be forgiven if he had ever unwittingly offended them that there was a world where it was deemed an offense to torture, burn, and drown one's innocent fellow creatures.—"The Rise of the Dutch Republic," Vol.1,pp.99,100.

William, Prince of Orange. Under the splendid leadership of William, Prince of Orange, who has been called the George Washington of the Netherlands, the people of that country waged a long and remarkable struggle against the greatest odds, for religious and political freedom. The full extent of the suffering of these people, the world will never know. In Spain also, for the same cause, thousands suffered. We have, in other chapters, given brief accounts of the suffering and sorrow in Germany, England, and other lands. Similar events of horror occurred in these other nations as the people fought and bled that freedom might come forth upon the earth. The people of Scandinavia also deserve great credit for the part they played in these strivings for freedom. The people of these countries, who sacrificed their lives and worked for political freedom were all sprinkled with the blood of Israel. This accounts in part for their stand against religious tyranny and political despotism. It is from these countries that the greatest numbers have been gathered out by the preaching of the Gospel. By the shedding of blood the way was prepared for them. Their fathers made it possible for the children to receive the truth by and through the part they played in earlier times in freedom's cause.

Liberty Consecrated by Martyrdom. It was not only at Gettysburg and on other battlefields during the great civil struggle between the States of the American Union, that men dedicated their lives to the cause of freedom. The blood-soaked soil of other lands testifies to and bears the seal of such dedication. Wherever the struggle has gone on upon the earth between tyranny and oppression on the one side and the rights of men to religious and political independence on the other, there has been a dedication of the lives of those whose blood was shed that men might live subject to common consent and in righteousness. Our nation, the United States, was founded, it is true, on the principle that all men are created equal in their right to worship God and have the privilege of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. These same privileges belong to the people of every land. Many of them have been robbed of this inherent right. In every land where freedom prevails these principles should be carefully and faithfully cherished. No doctrine or theory should be received which tends to take away from the individual these practices. They were given to men in the pre-mortal creation. They belong to the eternal plan of man's redemption.

Let us conclude these observations by quoting President Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg speech, the truth of which should flow in the life-blood of every mortal soul.

Lincoln's Gettysburg Address

Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth upon this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any other nation so conceived and so dedicated can long endure. We are met on a great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this. But, in a larger sense we cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we cannot hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecreated it far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will little note, nor long remember, what we say here; but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us, that from these honored dead we take increased devotion; to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion; that we here highly resolve that the dead shall not have died in vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth.
