Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 21

THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA

Civilization Began in America. Contrary to popular belief the western hemisphere is where civilization began. The Lord revealed that Adam-ondi-Ahman, a place in Daviess County, Missouri, is where Adam dwelt after he was driven out of the Garden of Eden. The scriptures say that Adam journeyed to the East of Eden and at that portion of the garden from whence he was driven the Lord placed Cherubim to prevent Adam returning. The Garden of Eden, then, must have been on the western hemisphere. It stands to reason, this being true, that the antediluvians also dwelt on this western hemisphere before the division of the earth. Just what was the nature of the land surface of the earth when Noah built his Ark may not be definitely known, but this we know—if we accept the scriptures—that in the beginning all the land surface of the earth was in one place. The dividing of the continents did not take place until after the flood, for it was in the days of Peleg when the earth was divided. Some have maintained that this division had reference to the parcelling out of the land surface among the tribes and peoples as they scattered forth over the earth. This interpretation, however, cannot be maintained in the light of what is written. The Lord has promised us that in these last days in the restoration of all things the land surface shall once again be brought back to the condition in which it was before it was divided. This will come at the time of the second advent of Jesus Christ, for he has said:

And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people.

And it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found.

He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land;

And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided.—D. and C. 133:21-24.

A Choice Land is Zion. When the Ark was carried on the waves of the flood it was evidently no small journey and took many days, for the "waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days." When Noah landed he was at Ararat. The western world was swept clean as we learn from the Book of Mormon. In the Book of Ether (13:2) we are informed that:

* * after the waters had receded from off the face off the face of this (American) land it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve Him who dwell upon the face thereof.

Having been cleansed from all its iniquity this choice land was again designated as a place for a chosen people, and the Lord led the Jaredites out from the Tower of Babel across the great waters to possess it. After their destruction for their failure to heed the firm decree of God that none but a righteous people should inherit this land, another people was brought to this hemisphere to inherit it. The people of Lehi, and perhaps the people of Mulek, were brought here in fulfilment of the promise made to Joseph, son of Jacob. This western world was given to the Children of Joseph and his fellows, to be their inheritance after the destruction of the Jaredites, with the same warnings and promises which, no doubt, had been given to the antediluvians as well as to the Jaredites. So we find the Nephites and the Lamanites possessing this land of promise unmolested and free from interference by any other nation. The Lord withheld the knowledge of this land and its inhabitants from all other nations, as we learn in the Book of Mormon, so that the descendants of Joseph might possess their inheritance with full liberty and spiritual guidance in all matters of government. It was not until after these people dwindled in iniquity, bringing the wrath of God upon them, that the Lord permitted the nations of the Gentiles to learn of this western hemisphere.

The Lord had said that the land of Zion—America—is a choice land above all other lands upon the earth. When the Jaredites were led to this land across the great waters, the Lord said to them:

Behold this is a choice land, and whatsoever nations shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written.

Kept From Knowledge of Other Nations. When these ancient Jaredites dwindled in iniquity so that they had to be destroyed, the Lord raised up another people and led them here and established them in the land with the same commandments. As already stated, these people were the descendants of Joseph who had been given the land in fulfillment of a promise made by the Lord through Jacob upon the head of Joseph. These descendants of Lehi who came here received the same commandments which had been given to the Jaredites, as follows:

And behold, it is wisdom that this land should be kept as yet from the knowledge of other nations; for behold, many nations would overrun the land, that there would be no place for an inheritance.

Wherefore, I, Lehi, have obtained a promise that inasmuch as those whom the Lord God shall bring out of the land of Jerusalem shall keep his commandments, they shall prosper upon the face of this land; and they shall be kept from all other nations, that they may possess this land unto themselves. And if it so be that they shall keep his commandments they shall be blessed upon the face of this land, and there shall be none to molest them, nor to take away the land of their inheritance; and they shall dwell safely forever.

But behold, when the time cometh that they shall dwindle in unbelief, after they have received so great blessings from the hand of the Lord—having a knowledge of the creation of the earth, and all men, knowing the great and marvelous works of the Lord from the creation of the world; having power given them to do all things by faith; having all the commandments from the beginning, and having been brought by his infinite goodness into this precious land of promise—behold, I say, if the day shall come that they will reject the Holy One of Israel, the true Messiah, their Redeemer and their God, behold, the judgments of him that is just shall rest upon them.

Yea, he will bring other nations unto them, and he will give unto them power, and he will take away from them the lands of their possessions, and he will cause them to be scattered and smitten.—2 Nephi 1:8-11.

The claim is made that the Norsemen at a very early day visited the American continent; that they established colonies here and took back reports of their discoveries. Out of this, however, nothing has come, if it be true. There is a good and sufficient reason why nothing came of such discoveries. The Lord, as here declared by Lehi, promised to keep this western world from the knowledge of other nations until the time should come for that knowledge to be made known.

Nephi's Vision. The coming of Columbus was seen in vision by Nephi nearly six hundred years before the Christian Era. Of this vision, Nephi said:

And I looked and beheld a man among the Gentiles, who was separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters; and I beheld the Spirit of God, that it came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren, who were in the promised land.

And it came to pass that I beheld the Spirit of God, that it wrought upon other Gentiles; and they went forth out of captivity, upon the many waters.

And it came to pass that I beheld many multitudes of the Gentiles upon the land of promise; and I beheld the wrath of God, that it was upon the seed of my brethren; and they were scattered before the Gentiles and were smitten.

Nephi also beheld that the Spirit of the Lord guided and blessed the Gentiles upon this land in the beginning, and that a great nation was established here. Moreover, at the first the seed of the Lamanites were scattered, punished and sorely persecuted even to death by the Gentiles and this because of the long extended iniquity of the remnant upon this land; but in the end the Gentiles became nursing fathers to these benighted Lamanites. All of this has been fulfilled.

Columbus Seen by Nephi. Without any question Christopher Columbus was the man, seen by Nephi in his vision, who was inspired to cross the "many waters" to the western world. The testimony of Columbus confirms this. For years he struggled to obtain means to make the voyage westward which he thought would take him to the shores of Asia and to India, where he could establish trade relations by a much shorter route than overland as had been done in the past. Columbus believed that the earth was a sphere, and by traveling westward he could come to the east. When he did arrive at the Bahama Islands he thought that he had accomplished his purpose and that he had reached the coast of Asia. Although he made four trips to the new world and finally to the mainland of South America, he died thinking that he had reached Asia and not another hemisphere. he never lived to know the extent of his discovery and what great things were to come out of it in later years. It was because of his belief that he gave to the native Lamanites the name of Indians which has clung to them ever since. The great reason for making the perilous journey which Columbus made, and which was followed by other explorers, was to find means of increasing trade with the East and also to carry "Christianity" to the peoples of the East. As it had been in early ages, the mind of man was set on the gathering and accumulating of this world's goods. All of the early explorations were stimulated by the desire for wealth, but the Lord had other and greater things in mind which were later developed out of the discovery of the "New World" to the "Old."

Columbus pleaded with the rulers of Europe for eighteen years before he was successful in finding one who was willing to give ear to his pleadings. This was Isabella of Spain. There can be no doubt in relation to the inspiration of the Spirit of the Lord guiding Columbus to cause him to work so incessantly and under such great difficulties before he could induce one of the rulers to assist him in the accomplishment of his mission. It was a mission given him of the Lord, but Columbus knew it not, only that he was impelled by some force, or desire, which would not let him rest.

The Discovery of America. It was not until August 3, 1492 , that Columbus sailed with his three small vessels, and it was not until October 12 of that same year that he reached land in the western world. He was delayed by damage to one of his vessels at the Canary Islands and when at last he was prepared to cross the ocean he found the journey a very trying one. His sailors were full of awful fear. The views held at the time in relation to the great Atlantic Ocean caused them to think that they had slim chances of ever returning to their homes. After some three weeks had passed the members of the crew began to murmur and then to rebel. With the inspiration which was with him Columbus held his ground against the overwhelming opposition and continued on in the face of every danger. The reason for the rebellion was not because the men were displeased with Columbus, but because of their traditions which filled the minds of all of the people of Europe at that day. The Atlantic Ocean was to them the Sea of Darkness. They were sure that to the west it was inhabited by dragons and dreadful beasts with which men could not contend. Columbus, notwithstanding the threatenings, was resolute and determined to push on and was finally rewarded by the discovery of the Islands of the West Indies, as they have since been called. The knowledge which he imparted, and the evidence which he presented in the introduction of Lamanites at the Spanish court, instilled greater desire in his own heart and in the hearts of others, to make further discovery.

Later Discoveries. It was not many years after the return of Columbus to Spain, with the news that he had discovered land to the west, before nearly all the nations of Europe prepared to make explorations in all parts of the earth. Magellan set out on such a journey, and while he did not live to return to Europe, his men sailed round the world. The result of these early discoveries was that colonies were attempted in the New World. The leading nations grasped at the opportunity to increase their territory. What was more important to them at that day, especially Spain, was the discovery of gold and silver. Spain made her conquests toward the south in Mexico and Peru; Portugal, farther south in Brazil; England and France in the north; but they all sought to increase their wealth out of what might come of the new discovery. The real purpose for the discovery could not dawn upon them, nor could it be realized by the people of Europe at that early day.

The Set Time Had Come. The Lord revealed to Lehi and also to his son Nephi, that the time would come when the land of promise—Zion—was to be revealed to the Gentiles residing in the other half of the world. The discovery of America came to pass in fulfilment of this promise. The set time had come for the Gentiles to learn of the western hemisphere and the opportunity was given them to possess it as an inheritance, but on the same conditions which were exacted of the nations who had occupied the land before. By the will of the Lord and the direction of his Holy Spirit, the Gentiles were led to the New World. While out of this discovery has come many sad abuses and the most dreadful crimes practiced against the "remnant" upon this land, yet the good was eventually to overshadow all that was evil. The discovery was one of the most important factors in bringing to pass the purpose of the Almighty in the restoration of his Gospel in its fulness for the salvation of men in the latter days.
