Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 22

THE GENTILES IN AMERICA

Promises to the Gentiles. Nephi saw the day when the Gentiles should occupy all of the western hemisphere and have an inheritance upon it. Writing of his vision of these things he said:

And it came to pass that I looked and beheld many waters; and they divided the Gentiles from the seed of my brethren.

And it came to pass that the angel said unto me: Behold the wrath of God is upon the seed of thy brethren.

And I looked and beheld a man among the Gentiles, who was separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters; and I beheld the Spirit of God, that it came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren, who were in the promised land.

And it came to pass that I beheld the Spirit of God, that it wrought upon other Gentiles; and they went forth out of captivity, upon the many waters.

And it came to pass that I beheld many multitudes of the Gentiles upon the land of promise; and I beheld the wrath of God, that it was upon the seed of my brethren; and they were scattered before the Gentiles and were smitten.

And I beheld the Spirit of the Lord, that it was upon the Gentiles, and they did prosper and obtain the land for their inheritance; and I beheld that they were white, and exceedingly fair and beautiful, like unto my people before they were slain.—1 Nephi 13:10-15.

The vision further relates that the Gentiles at the first humbled themselves upon the land and received many blessings from the Lord, until a great nation and many lesser nations were established on all the face of the land. Nephi saw the struggle for independence on the part of the American colonists against the mother Gentiles and that the land was made fruitful as a habitation for the Gentiles. He further saw the time when the Gentiles should also fall into transgression after that the Gospel had been restored and proclaimed among them and the Angel of the Lord said to him:

Neither will he (the Lord) suffer that the Gentiles shall destroy the seed of thy brethren.

Neither will the Lord God suffer that the Gentiles shall forever remain in that awful state of blindness, which thou beholdest they are in, because of the plain and most precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back by that abominable church, whose formation thou hast seen.

When the Savior visited this continent after his resurrection, he commanded the Nephites to write a warning to come forth to the Gentiles in the latter days. He gave to the Gentiles the promise through the Nephites that the plan of salvation would be declared unto them and if they would repent they should be numbered among the house of Israel. They should have the great honor of assisting in bringing to pass the great work of the Lord. If, however, they rejected the Gospel and turned away from the commandments given unto them, then they should be severely punished. The Savior said:

Wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots;

And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strongholds;

And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy land, and thou shalt have no more soothsayers,

Thy graven images I will also cut off, and thy standing images out of the midst of thee, and thou shalt no more worship the works of thy hands. * * *

For it shall come to pass; saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved son, them will I cut off from among my people, O house of Israel.

And I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.

But if they will repent and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance.—3 Nephi 21:14-22.

So we see that the same promises of blessings for faithfulness and punishment for disobedience have been presented to the Gentiles upon this land today that were given to all other peoples who have been led to this choice land above all other lands. As were the ancient inhabitants, so we are under commandment to make our government conform to the righteous principles of the government of God.

No Gentile Kings Upon the Land. It was with the approval and guidance of the Lord that America was discovered. The lord would have kept the peoples of the eastern hemisphere away and ignorant of this land indefinitely if the time had not come for the matter to be made known unto them. In the purposes of the Lord it became necessary that the peoples of Europe should come to this land and here find an inheritance. Especially is this true of the people who formed the United States government as every Latter-day Saint clearly understands. But we should not forget that the Almighty is watching over this land with a jealous care requiring of the people obedience unto his laws.

It was said by prophecy through Jacob, brother of Nephi, that when the time should come for America to be discovered to the Old World, and many of the Gentiles should be led to make their residence here, that the land was to be a land of liberty to the Gentiles.

But behold, this land, saith God, shall be a land of thine inheritance, and the Gentiles shall be blessed upon the land.

And this land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles.

And I will fortify this land against all other nations.

And he that fighteth against Zion shall perish, saith God.

For he that raiseth up a king against me shall perish, for I, the Lord, the King of heaven, will be their King, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear my words.

Wherefore, for this cause, that my covenants may be fulfilled which I have made unto the children of men, that I will do unto them while they are in the flesh, I must needs destroy the secret works of darkness, and of murders, and of abominations.

Wherefore, he that fighteth against Zion, both Jew and Gentile, both bond and free, both male and female, shall perish; for they are they who are the whore of all the earth; for they who are not for me are against me, saith our God.—2 Nephi 10:10-16.

The Claim of Right of Possession by Discovery. When the news spread over Europe that Columbus had discovered land far to the west in the Sea of Darkness, and that this sea was not the habitation of dreadful monsters and a place where human beings could not live, but to the contrary, a most desirable place, the nations of Europe sent out their expeditions to lay siege and claim to all the unknown world which had not been claimed by their rivals. It is rather strange when viewed in its proper light that the "civilized" nations of Europe, through their representatives sent out to explore, should claim all the land which they "discovered" on the western side of the earth, notwithstanding it was inhabited. Europeans looked upon the Lamanites who possessed the American Continent as being savages, and as such not entitled to any rights of possession of the territory which they occupied. Uncivilized many of the Lamanites were, but it is also true that there were in America civilizations, even at the time of discovery, just as far advanced in many particulars as were the so-called Christian nations of Europe. It is true that the best, and most worthy among the natives had fallen from their high plane of advancement which they once held, and they had lost the guidance of the Holy Spirit, when Columbus and the Europeans by no conceivable right or law were justified in taking the land of the natives in the name of European monarchs and annexing it as the colonial possessions of the old kingdoms of Europe, except the law of force. The Indians would have had as good a right had they sailed to the shores of Europe and planted their standards there by right of force or supposed superior civilization. Force is not justice, although civilized man feels that by right of force and superior knowledge he is justly authorized to trample on the rights and privileges of those weaker than himself. This right of seizure by force and claim of superior intelligence has been a curse all down the ages. We have recently seen it in its most brutal form made manifest in Ethiopia. Human nature has not changed in the past six thousand years of the earth's temporal existence. The treatment the Indians have received from the Gentiles upon the land has been one great blot of injustice and crime. The whites, acting on the thought that "the only good Indian was a dead Indian," ruthlessly murdered and drove the Indians from their possessions, hunted and murdered them like wild beasts.

The Question of Civilization. Because the Lamanites were nomadic in their nature and moved from place to place; because they had no knowledge of Christianity—as it was taught at that time; because they had a dark skin; and because they, at times, warred among themselves, and for other reasons equally absurd, the Gentiles of Europe looked upon them as incumbrances upon the land. They spoke of them as savages and as being uncivilized, but the question of civilization is a relative term. The natives were honest, and when they made treaties with the whites were not the first to break them. Fortunately there were a few among the Gentiles who respected the rights of the natives and took no lands or other possessions from them without a treaty and giving something in return. The day may come when our children will look back upon the twentieth century in disgust, at least with curious question, in relation to our present-day civilization. Truly there is much in these days of gangsters, gunmen, organized crime like the Gadianton robbers of old, the manifestations of greed and selfish jealousy among the nations, the building of armaments and the excessive taxation of the people to an extent grievous to be borne, to maintain great armies and navies to insure peace, the love of pleasure and the seeking of power, that does not come from enlightenment and intelligent civilization.

Better Trained to Destroy. Gregory Mason, in his excellent work, "Columbus Came Late," has this to say:

The Strangers (Europeans) were armed with swords of a hard sharp material never before seen in America. It is said that a fisherman, approaching one of the new arrivals, grasped the latter's sword out of curiosity and cut his fingers. In this accident we may see a tragic symbol of the whole conquest of America. Europe accomplished that conquest, not by superiority in the arts of peace—which she did not possess—but merely because Europeans were more skilful than Americans in the "Art" of killing men.

Those rude fishermen were not the most cultured Americans. They, themselves, were probably ignorant of the high achievements in art and science which had flowered on the two continents behind them. They could not have told the Spaniards of these things had they wished, and the European would have been little interested to hear. The latter were rude men of action concerned with the pursuit of gold and precious stones. They came to America with a tremendous confidence in themselves which alone made possible the crossing of an uncharted ocean. They saw that the native's spears and arrows were no match for their swords and cannon, the very boom of which filled the Americans with terror. They were satisfied to see that they had gone much further than these brown "barbarians" toward the mystery of mechanics, and for them the mastery of mechanics was synonymous with civilization. We, their successors, have persisted in the error of this view. * * *

Today we live in an age of machines, and because of that fact we are too much inclined to take it for granted that a mastery of mechanics spells civilization. Yet there may be some among us who wonder, now and then, if the age of Marconi and the Wrights actually exhibits a higher culture than the age of Socrates and Praxiteles, or the age of Dante and Leonardo de Vinci. And if not, it might be said that the early American astronomers and architects were more civilized than the rough man-at-arms who conquered them.—pp. 3-5.

Let it be said to the credit of William Penn, Roger Williams, and a few others, that they respected the rights of the Indian and lived on friendly terms with him, but this was the exception to the rule.

The Love of Gold. The early explorers and those who sent them were ignorant of the nationality and descent of the degraded savages whom they found in the islands and on the continent of the western world. Neither did they understand that the Lord was watching over this land with a jealous care and that these poor natives ignorant of European ways were of his chosen people unto whom great promises had been made. At first the desire was to find a short cut to Asia and India for purposes of trade. When this was shown to be impossible disappointment spread over all of Europe. Later, however, the Spaniards who came here first, found great quantities of gold and silver among the natives of Mexico and Peru. Gold and silver proved to be the gods the Spaniards worshiped. By means of their superior weapons they undertook a conquest of the lands of Mexico and Peru, destroying, as some historians have said, a civilization far superior in many respects to that of Spain. It is true that with each expedition from the old world the Spaniards brought priests intent on converting the Lamanites to the Catholic faith. Some of these Catholic fathers were men of high ideals who desired to dispense justice in sincerity, but with real intent at all hazards to make Catholics of the native races. Others were no better than the conquistadores who came in search of gold and their influence among the natives did not result in good.

The early explorers were not seeking refuge from tyranny and had little desire of making permanent homes. The material substance which the land afforded is what they sought both for themselves and to augment the treasuries of the kings whom they represented. These hardy men, inured to all manner of deprivation, were willing to risk all for the sake of gold, and with this incentive no real attempt was made to make permanent settlements at the first. It is true that the Spaniards made settlements in Peru, Mexico, Florida, and even as far inland as Santa Fe, where in 1582 the second oldest settlement was made in what is now the United States, but these settlements were not founded on a permanent foundation as were those later among the Anglo-Saxons farther north.

The Founding of Settlements in the North. Shortly after the report made by Columbus was circulated abroad other venturesome spirits set out on the great deep. The great desire in the case of each was to find the shortest route to the East. John Cabot was the first to discover the main land of North America. This he did in the year 1497 in behalf of Great Britain. His men took possession and planted the British Flag in the name of Henry VII but a few short years after the return of Columbus from western shores. Then came the French and the Dutch to the north and the Portuguese to the south, each laying claim to the territory which they discovered. In 1562, the first religious refugees sought a haven in the western world. These were French Huguenots who thought they could find peace away from the persecutions of France. This company was small and attempted a settlement near Fort Royal, South Carolina. Hardships and longings for their native land won the battle and they were taken home through kindness of an English commander who rescued them and gave them passage on his vessel. Two years later another company of Huguenots set out to make another attempt at settlement. They landed on the St. John's River in Florida in close proximity to the Spaniards at St. Augustine. The Spaniards claimed all that land and having their bigotry and hatred aroused they attacked the French, massacred some seven hundred souls, all but a few who managed to escape, and destroyed their settlement. Although these unfortunates were Huguenots, a French Catholic named De Gourgues organized an expedition, came to Florida, revenged himself upon the Spaniards and then returned to France. No further attempt was made by the French to colonize in Florida.

English Settlements in America. The English were slow to follow up the explorations and the claims made in their behalf by the Cabots. It was not until 1578 that Sir Humphery Gilbert obtained a charter from Queen Elizabeth to explore the land in North America. After a successful voyage he returned to England, but again, in 1583, headed a second expedition. This met with disaster and Gilbert was lost at sea.

In 1584, Sir Walter Raleigh, half brother of Gilbert, obtained another charter which made him governor with full power to enact laws for any colony which he should establish. Raleigh found America to be a pleasant land and made friends with the natives. He returned to England with faith in the new country and enthusiastic to see it in possession of his countrymen. The following year he sent out a colony of 108 under Ralph Lane, who was to act as his deputy governor. The company settled on Roanoke Island in what is North Carolina. These colonists were not accustomed to pioneering. They did not know how to work and that accomplishment was essential to the success of any settlement in America. The result was that after a year of suffering and disappointment the settlers returned to England.

Raleigh was disappointed but not discouraged and again resolved to colonize. The emigrants of 1585, were all men, the second company was composed of men and their wives, but these good people like their predecessors found pioneering hard. Their acting governor returned to England for assistance, was detained three years, and when he returned all evidence of the settlement had disappeared and its inhabitants could not be found.

These disastrous attempts at colonization cast a spell of discouragement over the British people, but once again early in the seventeenth century other companies were organized intent upon the colonization of America. The first company of emigrants, 105 in all, arrived on the coast of Virginia in 1607, and founded the settlement of Jamestown, named after the king who had granted their charter. Had it not been for Captain John Smith who ruled that all who would not work should not eat, the entire colony would have perished. Other ships arrived with emigrants from England until several hundred settlers were located in the colony. Their difficulties and privations, due to the fact that they were not prepared for pioneering, cost them many lives. Those who survived were prepared to return to England when Lord Baltimore arrived with other colonists and made the settlers return to their lands. Thus the first permanent English settlement in the New World was established. A few years later the Dutch came from Holland and settled in New York, as did the Pilgrims and other religious settlers seeking a place of refuge in the New World.

The Pilgrims. The first colonists came to American shores for adventure and seeking wealth. The fur trade was the incentive which brought the Dutch, some came hoping to improve their condition over the limited prospects of the Old World. When the English began to settle in this land there was no religious freedom among the nations of Europe as we find it throughout a great part of the world today. In England the law compelled every person to attend the established church and all of the people were taxed to support it whether or not they believed in its government. There were in England at this time many dissenters who could not conform to all the requirements of the English church. A large body of worshipers who called themselves "Puritans," because they insisted on purifying the national church, were forced to leave their native land and find refuge elsewhere. For their views they had been severely persecuted, so they decided to find a haven of rest in Holland. But in Holland they were confronted by other difficulties. They were among a strange people who spoke a different language and whose customs were foreign in many ways to their own and where a religious was threatened. The result was that these Separatists resolved to go to America. In 1620, a part of these people now known as Pilgrims, most of whom were very poor and hence requiring assistance, were aided by speculators who placed heavy burdens upon them. They sailed for American shores and, realizing that they could not go to Virginia, they disembarked at a place which Captain John Smith had named on his map as Plymouth. Thus the second permanent settlement of English people in what is now the United States was founded. In the immediate years which followed many others came to the New World and joined the Pilgrim colonies so that in the year 1630 the city of Boston was founded. In 1634, a body of English Catholics also seeking refuge from religious oppression made their way to America.

So, little by little, many of the Gentiles, as seen by Nephi, crossed the "many waters" and found a place of refuge and residence in this land choice above all other lands. Towns and cities began to spring up and thriving communities were established. The people became contented with their lot so that they could say, "A sip of New England's air is better than a whole draught of Old England's ale," and the crying for the fleshpots of the Old World ceased to be heard among them.
