Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 23

GROWTH OF THE AMERICAN COLONIES

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles who had gone forth out of captivity did humble themselves before the Lord; and the power of the Lord was with them.

And I beheld that their mother Gentiles were gathered together upon the waters, and upon the land also, to battle against them.

And I beheld that the power of God was with them, and also that the wrath of God was upon all those that were gathered together against them to battle.

And I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles that had gone out of captivity were delivered by the power of God out of the hands of all other nations.—1 Nephi 13:16-19.

A Land of Liberty Unto the Gentiles. By a firm decree the Lord proclaimed two thousand years before the Gentiles came to America that this land should be unto them a land of liberty. If they would be humble the promise was made that the Lord would fortify this land against all other nations and he would help the Gentiles fight their battles. How this prophecy has been fulfilled is familiar to all. The land has been fortified against aggression of all European powers since the people in this land of all races have won their independence from European powers. Moreover, the attempt on the part of the Gentiles to set up kings has proved to be very disastrous. There are no kings upon the land that have been raised up unto the Gentiles. Even in Canada, which is considered as a British possession, the people make their own laws and govern themselves and there is no king among them. The American continents are filled with republics, for America has been the cradle of liberty for the whole world.

The first permanent colonies of Anglo-Saxons were planted in 1607 and 1620, the first in Virginia and the second in Massachusetts. Earlier attempts to colonize had failed. The reason for the failure was largely due to the fact that those who came to colonize were not imbued with the spirit of pioneering and were utterly unfit to undertake such a thing. They were mostly adventuresome souls of idle habits who knew nothing of battling with the elements in a new world. The later settlements were based on the desire for religious freedom. Literally, as Nephi states, they came out of captivity to possess the land.

Those sturdy Pilgrims of the Puritan faith came to stay. They had no intention of returning even when hardships were encountered. While they were forced to endure severe trials through which many of the original company laid down their lives, yet they were determined to remain, and in this the Lord was with them. Due to the continued persecution of their brethren in Great Britain because the English monarch endeavored to force his kind of worship upon all the people, other companies came at frequent intervals to strengthen the first little band. There were others also who came seeking refuge and a place of residence for other reasons, so that America, by 1630, contained several thriving villages.

Religious Intolerance in America. Notwithstanding these early settlers came to America because they were denied religious freedom in the mother country, they also practiced intolerance when they arrived on American shores. Political and religious freedom was of slow but natural growth. It did not burst into full bloom with the Reformation, neither did it obtain soil suited to its growth in the nations of Europe. The first settlers of Massachusetts were Puritans of the Separatist faction. They claimed the right to worship as they chose, but when others came to Massachusetts with views conflicting with their faith, these were not tolerated.

Roger Williams, who was a Puritan, but of liberal views, was forced to flee from Massachusetts to prevent being deported as an undesirable citizen. The Reformation did not insure the right of individual freedom to worship. Today in many lands every man is conceded the right to worship freely as he pleases as long as he does not infringe upon the rights of others. This was not the case in the seventeenth century even with the colonies in America. Laws were passed compelling a man to attend church and to follow the formula prescribed. Fines were imposed upon those who violated this law. The Puritans considered Massachusetts exclusively their own territory. They had no objection to those of other faiths settling elsewhere, but would not carry on with opposition doctrines among themselves. For this reason Ann Hutchinson, as well as Roger Wililams, was banished from their community; and thus in various parts of the land other settlements were formed.

Besides the Puritans others who came out of captivity were the Quakers and also some Catholics. The Quakers were not well received in Massachusetts. Some of them were whipped, some had their ears cut off, some were branded with hot irons, and some were put to death. William Penn, a Quaker, settled in Pennsylvania where he, like Roger Williams, made friends of the Indians and dealt with them fairly. Catholics settled in Maryland, where they could also worship free from molestation.

The early settlers in the Carolinas were Englishmen who came in 1670. In 1685, French Huguenots came from France. These were followed by Germans and Scotch-Irish. In this way little by little the original thirteen states which formed the American Union came into existence. Before the Revolutionary War they had no cohesive power and worked along independent lines. Religious differences stood in the way of their unity as a people. Intolerance on the part of one faction towards another had to be gradually broken down.

The Beginning of Liberty of Conscience. Roger Williams believed that the American continent belonged to the Indians and that foreign kings had no legal or moral right to grant charters or take possession of the land. He further taught that men should be at liberty to worship as they chose and a man's faith should be guarded against compulsion or interference on the part of others. Practicing what he taught he dealt justly with the Indians and because of it was able with his followers to establish a colony at Providence in Rhode Island. Others joined him and his settlement took firm root. From the beginning entire freedom of conscience was granted to all. Maryland, under Lord Baltimore, had granted like freedom after much trouble and the overthrow of religious prejudice. The principle of freedom of worship and freedom of thought was first laid down by Roger Williams, and from this small beginning it spread.

It is doubtful, if the Revolution had not come, if the peoples of the United States would ever have found themselves at unity in relation to these inherent principles based upon the free agency which the Almighty granted to all men, but which Satan tried to destroy in the beginning, and has endeavored to destroy ever since.

Growth of American Colonies. From the founding of Jamestown and the Pilgrim Colony at Plymouth in Massachusetts until the close of the French and Indian War, the growth of the American settlements was slow. A class of people came to America, however, determined to make it their permanent home. They were of the sturdy middle class which composed the bones and sinews of the people of Europe. Nearly all of the people in the colonies spoke English. The greater part of them were Protestants, with a sprinkling of Catholics and some Huguenots from France. Most all of these people had come seeking religious and political freedom. By the year 1643, there were about 26,000 people in New England, about one-fifth of these having been born on American soil.

The French had taken possession of the country to the North, known as Canada. The Dutch had come to New York, which they called New Netherlands, and the Spanish to Florida and Mexico. Although all of these people were professed Christians, worshiping the same God, yet they could not live in peace. War was brought on among the nations of Europe because of the colonization of America. The British conquered the Dutch and took from them the territory which they had colonized, and renamed it New York. The war between Great Britain and France resulted in the defeat of the French, and England took possession of all country to the north. When the American revolution broke out there were thirteen English colonies who joined together, governing a territory from Maine on the north to Georgia on the south, and the population was nearly all east of the Alleghanies. In 1763, the entire population of these colonies was between 1,600,000 and 1,800,000 souls. No census had been taken so that the exact figure cannot be given. Philadelphia, New York, Boston, and Charleston were the chief cities, and the greatest of these, Philadelphia, had a population of about 20,000 souls. The population of the whole country was divided about equally north and south of the Mason Dixon line, a dividing line which was to play an important part in the later history of the country.

Of this population there were about 400,000 negro slaves, most of whom were south of the Mason and Dixon line. Unfortunately negro slavery was introduced into America shortly after the first settlements were established and has proved a calamity and a blight from which it appears the United States may never recover. Because of this condition it may be seen that the white population of the North was greater than the white population of the South.
