Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 24

THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION

Britain's Policy Towards the Colonies. The view held in all the European countries towards their colonies was very similar. They held that the colonies existed for the sole purpose of benefit to the mother countries. The discovery of America brought many problems to Europe which had not been considered before. The grants extended to explorers and early colonizers were based on the demand that definite jurisdiction should be maintained by the homeland and all colonizers should be subject to the dictation of the rulers in the lands from whence they came. In this regard England was no worse, but in some respects much better, than other countries claiming territory in the New World. Colonies were established for the purpose, in the minds of the mother countries, of raising revenue. The colonists were expected to produce needed raw materials, but such materials must not compete in any way with products made at home. They could not build up manufacturing establishments because such would injure the makers of goods in the mother country. The colonists of one country were forbidden to trade with the colonists of another, or with other countries, all that they produced was expected to be reserved for the people of their native land. Moreover, as the colonists were expected to furnish raw materials for their native land, they were also expected to purchase from their native land the finished products and not obtain them elsewhere.

The American Revolution. No Spanish colony and no French colony was granted any privilege in this regard to any greater degree than was extended to the English. The French colonists had no disposition to build permanent homes and subdue the wilderness. French peasants were brought to the land to engage in manual labor. French colonists were of a roaming disposition and their country had many difficulties on this account in making permanent settlements. The French were not permitted in any sense to conduct their own political affairs. France sent out officials to govern them and they were denied any voice in the matter. A similar attitude was taken by Spain. In the British colonies, however, there was much political freedom. France and Spain admitted only Catholics to the American colonies, but with the English the great majority of the colonists were Protestants, although many of them belonged to the Church of England. Real religious freedom did not exist in any of the colonies except in the case of Roger Williams; and after his demise the regulations which he established were greatly modified so that Roman Catholics were disfranchised as late as the eighteenth century.

Restrictions on Commerce. The foreign powers also placed restrictions on commerce. In this regard Great Britain was guilty like the rest. This law followed the mercantile theory to protect the home manufacturers. According to English law the home markets had a claim upon all the products coming from the colonies. Such trade had to be carried in English boats and delivered at English ports. The colonists, because of these restrictions, were forbidden to launch out in any enterprise not approved by the home government and they could not trade with other peoples should they could not trade with other peoples should they please to do so.

Political Freedom. In political matters the thirteen English colonies had considerable freedom. In fact they claimed all the rights which were granted to the English people at home. These included trial by jury, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom from imprisonment without trial, the right of Habeas Corpus and other privileges embodied in the English common law. They had the privilege of organizing a house of representatives and another smaller house or council, similar to the English Parliament, and in this way they were enabled to make laws to govern themselves which did not conflict with the laws of Parliament and the government at home. Such privileges were not exercised by any other colonists under any other flag.

The English colonists came with the firm conviction that they had rights which were guaranteed since the days of Magna Charta, and that these were constitutional. They rightfully held that they should not be taxed without proper voice in the affairs of government and that they had the right to elect people to represent them. In fact the English colonists claimed, and justly so, all the privileges which were accorded to their countrymen within the British Isles. Moreover, they began to feel that it was an injustice on the part of the mother country to attempt to restrict them in their trade. The English king and Parliament felt that they had a perfect right to tax and restrict the colonists which was in accordance with the mercantile theory of commerce adopted by other countries. With the French and Spanish such treatment seemed to be only natural, they understood nothing else, but not so with the English. Since the days of King John they had been trained to regard their personal rights which were guaranteed them in the British Law. Why should colonists be considered in any respect different from British subjects within the shires and countries of Great Britain?

Why the Colonies Rebelled. The rebellion against the English government on the part of the American colonies was not brought about because they were more harshly treated than were other colonies. It came to pass because the English people had been differently trained. They felt the injustice of treatment accorded them by the mother country which denied to them political rights, which taxed them without proper representation, and restricted their freedom in matters of trade. They resented the edict of the home government that they were not to manufacture goods, but only furnish the raw material and when it was made up into salable goods buy it at excessive rates and pay a tax. In this treatment of the Colonies the British government perhaps had no thought of being unjust or unfair to the Colonists. It was merely a matter of extreme stupidity in thinking that the Colonists were in America simply to be a benefit financially to the British nation and were not entitled to be considered worthy of equal rights with British subjects at home. This treatment by the home government irritated the colonists. When they began to show their irritation then the politicians at home began to show resentment, and thus the breach was widened until reparation could not be made. Similar treatment to that accorded the English colonists awakened no resentment in the minds of the French or Spanish for they were differently trained so that injustice of such a sort was looked upon by them as a matter of course.

The Power of God was With Them. When we look back to 1775, and the years preceding and following when the American government was in the travail of birth, it is plain to see that the Lord was keeping his promise and fighting the battles of the colonists. It was the decree of the Almighty that American land should be free, and that here political as well as religious liberty should have a rebirth. If circumstances had not been right for the revolution then the colonists would have had a more difficult time in winning their independence. At the time of the rebellion against the English, Great Britain was at war with other countries. This war had grown out of the colonization of America. Besides fighting American colonists, Great Britain was defending herself against France, Spain and Holland. Then again there were hostile neutrals harassing her. America in the days of wooden sailing vessels was too far away under all these circumstances for a successful campaign on the part of the British. The colonists were weak and they were taxed to the limit of their powers to maintain themselves. Even with all the difficulties Great Britain was then encountering, had the Lord not been fighting on the side of the Americans, they would have failed.

Impetus to Freedom Elsewhere. The result of the conflict was more far reaching than generally supposed. The freedom of the United States and the establishing of a republic in this western land was an incentive to other peoples upon the shores of America. The Lord intended that they should all be free from the political intrigues and domination of the old world, for this was to be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles as long as they would serve the Lord and be humble.

Had the stubborn English King, George III, and his equally stubborn Parliament hearkened to the voice of protest from the American colonists, the whole trend of history in the New World may have taken a very different course. But it was in the destiny of things that this stubborn and unwise treatment should pursue its course. Had it not done so who can tell what would have happened to religious and political freedom which has since been proclaimed not only in America but has had its influence on many other parts of the world?

At the outbreak of hostilities the several American states, or territories, had various forms of government. Connecticut and Rhode Island held charters entitling them to manage their own affairs. Eight of them were under governors appointed by the king. Pennsylvania, Delaware, and Maryland were governed by their proprietors, successors to those unto whom, originally, grants were given. Each of the colonies had a legislative assembly; they levied their own taxes and had the chief voice in the making of their laws. They were all loyal to the king and had no intention of breaking away until circumstances developed which made such action, in their judgment, imperative.

Outbreak of Hostilities. When the British empire, because of the cost of war, endeavored to place heavy burdens upon the colonists and tax them without representation, and as they felt, unjustly, naturally they protested and vigorously petitioned for relief from the unjust burdens. When their protests and appeals failed and they became subject to military rule and were forced to take care of the military forces, and their civil liberty was threatened, their ports closed, and undue pressure brought to bear against them for rebellion, they rose up in their might and the war of the Revolution was on.

Declaration of Independence. The war knit the colonies together in a common cause, and while at first they did not seek separation from the mother country, as the trouble progressed they determined that no other course was open to them—they were fighting for complete independence and the right to establish a government of their own.

In June, 1776, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia offered this resolution in the Continental Congress: "Resolved: that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states." This resolution being approved, a committee was appointed to draw up a declaration embodying the resolution. A committee of five was designated to prepare the declaration which was presented and adopted by the Congress on the 4th day of July, 1776, and signed by the members of the Congress.

In this way the government of the United States of America, by legal act of the representatives of her people, was born. While this government is not the Government which will be set up when Christ, whose right it is, comes to rule, yet he expects great things of this American nation in assisting to bring to pass his purposes in preparation for the ushering in of the kingdom of God when the time comes for the Prince of Peace to take his rightful place as God and Governor of all the earth.
