Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 25

ADOPTING THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES

The American Colonies Separate Units. Before the outbreak of the Revolution the thirteen colonies, which later formed the union of the United States, were to all intents and purposes separate and distinct from each other. The difficulty with the mother country brought them to a unity of purpose and resistance by force of arms against the wrongs imposed upon them. While the colonies were separate units acting independently of each other, the bond of common interest and sympathy for each other in their struggle was the cement which bound them during the period of the war. A Continental Congress was convened and exercised jurisdiction throughout the days of the revolution. Delegates from each of the colonies held seats in this Congress.

At the close of the Revolution the several States found themselves independent of Great Britain, but confronted with the danger of falling apart now that the stress of war and necessity which the war imposed upon them to stand together had been removed. Some of the wisest statesmen among the patriots saw this danger and attempted to avert it. George Washington, in a circular letter to the state governors, wrote in June, 1783, saying:

It is yet to be decided whether the revolution must ultimately be considered as a blessing or a curse. * * *

This is the moment to establish or ruin their (the colonies) national character for ever. * * There should be lodged somewhere a supreme power to regulate and govern the general concerns of the Confederated republic, without which the Union cannot be of long duration.

A Critical Period. John Fisk, the historian, has referred to the period between 1783 and 1789, as the most critical period in the history of the United States. Eight years to the day from the battle of Lexington, hostilities came to an end; the army was disbanded, but the men had not been paid. Congress was impotent to raise funds and many of the wisest minds were fearful that the army would rise and take matters into their own hands. There were those also in the mother country who waited anxiously for some, if not all, of the distracted States to come back penitent, like the prodigal, asking to be received once more into the good graces of Great Britain. But the Lord was watching over his own. Such a return was not to be, for the purposes of the Lord, later to be revealed, required the establishment of a strong government dedicated to liberty upon this American land. For a time it appeared, however, that the several colonies would go their separate ways. It has been truthfully said:

But though America had won her independence, she had not secured harmony and union. While the war lasted the states fought like brothers, side by side; now that the danger was over, they threatened to fall apart. We were like a barrel made of thirteen stout staves, but yet without a single hoop to hold us together. Under the Articles of Confederation or Constitution adopted in 1781, the nation had no President—no head. It had only a Congress, and that Congress was destitute of power. It might pass good and useful laws, but it could not compel the people to obey them. It might beg the people to give money, but it could not make them furnish it. It might ask for soldiers to defend the country, but it could not draft them. * * *

The truth is, that the people had come out of the war in a distressed condition. They were heavily in debt. Business was at a standstill. Gold and silver coin was scarce. The states had an abundance of paper stuff which pretended to be money, but nobody knew what it was worth, and what passed for a dollar in one state might not pass at all in another. Distress and discontent grew worse and worse. The states quarreled with each other about boundary lines, about commerce, about trade. Instead of being a united and friendly people, they were fast getting to be thirteen hostile nations ready to draw the sword against each other.—Montgomery, American History, pp. 189-190.

The Articles of Confederation. The one feature which seemed to hold the colonies together more than any other was the fact that the Northwestern Territory, which had been taken by the American forces in 1779, was claimed by several of the states. Some of the smaller states objected to such a vast territory being added to any one of the states. It was finally agreed that this territory should be held as property belonging to the confederation. Richard Henry Lee of Virginia, who introduced the resolution declaring the United States free and independent, on the same day and at the same time presented a resolution calling for the formation of Articles of Confederation by the states. It was seen by the members of the Continental Congress that if the union between the several states was to be permanent some stable form of government should be formed and accepted by them all. Benjamin Franklin on June 12, 1775, submitted a draft of Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, but at that time no action was taken. The resolution of Richard Henry Lee, one year later to the day, was accepted, and a committee, one member from each colony, was appointed "to prepare and draft the form of a confederation to be entered into." The report of this committee with various amendments was accepted and adopted by the Congress November 15, 1777.

Congress had no power to bind the states and therefore sent the Articles to the states with an appeal and request that they authorize their delegates in Congress to ratify them. Some of the states hesitated but others immediately complied. Maryland was the last to ratify. On March 1, 1781, the Maryland delegates joined the other delegates by ratification of the Articles of Confederation. The delay was in large measure due to the dispute over the Northwest Territory. Maryland insisted that all the states should agree that this territory should be the property of the Confederation and that the several states should relinquish their several claims, which was eventually done.

A Loose Confederation. At this particular time the United States was merely a confederation of the states, or a number of small nations which had entered into an agreement to live together and act in concert in relation to their common welfare. The idea prevailed among them that this federation could be severed at any time and each state reserved the right to withdraw at will from the union thus formed. From July 4, 1776, to March 1, 1781, when the Confederation was adopted, the United States was governed by the Continental Congress. Under the "Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union between the States," the union had no President, no supreme court, and consisted of one house of congress made up of delegates elected by the legislatures of the states, whose jurisdiction was greatly limited. There were so many defects and restrictions in the Federation that the wise men in the nation readily perceived that something more nearly perfect, more powerful and binding upon the colonies, was necessary if the union was to be preserved.

The Constitution of The United States. The preamble of the Constitution of the United States reads as follows:

We, the People of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this CONSTITUTION for the United States of America.

It was with this objective that in May, 1787, a convention of delegates from all the states, except Rhode Island, met in Philadelphia. The number of delegates was fifty-five, but only thirty-nine of them signed the Constitution. Most of the delegates were men in the prime of life, ranging from thirty to forty-five years of age. George Washington, who was fifty-five years of age, presided. Benjamin Franklin, the dean of the convention, was in his eighty-second year, but it is said of him, he was as alert and active as a young man of twentyfive. The names of the thirty-nine who signed the constitution and who are worthy to be remembered are:

George Washington, President and Deputy from Virginia.

New HampshireVirginia John Langdon John Blair Nicholas Gilman James Madison, Jr. Massachusetts Nathaniel GorhamNorth Carolina Rufus King William Blount Connecticut Richard Dobbs Spaight William Samuel Johnson Hugh Williamson Roger ShermanPennsylvania New York Benjamin Franklin Alexander Hamilton Thomas Mifflin New Jersey Robert Morris William Livingston George Clymer David Brearley Thomas Fitzsimons William Paterson Jared Ingersoll Jonathan Dayton James Wilson Delaware Gouverneur Morris George Read Gunning Bedford, Jr.South Carolina John Dickinson John Rutledge Richard Bassett Charles C. Pinckney Jacob Broom Charles Pinckney Maryland Pierce Butler James M'Henry Daniel of St.ThomasGeorgia Jenifer William Few Daniel Carroll Abraham Baldwin Attest: William Jackson, Secretary

The Struggle for Ratification. Washington, Franklin, Madison, Hamilton and Marshall had the leading part in the drafting of the Constitution, and after it was adopted by the Convention, Madison and Hamilton were untiring in their efforts in urging its ratification by the several states. Writings by these men which appeared in The Federalist show the inspiration of the Almighty which rested upon them.

After a stormy period of nearly four months in which some of the delegates almost despaired of ever coming to a peaceable agreement, the Constitution of the United States was adopted by the Convention. The next step was to have the people of the thirteen states ratify the action of the Convention. That same year three of the states ratified, and eight more the following year. Rhode Island and North Carolina delayed for some months, but finally joined with their sister states in ratification. The Constitution went into operation March 4, 1789, and thus became the vital and basic law of the United States. George Washington was elected President of the United States April 6, 1789, and was inaugurated on the 30th day of that same month.

Checks and Balances. It is not the purpose of this writing to go into the details of the Constitution. The only way to grasp its significance is to carefully read and consider its various parts. The Constitution is the greatest document, so far as we know, ever adopted by organized society for their government, outside of the kingdom of God. It furnishes the nation a system of checks and balances for their protection so that any one department of the government, cannot, without losing its sacred functions, be overcome or subordinated by another. There are three great departments provided: the legislative, the judicial and the executive.

Each is given power to defend itself against the encroachments of the other two, and each acts as a check on the others. The Constitution framers had good reason to attempt the accomplishment of this difficult purpose; in the old colonial days, which most of them remembered, the governor of the royal provinces had exercised all three functions, greatly to the dissatisfaction of the colonists; and the legislative body of Great Britain had held the supreme power. To avoid establishing a government which would develop into either of these forms, the framers of the Constitution sought to give each department its due share of power, and prevent any one department from making itself supreme. For instance, the executive power is vested in the President; but he also exercises important legislative functions in his veto, and judicial power in his right to pardon. The legislative power is lodged in Congress, but the Senate acts as an advisory council to the President—without its consent no important appointment can be made and no treaty ratified. The judicial power is entrusted to the Supreme Court and inferior courts; but, as no law can be enforced which the Supreme Court declares to be unconstitutional, the Supreme Court, in fact, exercises supreme legislative functions. Finally, the House of Representatives, by means of its initiative in taxation, exercises a most effectual control over the executive department.

The Legislative Power. The legislative power is confined to certain subjects enumerated in the Constitution, and is further restricted by the first ten amendments, especially by the tenth, which declares that "the powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively or to the people." The Supreme Court is the authorized interpreter of the fundamental law, and it has construed the Constitution in the broadest possible way; following these decisions Congress has exercised powers, many of which were probably never dreamed of by the framers of that instrument or by the members of the ratifying conventions, whose votes gave it the force of law. Acts of Congress are "the Supreme law of the land," unless the Supreme Court declares them unconstitutional, and hence null and void. (Students' History of the United States, by Channing, pp. 240-241.)

The people should with jealous care guard against the time ever coming when any one of these three branches may surrender its rights to any other, or be swallowed up and overcome by some other branch of the government. Today there are many who advocate the destruction of these safeguards given us by the framers of the Constitution who were men inspired to make this document as near to the fundamental doctrines of the kingdom of God as it was possible under the circumstances for it to be.

The Supreme Law. The Constitution proclaims the following:

This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.

The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of the United States and of the several States, shall be bound by oath, or affirmation, to support this Constitution; but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States.

Hinsdale, in his book, "The American Government," commenting upon these provisions of the Constitution has said:

The supremacy of the Union is limited to those powers and functions that are delegated to it by the Constitution. Within this sphere, it is all powerful; beyond this sphere, it has no power whatever. The laws enacted by Congress are supreme so long as they are in force; when they are declared repugnant to the Constitution by the proper authority, they are null and void.

The wisdom of these provisions in the Constitution which protect the liberties and inherent rights of the citizens, should be apparent to all. They should be guarded and protected with a jealous care. The Constitution is our assurance against anarchy and despotism. Every Latter-day Saint should be familiar with every part of this great document. Such knowledge is essential to an understanding of the significance of the word of the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants. Yet there are some in our land who would gladly see these safeguards destroyed.

No Religious Test. With this provision of the Constitution, that there should be no religious test, and that every person should have the right to worship according to the dictates of conscience, the fulness of religious liberty was born. This principle, we may see from a study of the past, has been of gradual growth and development since the days of the emancipation of the people from religious tyranny at the time of the Protestant revolution. It took several centuries for the seed to develop and bring forth the fully developed fruit which it did when the government of the United States was formed. In this way the Lord prepared the way for the restoration of the Gospel with all its keys and powers in a humble way in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. It would be wrong to say that it was impossible for the Lord to establish his work had not religious freedom come and been guaranteed as we find it in our Constitution. But it is a fact, nevertheless, that he, in his infinite wisdom, prepared the way, commencing several hundred years ago and working through brave and humble men, many of whom became martyrs to the cause of truth, when darkness ruled supreme over the face of the earth.

Attitude of the Latter-day Saints Towards the Constitution. From the very beginning of this latter-day work we have been taught that the Constitution of the United States was and still is an inspired document. Such it was when it came forth from the hands of the framers. Above all peoples on the face of the earth the Latter-day Saints should uphold, defend and cherish this sacred document. It has been predicted that the time will come when it will be threatened with destruction, and when that time comes the true Latter-day Saints will rally to its support.

Our attitude should be based on the word of the Lord given us for our guidance until the time shall come when the authority of the Redeemer shall be fully established in the earth. The Lord said:

For verily I say unto you, my law shall be kept on this land.

Let no man think he is ruler; but let God rule him that judgeth, according to the counsel of his own will, or, in other words, him that counseleth or sitteth upon the judgment seat.

Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the law of God hath no need to break the laws of the land.

Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet.

Behold, the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of the Church, and in this light ye shall hold them forth. Behold, here is wisdom.—D. and C. 58:19-23.

And now, verily I say unto you concerning the laws of the land, it is my will that my people should observe to do all things whatsoever I command them.

And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me.

Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you and your brethren of my church, in befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land;

And as pertaining to the law of man, whatever is more or less than this cometh of evil.

I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed; and the law also maketh you free.

Nevertheless, when the wicked rule the people mourn.

Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever is less than this cometh of evil.

And I give unto you a commandment, that ye shall forsake all evil and cleave unto all good, that ye shall live by every word which proceedeth forth out of the mouth of God.—D. and C. 98:4-11.

And again I say unto you, those who have been scattered by their enemies, it is my will that they should continue to importune for redress, and redemption, by the hands of those who are placed as rulers and are in authority over you—

According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles;

That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment.

Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another.

And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood.—D. and C. 101:77-80.

In addition to these passages of scripture from our modern revelations, the Prophet Joseph Smith in the prayer of dedication of the Kirtland Temple which was given by the spirit of revelation, in the course of that supplication was led to say:

Have mercy, O Lord, upon all the nations of the earth; have mercy upon the rulers of our land, may those principles, which were so honorably and nobly defended, namely, the Constitution of our land, by our fathers, be established forever.—D. and C. 109:54.

Since the Constitution was based upon correct principles founded, as the Prophet Joseph Smith has said, "on the wisdom of God," as he saw fit to give it to our fathers, we above all peoples on the earth should rally to its support in time of need and rejoice in its great protecting influence. The great English statesman, William E. Gladstone, said of the American Constitution: "So far as I am able to observe, it is the greatest instrument ever stricken off at a given time, by the brain and purpose of man."
