Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 29

CHURCH AUTHORITIES AND THE CONSTITUTION

The Constitution Always Sustained. The attitude of the members of the Church towards the Constitution of the United States and the fundamental principles of our Government has always been one of loyalty. Even in the days of our greatest tribulation, the Latter-day Saints have defended and sustained these sacred principles. Never have they lifted their hands or their voices against the fundamental principles upon which our nation with its liberty and freedom is based. It is well understood by all that the Constitution was given by inspiration of the Almighty to honorable and wise men raised up for this purpose. The character of our government has always been defended and sustained. The Prophet Joseph Smith, while suffering unjustly at the hands of officials who had sworn to uphold and defend the sacred principles of the Constitution, and who had violated their oath in the vilest manner, and who heaped upon him and his companions in tribulation cruelties which only fiends could inflict, wrote to the Saints to defend and sustain the constitutional law of the land and to be loyal to the fundamental principles of our government.

Joseph Smith, the Prophet. The following is an excerpt taken from his letter written from Liberty prison, in 1838:

There is a love from God that should be exercised toward those of our faith, who walk uprightly, which is peculiar to itself, but it is without prejudice; it also gives scope to the mind, which enables us to conduct ourselves with greater liberality towards all that are not of our faith, than what they exercise towards one another. These principles approximate nearer to the mind of God, because it is like God, or Godlike.

Here is a principle also, which we are bound to be exercised with, that is, in common with all men, such as governments, and laws, and regulations in the civil concerns of life. This principle guarantees to all parties, sects, and denominations, and classes of religion, equal, coherent, and indefeasible rights; they are things that pertain to this life; therefore all are alike interested; they make our responsibilities one towards another in matters of corruptible things, while the former principles do not destroy the latter, but bind us stronger, and make our responsibilities not only one to another, but unto God also. Hence we say, that the Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun. * * *

We say that God is true; that the Constitution of the United States is true; that the Bible is true; that the Book of Mormon is true; that the Book of Covenants is true; and that Christ is true.—History of the Church 3:304.

It is one of the first principles of my life and one that I have cultivated from my childhood, having been taught it by my father, to allow everyone the liberty of conscience. I am the greatest advocate of the Constitution of the United States there is on earth. In my feelings I am always ready to die for the protection of the weak and the oppressed in their just rights. The only fault I find with the Constitution is, it is not broad enough to cover the whole ground. Although it provides that all men shall enjoy religious freedom, yet it does not provide the manner by which that freedom can be preserved, nor for the punishment of government officers who refuse to protect the people in their religious rights, or punish those mobs, states, or communities who interfere with the rights of people on account of their religion. Its sentiments are good, but it provides no means for enforcing them. Its sentiments are good, but it provides no means for enforcing them. It has but this one fault.—Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 6:56-57.

President Brigham Young. The American Government is second to none in the world in influence and power, and far before all others in liberal and free institutions. Under its benign influence the poor, downtrodden masses of the old world can find an asylum where they can enjoy the blessings of peace and freedom, no matter to what cast or religious sect they belong, or are disposed to favour, or whether they are disposed to favour any or none at all. It was in this government, formed by man inspired of God, although at the time they knew it not, after it was firmly established in the seat of power and influence, where liberty of conscience, and the free exercise of religious worship were a fundamental principle guaranteed in the Constitution, and interwoven with all the feelings, traditions, and sympathies of the people, that the Lord sent his angel to reveal the truths of heaven as in times past, even as in ancient days. This should have been hailed as the greatest blessing which could have been bestowed upon any nation, kindred, tongue, or people. It should have been received with hearts of gratitude and gladness, praise and thanksgiving. * *

To accuse us of being unfriendly to the Government, is to accuse us of hostility to our religion, for no item of inspiration is held more sacred with us than the Constitution under which she acts. As a religious society, we, in common with all other denominations, claim its protection; whether our people are located in the other states or territories, as thousands of them are, or in this territory, it is held as a shield to protect the dearest boon of which man is susceptible—his religious views and sentiments.—President Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 2:170.

We will cling to the Constitution of our country, and to the government that reveres that sacred charter of freemen's rights; and if necessary, pour out our best blood for the defense of every good and righteous principle.—Journal of Discourses 10:41.

The general Constitution of our country is good, and a wholesome government could be framed upon it, for it was dictated by the invisible operations of the Almighty; he moved upon Columbus to launch forth upon the trackless deep to discover the American Continent; he moved upon the signers of the Declaration of Independence; and he moved upon Washington to fight and conquer, in the same way as he moved upon ancient and modern prophets, each being inspired to accomplish the particular work he was called to perform in the times, seasons, and dispensations of the Almighty. God's purpose, in raising up these men and inspiring them with daring sufficient to surmount every opposing power, was to prepare the way for the formation of a true republican government. They laid the foundation; but when others came to build upon it, they reared a superstructure far short of their privileges, if they had walked uprightly as they should have done.

The signers of the Declaration of Independence and the framers of the Constitution were inspired from on high to do that work. But was that which was given to them perfect, not admitting of any addition whatever? No; for if men know anything they must know that the Almighty has never yet found a man in mortality that was capable, at the first intimation, at the first impulse, to receive anything in a state of entire perfection, and it was for after generations to rear the superstructure upon it. It is a progressive—a grand work. If the farmers of the Constitution and the inhabitants of the United States had walked humbly before God, who defended them and fought their battles when Washington was on the stage of action, the nation would now have been free from a multitude of place-hunters who live upon its vitals. * *

Will the Constitution be destroyed? No; it will be held inviolate by this people, and, as Joseph Smith said, "The time will come when the destiny of the nation will hang upon a single thread. At that critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from the threatened destruction. It will be so."

With regard to the doings of our fathers and the Constitution of the United States, I have to say, they present to us a glorious prospect in the future, but one we cannot attain to until the present abuses in the Government are corrected.—J. of D. 7:13-14.

It is alleged and reiterated that we do not love the institutions of our country. I say, and have so said for many years, that the Constitution and laws of the United States combine the best form of government in force upon the earth. But does this follow that each officer of the Government administers with justice? No; for it is well known throughout our nation that very many of our public officers are as degraded, debased, corrupt, and regardless of right as men well can be.

I repeat that the Constitution, laws, and institutions of our Government are as good as can be, with the intelligence now possessed by the people. But they, as also the laws of other nations, are too often administered in unrighteousness; and we do not and cannot love and respect the acts of the administrators of our laws, unless they act justly in their offices.—J. of D. 6:344.

Elder Orson Pratt. Did the Lord have a hand in the organization of the United States government? asks the inquirer. Yes; the Lord had a hand in framing its Constitution. Why did not the Lord, at that time, introduce a perfect government—a theocracy? It was simply because this people were not prepared for it—they were too corrupt; and although they had more integrity, more virtue, more honesty, and more sympathy and feeling for that which is just and upright, than any other portion of the inhabitants of the earth, and probably more than a great many now have, yet they were far from being prepared for the government of God, which is a government of union.

They were far from that, consequently the Lord inspired them to introduce a government that he knew would be just suited to their capacity, and hence it was that he inspired Jefferson, Washington, Franklin, and others to introduce those measures which they did, and to carry them out, and they were such as were just suited to the conditions and circumstances of the people; hence the government of the United States we, as a people, venerate and defend.—J. of D. 3:70.

President John Taylor. It was through and by the power of God, that the fathers of this country framed the Declaration of Independence, and also that great palladium of human rights, the Constitution of the United States. There is nothing of a bigoted, narrow-contracted feeling about that instrument, it is broad and comprehensive.—Liahona 12:644.

President Wilford Woodruff. The Lord inspired the men who framed the Constitution of our country, and has guarded the nation from its foundation.—Liahona 12:644.

Elder Orson Hyde. It is said that Brother Joseph in his lifetime declared that the Elders of this Church should step forth at a particular time when the Constitution would be in danger, and rescue it, and save it. This may be so; but I do not recollect that he said exactly so. I believe he said something like this—that the time would come when the Constitution and the country would be in danger of an overthrow; and said he: "If the Constitution be saved at all, it will be by the Elders of this Church. I believe this is about the language, as nearly as I can recall it.—J. of D. 6:152.

President Joseph F. Smith. I think it our duty to cultivate peace, and to ameliorate the condition of the Filipinos, Hawaiians, Haitians and Cubans, and elsewhere in the world. I believe the time will come when the arm of peace of this nation will be extended to the distracted little southern republics, where a rebellion arises almost every year against their constituted authorities. I hope to see the day when the counsels of peace and good will from this powerful nation will be so recognized by the people of this continent all the way to the south of us, and by the inhabitants of the islands that border upon our coasts, both east and west, that peace and good will and elevation may be brought to pass and established among them through the instrumentality of an enlightened people. And I hope with all my soul that the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will be loyal in their very hearts and souls to the principles of the Constitution of our country. From them we have derived the liberty that we enjoy. They have been the means of guaranteeing to the foreigner that has come within our gates, and to the native born, and to all the citizens of this country, the freedom and liberty that we possess. We cannot go back upon such principles as these. We may go back upon those who fail to execute the law as they should. We may be dissatisfied with the decision of judges, and may desire to have them removed out of their places. But the law provides ways and means for all these things to be done under the Constitution of our country, and it is better for us to abide the evils that we have than to fly to greater evils that we know not what the result will be. All we have to do if an officer is not executing the duties of his office righteously is to impeach him or wait till his term of office is out, and then shelve him in the lawful way. The people have the power to leave him out and put a better man in his place, and that is strictly in accordance with the commandments of God contained in the book of Doctrine and Covenants. Wherefore honest men, and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men you should observe to uphold, in positions of honor and of trust, that they may execute righteousness, and prove themselves worthy of the confidence and patronage of the people who elevate them to positions.

I believe with all my soul in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and in the laws of God, and I do not think any honest and intelligent man or woman could help but believe in the justice, the righteousness and the purity of the laws that God wrote upon the tablets of stone. These principles that I propose to read to you are the foundation and basic principles of the Constitution of our country, and are eternal, enduring forevermore, and cannot be changed or ignored with impunity.

(At this point President Smith read and commented upon each of the Ten Commandments after which he said:)

Now, these are the commandments of God, the principles contained in these commandments of the great Eternal are the principles that underly the Constitution of our country and all just laws. Joseph Smith, the prophet, was inspired to affirm and ratify the truth, and he further predicted that the time would come when the Constitution of our country would hang as it were by a thread, and that the Latter-day Saints above all other people in the world would come to the rescue of that great and glorious palladium of our liberty. We cannot brook the thought of it being torn into shreds or destroyed, or trampled under foot and ignored by men. We cannot tolerate the sentiment at one time expressed by a man high in authority in the nation. He said: "The Constitution be damned; the popular sentiment of the people is the constitution." That is the sentiment of anarchism that has spread to a certain extent, and is spreading over the land of liberty and home of the brave. We do not tolerate it. Latter-day Saints cannot tolerate such a spirit as this. It is anarchy. It means destruction. It is the spirit of mobocracy, and the Lord knows we have suffered enough from mobocracy, and we do not want any more of it.—Conference Report, October, 1912.

President Charles W. Penrose. Now, the framers of that instrument had before them the history of the progress of civil government for ages. They knew something about the failings of the past; they knew something about the various kinds of government that had been set up in the centuries that had passed away; they had learned the difference between that which is called popular government—the unguided will of the people, the masses, and a representative government carried on by persons chosen by the people. And, my dear brethren and sisters, if you will study the Constitution of our country as we all ought to do, for we form a part of the government, we are part of the people, and we are endowed as a State in the Union—I say "WE," I mean, of course, all people of Utah—endowed by the power of the Constitution with all the rights and privileges that pertain to citizens of our country, we should become familiar with that instrument. I am glad to know that the Mutual Improvement Association has endeavored to introduce among the members of that body a manual relating to the government of our country and its institutions, so that our brethren may become acquainted with it. Now, you will find by studying that sacred instrument that it provides for what is generally called a representative form of government. The government is divided into three branches: the legislative, the executive and the judicial; the judiciary, and the President, and the Congress which is formed into two branches, one to make a balance or check upon the other. These institutions set up and established in the Constitution of our country were the product of the knowledge and the wisdom of the men who sat in council, who had had the opportunity of reading about the experiences of the past, away back to the time of ancient Rome and Greece, and they saw the failures that had occurred when the populace directly had power to regulate the affairs of the community. They saw what was needed to put a check upon the passions of the multitude; they saw what was necessary to secure the rights and privileges of ALL the people under the Constitution which they were framing, and God gave them the wisdom to select out of the experiences of the past the things that abide, that would remain, that were imperishable in their nature because they were founded in truth, founded in the real spirit of liberty, founded in the essential spirit of freedom to secure to all people their rights and privileges so that none might intrude upon the other.

Individual liberty would not do in the full extent of the term, for if every man was at liberty, as some have contended, to say what he chooses and in the way he chooses, how soon there would be chaos! You go along the street here in Salt Lake City and tell every man what you think of him and say it in the way that you choose, what would be the consequences? Why, you would find yourself in the gutter if he is stronger than you physically. Suppose people everywhere had the freedom to say just what they liked and in the way they liked and contended individually for that which they thought would be for the best interest of the community, we would soon have no community, we would have chaos, and by and by there would be anarchy. You will find by reading closely the history of the past, that this extreme popular liberty has generally gone back again into tyranny and monarchism. But the representative form of government provided in the Constitution of the United States, if preserved among the people of this country, will maintain and continue that freedom, that liberty and that power to the nation which the Lord designed this nation should have, if the people would follow in his ways and keep his commandments. For it is the history of this country that when the majority of the people went into wickedness and corruption and turned away from the principles bequeathed to them by the fathers and rushed into self-government to the full extent, they perished, they were involved in war and destruction came upon them. And now the Lord has declared that if we continue in the truth which he has revealed, he will maintain this nation and make it great in the eyes of all the world, and for over a hundred years this has been going on under the form of government established by the fathers under that instrument called the Constitution of our country which the Lord inspired wise men to adopt.

We have been told repeatedly—I have heard it ever since I came into the Church almost—that the time would come when that Constitution would be in danger, and it would be the privilege and the duty of the men of God in the Church of Christ to stand up for the Constitution and help to maintain it and preserve it from being trampled under foot. I call the attention of my brethren and sisters this morning to this declaration, and even if it had not been uttered in that form I believe with all my heart, because of the revelation that I have referred to, that the Lord designs that this people, of all people in this great land, shall be the defenders of the Constitution of the United States and stand by the fundamental principle which runs through the whole instrument, by which the people are represented by men of their own choice to make the laws, to execute them and to pass upon them—not to be passed upon by the multitude but by the tribunal that the Lord helped to bring about by giving wisdom to our forefathers that they might establish the government on those foundations. I draw your attention to this because I believe, as President Smith declared in the opening speech in this conference, that "we are living in perilous times;" that the time has come when our attention should be drawn to these things that we may know our duty and that we may perform it manfully.—Conference Report, October, 1912.
