Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 30

THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION

Respect For Authority. The Latter-day Saints have always been taught to respect authority. This doctrine has come down from ancient times as a requirement of the Lord's people. Peter impressed this duty upon the primitive Saints, and it forms the substance of the Twelfth Article of Faith given to the Church by the Prophet Joseph Smith. This applies to the members of the Church in every land, whether it is one of popular government or otherwise. It is a fact, however, that people who have a hand in governing themselves are bound to have a greater love for established authority than are those subject to despotic, or dictatorial government. In the one case they feel that they are to some degree responsible for the government, having had a hand in the choosing of those who make and enforce the laws. On the other hand, in dictatorial governments the people are relieved from all responsibility and cannot be expected to have the interest they otherwise would, in the functions of government.

The Secret of England's Greatness. The island of Great Britain, including Wales, Scotland and England, is slightly larger than the state of Utah and less in area than the state of Colorado. This "Tight Little Isle" as it has been called, has exercised a wonderful influence upon the world. Great Britain is separated from the main coast of Europe by a narrow strip of water some twenty miles wide, but this channel has afforded a natural defense against the other nations of Europe which the other countries have not enjoyed. From time immemorial the nations of Europe have manifested a jealousy of each other, and have possessed an over-sized measure of desire to possess as much of their neighbor's territory as they could obtain by the power of might. This fear and greed has necessitated the creation of large standing armies on the continent of Europe constantly at hand ready for any emergency. The English channel has obviated any such need on the part of Great Britain. English kings have claimed the right to maintain such an army, but they have never succeeded in this claim. The Bill of Rights, passed in 1689, ended this controversy. It declared that "the maintenance of a standing army in time of peace without the consent of parliament is contrary to law."

It has been said that England's isolated position is by far the most important fact in the proper understanding of her constitutional history. Shakespeare described Great Britain as follows:

"This fortress built by Nature for herself, Against infection and the hand of war; This happy breed of men, this little world; This precious stone, set in the silver sea, Which serves it in the office of a wall, Or as a moat defensive to a house, Against the envy of less happier lands; This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, This England."—Richard II. Act. 2, Scene 1.

England's greatness also lies, Dr. William Bennett Munro has said, in the genius of her people.

The fusion of racial strains—Celt, Saxon, Norman and Dane—gave to the British islands a breed of men in whom the ardor for free political institutions was strong. So strong did it prove to be, in fact, that it ultimately became the root of Britain's difficulties with her own colonies. The people of the British Isles, and their descendants wherever scattered, have in all ages been impatient of improvised, uncertain, or dictatorial authority; on the other hand they have had at all times an innate respect for political authority based upon their own consent.

And something, finally, must be attributed to the happy accident that no rigid constitutional framework was devised in the earlier stages of British history to hold the course of political development in check. The Briton has never had much use for political abstractions. He has been openly averse to a system of government based upon fixed principles and involving the application of exact rules. For this reason the British constitution has never been permitted to assume a stereotyped form. It has remained unsystematized, uncodified and to a degree indefinite.—"The Governments of Europe," pp. 3-4.

Then again, the blood of Israel is profusely scattered throughout the island of Great Britain; not so profusely in the "Emerald Isle." This accounts for the fact that the friction between England, Wales and Scotland could be brought to a peaceful close with a unity among these peoples; but in Ireland the conflict has gone on even to the present day. Moreover, another sign that the blood of Israel was widely diffused in Great Britain is manifest in the fact that out of this land have come to the land of Zion the thousands who have received the Gospel. Next to Great Britain there have come out of Europe the largest numbers of Latter-day Saints from the Scandinavian countries, and then from Germany. All of these nations are closely related by blood.

Great Britain's Political Stability. While in early times England was subject to absolute monarchial rule, in the course of time that nation developed into the world's greatest imperial representative government. In countries where dictators rule, and where the law is based upon the foundation of force in the hands of one man, or even a small group of men, the danger of revolution constantly lurks. Dissatisfaction is bound to dwell in the hearts of the people, no matter how obediently they may appear to cherish the rule and observe the law, or how loudly they may shout and acclaim their patriotic loyalty. If the people of Spain had been subject to a liberal measure of freedom, and a voice in the government unrestrained from dictation as long as have the British people, it is doubtful if the terrible scenes of 1936 enacted in frightful shedding of blood and carnage which have shocked the world would have occurred.

In the British nation, when the people become dissatisfied with an administration, they take the same steps which are taken by the people of the United States in the choosing of their officers, they resort to the ballot box and express their choice. When that choice is expressed, it is the end of the matter, the people respect the will of the majority. In despotic countries this is not the case. We have seen in recent years, in some countries where the people have an empty form of popular government, that they have been forced to express themselves according to the will of dictators. Then, when dictatorship is enthroned the inalienable rights of the people are brought to a sudden end. Satan's plan, that of compelling people to bow to the yoke of despotism, has been the cause of most of the floods of blood shed in war since this present mortal world began.

Dr. William Bennett Munro, in "The Governments of Europe," has said:

The art of free government has been the greatest contribution of the Anglo-Norman race to the civilization of the world. Civilized man drew his religious inspiration from the East, his alphabet from Egypt, his algebra from the Moors, his art and literature mainly from Greece, and his laws from Rome. But his political organization he owes most to English conceptions, and constitutional systems all over the world are studded with words and phrases which can be explained only by reference to the theory and practice of English government. It is true, of course, that representative government has sprung from the soil in other countries, but it has usually withered and died. The British constitution is the mother of constitutions; the British parliament is the mother of parliaments. No matter by what name the legislative bodies of other countries may be known, Congress or Chamber, Reichstag or Rigsdag, Storthing or Sobranje, they all bear the impress of their maternity. It is hardly an exaggeration to say, therefore, that the democratization of the entire civilized world, largely through the influence of Anglo-Norman leadership, is the most conspicuous fact in the whole realm of political science. Not to know and appreciate this fact is to miss the first clue to an understanding of the science of government.—p. 1.

It is true there has been representative government in other countries. Ancient Greece was under such a rule. For hundreds of years the Nephites had some sort of government of that kind, and many of the Germanic tribes of Europe, even while they were in the midst of their savagery and before Christianity reached them, exercised a sort of democracy. But these forms and attempts at popular government perished in the course of time. The influence of the British Empire has been the leaven, in this regard, which has leavened the lump. The pain, the struggles, the accomplishments obtained in behalf of freedom, have been felt in many other lands, and other peoples have been influenced by them.

The British Constitution. Great Britain has never assembled a Constitutional Convention like the American Colonies did in 1787. The British constitution is a composite picture containing many fundamental measures passed by Parliament, and her unwritten laws which have survived the ages. It flows in the blood of the people. It is the accumulation of laws and customs. It is composed of the charters, statutes, precedents, traditions and court decisions that have come down piecemeal from very early times. Some of these have become so thoroughly established in the minds of the people that it would be practically impossible to destroy them.

Dr. Munro further says:

With the exception of the dozen years in which Oliver Cromwell quitted his farming and served as the President of the English Republic under the title of Protector of the Commonwealth, its general contour has undergone no drastic change for at least five centuries. Nowhere else has the world witnessed a political evolution so prolonged and so relatively free from great civil commotion. There have been revolutions in England, not all of them bloodless, but they merely cleared the obstructions out of the channel. They did not deflect the main current of political progress. The new dispensation began where the old left off. After such upheaval the process of constitutional evolution was speeded up. So, while it is possible to mark out epochs or stages in the development of the British Constitution, this is done by nothing differences after long periods rather than by coming upon transformations at definite times.—"The Governments of Europe." p. 2.

The Stuarts held to the doctrine of the divine right of kings. They also sought to destroy the measure of representative government which had been established before their time. James the First was wise enough not to attempt to enforce all of his views. Charles the First was not so wise and his attempt to enforce his despotic rule carried him to the scaffold where he lost his head. It is said that in the reign of Charles II the people were as indifferent to their form of government as at any time. One historian has said:

Charles II was at this period as absolute as any monarch in Europe. The nation seemed to have lost all idea of liberty, and nothing but the indolent, unenterprising disposition of the king prevented him from riveting the fetters of tyranny so as to render them indissoluble. Scotland, which had at different periods of the reign been thrown into insurrection by the arbitrary measures used to restore episcopacy, was at length completely tamed; and the relics of the covenanters were suppressed with circumstances of great barbarity. (Gen. Bio., Vol. 2:616.)

Charles, however, died without accomplishing his purpose, and his brother James II, who succeeded him, was eventually forced to abdicate and William, Prince of Orange and his wife Mary, eldest daughter of James, came to the throne. This was the end of despotic government in England.

The British Constitution Composed of Many Parts. The British constitution may be defined as being without definite body and form, but, nevertheless, composed of many parts. It is a living thing. It may at any time be modified or changed by act of Parliament, yet the great features which expressed the liberties of the people are so definitely fixed and the thread of this freedom is so indestructibly woven through the fabric that to destroy it would be to destroy the nation itself.

While the people of the Empire are living under a monarchial form of government, and they honor their king, yet all the affairs of state are well within the hands of the people. Under the past and present temperament of the British people, there could hardly arise in Great Britain a dictator. So firmly fixed is their constitutional law, so thoroughly impregnated with it are the people, that should any attempt be made to destroy its underlying and fundamental structure, they would rise up in their might and with united front resent it. What the future may bring about in the multiplicity of world changes, no mortal is able to foresee.

In many respects the British system of government shows more stability than does that of the United States. This comes, no doubt, through long centuries of custom and training. Then again, the American nation has been constantly absorbing people from every other nation. Many have come from despotic countries bringing their ideas and traditions. All of these people have to be absorbed, and some may not have partaken of the true spirit of representative government. They are like children who have been under restraint and then had the restraint suddenly removed. They are inclined to break loose in excessive bursts of action. The cause of the explosion in the bomb is the sudden expansion of the ignited powder. If these gases were permitted to expand gradually, there would be no explosion.

The enforcement of the law in Great Britain is far superior to that in the United States where too much attention is paid to the technicalities and too little to the spirit of the law. In this respect the United States needs drastic and permanent reform. To our shame our officers at times have shown disrespect for the intent of the law. Even here in Utah, where above all other places the law should be enforced, there has frequently been an inexcusable delay at the expense of the taxpayers. Because of the law's delay, and the failure of justice through technicalities, we have witnessed in the United States disgraceful scenes within recent years—scenes which have brought down upon our heads the just rebuke and ridicule of foreign people.

Fabrics of British Constitutional Law. There are several great elements at the basis of British constitutional law; these are: The Magna Charta of 1215, the Petition of Rights of 1628, the Bill of Rights of 1689, the Act of Settlement of 1701, the Act of Union of 1707, the Great Reform Act of 1832, the Parliament Act of 1911, and the Government of Ireland Act of 1922. These taken all together, however, constitute but a fragment of the British Constitution. There are many ordinary statutes which have been passed by Parliament dealing with sundry matters. These acts range over many centuries coming down to very modern times. The common law is the body of legal rules which has grown up outside of Parliament and gained general recognition.

English history begins with a monarchy where the king was practically supreme. The king made the laws and his officers enforced them. The change came gradually and the responsibility of making and enforcing the law was eventually shifted to other shoulders. Today Parliament makes the laws in England, and, while its form is that of a monarchy, it is nevertheless "a veiled republic." No statute is valid today without the Crown's consent. There is never an appointment made, including that of the Prime Minister, except it is done in the name of the Crown. Britain is today "His Majesty's Government," and every department is "His Majesty's,"—the navy, the army, Parliament, or whatever it may be. Parliament, however, wields the real power of the British Government. It can make her laws and change them, but the people would as soon expect to see the island sink into the depths of the sea as for Parliament to attempt to change some of the fundamental principles which have become so well established through long usage and custom, such as the right of the individual to the possession of private property, which is a part of the constitution, but not a part of the written law.

As stated in another place, Great Britain is a nation of destiny, of which the American essayist and philosopher, Ralph Waldo Emerson, has said:

let who will fail. England will not. These people have sat here a thousand years, and here will continue to sit. They will not break up, or arrive at any desperate revolution, like their neighbors; for they have as much energy, as much continuance of character, as they ever had.

May this, we pray, continue to be the case.
