Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 31

THE MONROE DOCTRINE

America Fortified Against All Nations. The Lord promised that the Gentiles upon the American continent—the land of Zion—should be blessed with liberty and be free from the domination of all other nations on the earth providing the people residing here would remain humble. The land should not only be free from the domination of other lands, but the people dwelling here should exercise religious and political freedom in the conduct of their own governmental affairs. They were not to be subject to tyranny and oppression unless they turned to paths of wickedness. "And I will fortify this land against all other nations," the Lord declared through Jacob, brother of Nephi. It is generally understood throughout the Church that the United States is the great nation among the Gentiles which was to be raised up, and that this nation has a mission on this continent as the protector of all other nations on this hemisphere, in the exercise and defense of liberty.

The Monroe Doctrine. It is generally understood also in the Church that the greatest and most significant principle by which this land is fortified against the encroachments and invasions of European and Asiatic powers, is found in the Monroe Doctrine. This doctrine is not a law on the statute books of our country. It is not a resolution passed by the Congress of the United States, but is a definite statement of policy issued by President James Monroe in a message to the Congress of the United States, December 2, 1823. At that particular time Austria, Prussia and Russia, who had formed an agreement against Napoleon for their mutual protection, again entered into what was known as the "Holy Alliance." This came after Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo, and it was entered into for the purpose of protecting these powers in their dictatorial forms of monarchial government.

Between 1816 and 1822, revolutionary governments had been established in all the Spanish-American colonies on the American continent. It was very natural for the people of the United States to feel an intense sympathy with these struggling peoples in their attempt to throw off the yoke of despotism which had endeavored to bind them. As early as 1820 the House of Representatives, under the leadership of Henry Clay, had passed a resolution declaring that it was expedient to provide a suitable outfit and salary for ministers from the United States to these countries which had achieved their independence. As negotiations were under way for the acquisition of Florida by the United States, nothing came of this resolution at that particular time. In 1822, however, under the direction of Henry Clay, Congress did recognize as far as its action could do so, the independence of these republics, and an appropriation of $100,000, was made to pay the expenses of ministers from this country to the Spanish-American republics.

The "Holy Alliance" entered into by the powers previously mentioned, set up a reciprocal service in maintaining these respective countries from threats of revolution which confronted them. An uprising in Piedmont and Naples had recently been checked by the help of other members of the "Holy Alliance," wherein the citizens had endeavored to throw off the monarchial form of government. And now that Napoleon had been defeated and all uprisings had been put down these countries looked with longing eyes towards America. Their intention was to aid Spain in regaining her lost possessions and at the same time to receive territorial reward on this side of the earth for such help as they might render.

The Alliance entered into was as follows:

In the name of the Most Holy Invincible Trinity.

As their Majesties the Emperor of Russia, the Emperor of Austria and the King of Prussia consider it necessary, owing to the momentous events which have marked the path of the last three years, but mainly owing to the many blessings which it has pleased a Divine Providence to shower upon the states whose rulers have set (their confidence and hope upon it alone and who had arrived at the positive conviction that it is necessary to base their mutual relationship upon the sublime truths which the everlasting religion of the Savior teaches.)

Issued in triplicate and signed at Paris in the year of Grace 1815, 14-26 September.

L. S. Franz, with his own hand.

L. S. Frederick William.

L. S. Alexander.

Lodge and Garner, in their "History of the United States," speaking of the activities of the Alliance, have this to say:

Having restored absolutism everywhere on the continent, and having nothing further to fear in Europe for the present, the allies began to consider the possibility of restoring to Spain her revolted colonies in South America. France was willing to serve as the instrument of this unworthy undertaking, with the expectation of course, of reimbursing herself with a generous slice of South American territory. England alone, of the European countries, was opposed to intervention, chiefly because a large and lucrative trade had sprung up between that country and South America since the overthrow of Spanish dominion in that region, and this was in danger of being destroyed should the revolted colonies be restored to Spain.

Naturally the report of the activities of the Holy Alliance to assist Spain to regain her lost colonies reached the United States. Napoleon being out of the way, this appeared to the European powers as being the proper time to strike. At this same time Russia was laying claims to a generous slice of the Pacific coast of America. In 1821 the Czar had issued a Ukase reserving to Russian subjects exclusively, all trade, commerce and fishing on the northwest coast as far south as the fifty-first parallel of latitude. Foreigners were forbidden to approach within one hundred miles of the restricted coast line. Lewis and Clark had early in the century carried their expedition through to the Pacific, and, based, largely upon their findings and report, the United States had laid claim to the territory then known as Oregon. The endeavor on the part of Russia to extend her domain and take possession of the American coast in the Pacific was looked upon, as were the attempts of the European powers to restore the recently created republics on this hemisphere to Spain, as a menace to the well-being and peace of the United States.

America Not Subject to European Colonization. John Quincy Adams, who was the Secretary of State in Monroe's cabinet, informed Russia that the United States "would contest the right of Russia to any territorial establishment on this continent, and that we should assume distinctly the principle that the American continents are no longer subject for any new European colonial establishments." He declared that the whole of North America belonged to the United States by "the law of nature."

In that same year Mr. George Canning, secretary of foreign affairs for Great Britain, approached Richard Rush, the Ambassador from the United States, with the thought that the United States should cooperate with England in preventing the Holy Alliance from interfering with the Spanish-American Republics.

When President Monroe consulted Thomas Jefferson in relation to the action the United States should take in this matter, Mr. Jefferson answered: "Our first and fundamental maxim should be, never to entangle ourselves in the broils of Europe. Our second, never to suffer Europe to intermeddle with cis-American affairs." The same policy had been advocated by Washington many years before.

The Monroe Doctrine. The idea expressed by John Quincy Adams in his note to Russia and the thought expressed by Thomas Jefferson, and which had been crystallizing in the minds of the people of the United States since the close of the Revolutionary War, was presented by President Monroe to Congress in his message delivered December 2, 1823. The declaration of this doctrine in the President's message had a very salutary and substantial effect in cooling the ardor of foreign powers in their contemplated desire to meddle in the affairs of the Western World. While President Monroe's sentiment was resented by these powers and met with their disapproval, yet to this day it has been respected, and by some of these powers even acknowledged.

Excerpts From President Monroe's Message. The substance of this message as it pertains to the matters herein discussed and generally referred to as the "Monroe Doctrine," is as follows:

Fellow Citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives:

I. At the proposal of the Russian imperial government * * a full power and instructions have been transmitted to the minister of the United States at St. Petersburg, to arrange, by amicable negotiation, the respective rights and interests of the two nations on the northwest coast of this continent. * * * The occasion has been judged proper to asserting, as a principle in which the rights and interests of the United States are involved, that the American continents, by the free and independent condition which they have assumed and maintained, are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European powers.

II. In the wars of the European powers, in matters relating to themselves, we have never taken any part, nor does it comport with our policy so to do. It is only when our rights are invaded, or seriously menaced, that we resent injuries or make preparations for our defense. With the movements in this hemisphere we are, of necessity, more immediately connected and by causes which must be obvious to all enlightened and impartial observers. The political system of the Allied Powers is essentially different in this respect from that of America. * * We owe it, therefore, to candor and to the amicable relations existing between the United States and those Powers to declare that we should consider any attempt on their part to extend their system to any portion of this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety. With the existing colonies or dependencies of any European power we have not interfered and shall not interfere. But with the governments who have declared their independence, and maintained it, and whose independence we have, on great consideration and on just principles, acknowledged, we could not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing them, or controlling in any other manner their destiny, by any European power, in any other light than as the manifestation of an unfriendly disposition towards the United States.
