Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 33

MODERN RELIGIOUS AND MORAL TRENDS

The Lord's Controversy with the Nations. It should be plainly manifest to the casual observer, as well as to the thoughtful student, that the nations of the earth are rapidly drifting towards the abyss of destruction and the time spoken of by the Lord when he said he would make an end of all nations. This drift has increased since the World War. Our Savior declared that he will not come until the cup of iniquity is full. The signs that the cup is rapidly filling are constantly before us, and while this is an unpleasant topic, extremely so to those who are unrepentant and living in disobedience of the commandments of the Lord, nevertheless someone is compelled to raise the warning voice.

An ancient prophet said to Israel:

Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel; for the Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.

By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood.

Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away. * * *

My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me; seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.—Hosea 4:1, 2, 3, 6.

Today this same message may be spoken to the nations with equal truth, for they have turned away from righteousness to the ways of hate and evil and uncleanliness. The Lord has said because of these evils:

For the hour is nigh and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe; and all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that wickedness shall not be upon the earth;

For the hour is nigh, and that which was spoken by mine apostles must be fulfilled; for as they spoke so shall it come to pass.— D. and C. 29:9-10.

Again the Lord declared:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my face.

Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth, saith the Lord.

And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord;

First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord.—D. and C. 112:23-26.

In another place the Lord also said that "Zion may escape" provided she will "observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her." (D. and C. 97.)

"Knowledge Shall Be Increased. "But," some one will say, "are we not living in the most enlightened age the world has ever seen?" "Is it not true that great progress has been and is being made for the benefit of man by which life and happiness are increased?" The answer to all of this is, Yes, such is the case, if we confine the answer to material things. The angel said unto Daniel at the close of his vision: "O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased."

The Lord has poured out abundant knowledge in all things material upon the inhabitants of the earth. Great progress has been made in mechanics, in chemistry, in physics, and other sciences. Men have built great telescopes by which the hidden galaxies of the universe have been brought to view. They have, by the aid of the microscope, discovered vast worlds of microorganisms, some of them almost as deadly in their attitude towards men as men are themselves. They have discovered means to control disease, and thus prolong life. They have, by the aid of anesthesia made men insensible to pain, thus permitting major and delicate operations which would not otherwise be performed. They have invented machines more delicate than the human touch, more sensitive to light and able to see farther and truer than the human eye, and other machines so powerful that by their aid mountains may be removed. The accomplishments of men, through the inspiration the Lord has given them, but which they seldom acknowledge, are too numerous to mention. This is a wonderful age. Everything, it seems, to make men happy, prosperous and comfortable, to lessen their difficulties and responsibilities, has been given unto them; but still they are in the midst of turmoil, dissatisfaction and distress.

"The World Grows Weaker and Wiser." While knowledge is increased, as Daniel was told, yet it is not the knowledge that saves. Men have rejected the most important knowledge—the saving laws of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith once said:

The world is a very wicked world; and it is a proverb that the "world grows weaker and wiser," if that is the case, the world grows more wicked and corrupt.

In the earlier ages of the world a righteous main, and a man of God and of intelligence, had a better chance to do good, to be believed and received than at the present day.—D. H. C. Vol. 4:553.

Again he said:

As far as we degenerate from God, we descend to the devil and lose knowledge, and without knowledge (i.e. of heavenly things) we cannot be saved, and while our hearts are filled with evil, and we are studying evil, there is no room in our hearts for good; or studying good. Is not God good? Then you be good; if he is faithful, then you be faithful. Add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, and seek for every good thing.—D. H. C. 4:588.

The Lord has a controversy with the nations simply because they have rejected his truth. They have turned from the light which has been offered them in the principles of salvation, and are engaged in their own worship and desires in worldly things, and do not receive the Only Begotten Son. The Lord said that after he had sent his servants with their testimony, and that testimony was rejected, he would come out of his hiding place and speak to the nations with his own voice—even "the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds." He would also speak by the voice of war and bloodshed, and "all things shall be in commotion; and surely men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people."—Doc. and Cov. 88:89-91.

A Day of Broken Covenants. For several years the world has been passing through what it is pleased to call "a depression." This followed in the wake of the World War. The greatest feature of this depression is not, as so many think, the financial stress and strain. It is the spiritual depression which has cast its black shadow over the world. Many of the young men who went into the war with some semblance of faith in God, came out of it fatalists and doubting the existence of God. There has been a great indifference manifest toward religion and all its virtues. Men came out of the war hardened in their views and judgment toward religion and lacking in moral stability.

The World War commenced through the violation of sacred treaties. These were termed "scraps of paper." Since the war that view has been received and acted upon by many of the nations. Witness their attitude towards the United States in relation to their debts. "The Literary Digest," commenting as recently as March 31, 1936, said: "Out of the welter of the World War, in the feverish desire of the nations for peace, came a number of important treaties. They emerged after June 28, 1919, when the treaty of Versailles was signed by the Allied Powers and Germany." The "Digest" then enumerates some ten or more important treaties which were entered into and broken by the nations. Then, quoting the Chicago Daily News, it declares that "the breaking of treaties is the fashion of the day, and nations which keep their word are the exception."

In the United States in recent years there has grown up a woeful lack of respect for law and order. This spirit is also manifest in other countries, but in the United States we have been, and still are, infested with gangsters, thugs, and organized criminals, as wicked and powerful as were the Gadianton robbers in olden times. Millions of dollars are required by the government in fighting this monster. This organized crime is not confined to the ignorant, but many who are scientifically trained have been directing it. These criminals have been using modern inventions to aid them in their evil work, at times anticipating the government agencies in the use of these scientific inventions.

The Trend of Modern Education. The trend of education throughout the world today is materialistic and mechanistic; the swing is away from God. What the advocates of these doctrines are pleased to call "modernism" and "liberalism" eliminate faith in Jesus Christ as the Son of God. These teachings deny the necessity for the atonement and its efficacy. They declare that what the world calls sin has always been in the world, is coeval with the good, and was not introduced through the transgression of a law. This doctrine, of course, does away with the "fall" of man. It teaches that through untold ages man has been gradually ascending the ladder of intelligence since he "evolved" from lower forms of life and gained a conscience. Therefore the story of Adam and the Garden of Eden is a myth coming to us from an age of credulity and superstition.

Scores of volumes have been written attempting to show that the ancient Hebrew prophets were superstitious men who taught the people in the traditions of their times, according to the fanaticism which they possessed. Abraham, Moses, Elijah, and other prophets, who spoke and wrote as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost, are ridiculed as being semi-civilized men who imbibed the spirit of ignorance peculiar to their time. The Old Testament has been largely discarded in this day as a relic of superstition and ignorance. It is loudly proclaimed that some of these books were not written by the men whose names they bear; for instance, the books of Moses, it is said, are of a much later date than Moses; the book of Isaiah is a composite writing, in which two or more authors had a hand. The same is said of Genesis. The doctrine of belief in God is said to be a progressive thought, and hence a man-made idea, of gradual development among the hebrews, from whom our Bible comes. It is said that the earlier prophets believed in a cruel, cunning, and jealous God, who was full of vengeance. This also was the idea of other nations of that time. From this belief man gradually developed the idea of the God of love as exemplified in the ministry of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding the Lord has said that we may know that "there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them."

This modern doctrine proclaims that the belief in God anciently was a belief in many gods, but it has gradually changed to the worship of one God. The modern teaching eliminates the doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus Christ and every other creature, and hence denies the testimony of the disciples of our Lord, who were eye witnesses of his resurrection. No wonder that soberminded men are crying out against these evils and calling on the people to "return to God." Some of the most popular preachers in the land, who declare themselves to be "Christians," have rejected the divinity of Jesus Christ. They receive him, not as the Only Begotten Son of God, who brought salvation through the shedding of his blood, but merely as the world's greatest teacher who was not possessed of divinity.

"Brown Paganism." As late as August 8, 1936, the Literary Digest published a page and a half of comment dealing with the attempt in Germany to establish "Brown Paganism," with a re-written Bible eliminating the Old Testament and treating Jesus Christ as a "Nordic Superman." It had been proclaimed that the Son of God was "born in Galilee of Amorite Nordic parents; he was a stern, brave, aggressive revolutionist who was crucified by the Jews."

The press dispatches from Berlin of April 8, 1936, stated that "Christ's Sermon on the Mount had been adapted to a modern German view by Reichbishop Ludwig Mueller." This account is given as follows:

The main feature of the new version is elimination of all reference to Jerusalem, King Solomon, Pharisees and scribes, laws and prophets, and the ten commandments as made in the gospel according to Matthew.

These references were held to be Jewish, and therefore to be rejected.

The "modernized" sermon on the mount was issued in the form of a book entitled, "The German words of God, Rendered into German by Reichbishop Ludwig Mueller."

The Reichbishop explained that he purposely avoided the word "translated" in reference to his version.

The exhortation to turn the other cheek to a smiter is rendered by Reichbishop Mueller thus:

"If thy comrade smite thee in the face in his wrath, it is not always right to smite back. It is more manly to preserve a superior calm. Mayhap thy comrade will repent."

For Pharisees and scribes, the Reichbishop substituted "teachers and preachers;" for the laws and prophets, "divine truths."

Christ's blessings were revamped as, for example:

"Blessed is he who bears his sorrow manfully. He will find strength not to despair."

"Blessed is he who keeps good comradeship always for such is the will of God."

Dr. Otto Dibelius, a prominent evangelical church leader, criticized Reichbishop Mueller's new interpretations in an article in the fortnightly "Jungerkirche," asserting that Mueller dethroned God.

Instead of divine revelation, Dr. Dibelius said, "he would give us the voice of blood, comradeship and honor. All human emotions."

Mueller's foreword to readers of his new book concluded with the signature, "Your Reichbishop." The Supreme Evangelical Church council has lodged a formal objection to this designation.

Thousands of German citizens, let it be said to their credit, rejected this teaching. Nevertheless it is proclaimed by many who boast of their super-patriotism in that land: "Germany will never become invincible until it has a single state religion like Japanese Shintoism."

"They Are All Atheists." Maurice Hindus, in his book, "Humanity Uprooted," in the chapter on the "Collapse of Religion," in Russia, tells this story of his experiences with a group of boys in that land:

"Boys," I said, "how many of you believe in God?"

"Not one of us," replied several voices in unison. "Don't any of you ever go to Church?" "No." They snickered as if amused at such a query. "Are you atheists?" "Aren't you, Uncle?" countered one of them with a touch of defiance. "Why should I be?" "Because,"—and there was a sense of finality in the tone of the answer as if the speaker, mere boy though he was, thought the matter beyond dispute.

"Everybody is an atheist," remarked the tallest of the group, apparently also its leader, "except, of course, old hags."

"I'll bet you are an atheist too," teased a red-haired lad. "Only you won't let on." He giggled, and the others giggled with him.

"And why do you say that?" I demanded.

"Because there is no God, that's why," responded the leader, and once more they giggled and then guffawed with amusement. * * *

Shortly afterward, in company with a Russian student, I was making a journey mostly on foot, in one of the most far-away and backward regions. No telephone lines had yet been laid over its endless spaces. No railroad had yet cut across its vast plains. No sign of industrial civilization had yet invaded its slumbering domain. It was what the Russians call "the deaf country," aye, the deafest of the deaf. My companion and I tramped about in a leisurely way from village to village, and one day, caught in a storm, we ran for shelter into the first peasant hut we saw. A sagging log hut it was, with a thatched roof and two dusky little windows that peered into the muddy street with the glazed dullness of the eyes of a corpse. It was obvious that this was the home of a real bedniak, or poor man.

A crowd of children from seven to twelve years of age had gathered there. We greated them, but they only drew together and snickered as if abashed. I passed around lumps of sugar, a luxury of luxuries to peasant youths, and they immediately loosened up and began to talk. There were no grown folk in the house. It was summer, and all adults in the village were in the fields working. There was only one girl in the group, somewhat older than the boys, barefoot and caring for a crying baby in a crib suspended by a rope from the ceiling.

"Boys," I finally braved myself to ask, "do any of you believe in God?"

Then adds Mr. Hindus, in the early days—as far back as twelve years ago—such a question would have startled the children with terror. They would have thought him possessed of an evil spirit or demented. They would have clutched their little crosses and perhaps uttered a prayer, and he, for his impudence and sacrilegious remark, would have been hustled out of the town or to the constable. In the days only a decade ago, he says, the very word Bezbozhnik, or atheist, was anathema to the muzhiks, young and old; but here on this occasion the only response was good-natured mirth, as the girl responded:

"They don't believe in God, they are all atheists."

"And so are you," burst out a light-haired youth with glowing dark eyes.

"No. I am not," the girl protested, "I am like my mother, and not like my father. I believe in God, and I go to church and light candles, too."

"The boys laughed at her attempted defense, and she, as if stung by their ridicule, proceeded to expatiate on the subject.—"Humanity Uprooted," pp. 4-8.

Dismissing the Bible. [^1] Considering the trend of the times; the nature of the materialistic mechanistic, and cold scientific education of the leading nations, in which belief in revelation and God are eliminated, is it any wonder that thoughtful men are crying out to the people to return unto God? Many years ago, President Brigham Young prophetically declared: "The Christian world is actually coming to the point that they will dismiss the Bible from their schools; and by and by they will dismiss it from their pulpits and get one to suit themselves. They will hew out for themselves cisterns that will hold no water."—J. of D. 13:213.

The Cheapening Trend of Literature.—In this day of advanced education where nearly every person can read and write, the people are going to avail themselves of their powers to amuse themselves by reading, even if they do not intend to exert themselves in thoughtful study. There has never been a time in the history of the world when so much literature was before the people as there is today. Hundreds of tons of books, pamphlets, magazines, to say nothing of newspapers with their demoralizing magazine and sensational sections, are being printed every year. Perhaps if nine-tenths of these publications were eliminated the public would be better off. What are the people reading? A small part are reading enlightening literature including the Bible; however that book is now quite generally placed on the back shelf and seldom noticed by the majority. A great many people are reading the current magazines, with their salmagundi of good, bad and indifferent matter. A great many more are content with the cheapest trash, the sensational and sex-appealing literature.

Several weeks ago I stood before a bookstand in a railroad station. There were about thirty magazines in the rack on the wall. Out of this number I counted more than twenty on the covers of which were scenes of men and women with deadly weapons and in menacing attitude. Among the others were magazines of equally objectionable and vulgar covers. Out of curiosity I waited to see what might happen, and was not surprised to see some youths after scanning the rack pick out one of the most objectionable.

Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler, President of Columbia University, speaking at the 181st anniversary of that institution, pointed to the reading of trashy and useless literature as one of the leading contributions to the cause of rudeness and ill manners of the American people. He could have said also, to their morals. "Bewailing the cheapening trend of literature, which is causing the American people to leave even the Bible and Shakespeare unthumbed," the report says, Dr. Butler advised the youth to seek better ways. "If we will only fix our minds on excellence, and leave no stone unturned to achieve it, we shall remember such conditions as Lowell described. We must recognize the tests which mark the difference between the first-rate, and the second-rate, and lower. Some of this knowledge we shall get from imitation of those with whom we are associated, the rest can come only from observation and reflection."

Moving Pictures as an Evil. Paul, nearly two thousand years ago, declared to Timothy that "the love of money is the root of all evil." And the Lord warned his disciples to "beware of covetousness, for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth." But mankind will not profit by sound doctrine or the experiences of those who engage in folly. Covetousness, greed, and the desire to possess through the power of money, make money the root of evil. We see this desire to gain manifested in all walks of life, but in no place is it made manifest more plainly than in the moving picture houses.

There is no other one agency of greater value to the people in the interest of education, if it is so used. But Satan has laid his slimy fingers upon the films. He has also put into the hearts of men the thought that to possess is the greatest duty and achievement of man. It is questionable if any one thing coming prominently before the people in modern times has surpassed the moving picture as a force in the influencing of youth towards evil. When attention was called to the nature of the films which are being produced and the evil effects coming from them, one producer said: "We give the people what they want." He then went on to say that if the public should demand clean, wholesome, uplifting films, the producers would be glad to produce them. He was verily correct in what he said. The public gets what it wants. If it does not get it, an immediate change would be made to meet its wishes. Therefore we must conclude that in the presentation of the films the public demand is considered. But this shows the drift of humanity in this intellectual age. Many of the pictures which pass the censor draw near the border line of indecency and portray with cunning skill the craftiness of the defiers of the law. Can it be denied that the lawlessness which prevails is greatly contributed to by these films?

The Influence and Sanctity of the Home. [^2] Here, also, in the home, the baneful effects of the modern show is manifest. Marriage is frequently a thing of ridicule, or is treated with disrespect and in the spirit of levity. Instead of this the sacredness of marriage and the home life should be maintained.

Marriage is ordained of God, for the Lord has placed the sacred and eternal stamp of approval upon it. (D. and C. 49:15.) President Joseph F. Smith has said:

I want the young men of Zion to realize that this institution of marriage is not a man-made institution. It is of God. It is honorable, and no man who is of marriageable age is living his religion, who remains single. It is not simply devised for the convenience alone of man, to suit his own notions, and his own ideas; to marry and then divorce, to adopt and then to discard, just as he pleases. There are great consequences connected with it, consequences which reach beyond this present time, into all eternity, for thereby souls are begotten into the world, and men and women obtain their being in the world. Marriage is the preserver of the human race. Without it, the purposes of God would be frustrated; virtue would be destroyed to give place to vice and corruption, and the earth would be void and empty.

Neither are the relationships that exist, or should exist, between parents and children, and between children and parents, of an ephemeral nature, nor of a temporal character. They are of eternal consequences, reaching beyond the veil, in spite of all that we can do. The man, and the woman who are the agents, in the providence of God, to bring living souls into the world, are made before God and the heavens, responsible for these acts as is God himself responsible for the works of his own hands, and for the revelation of his own wisdom. The man and the woman who engage in the ordinance of matrimony are engaging in something that is of such farreaching character, and is of such vast importance, that thereby hangs life and death, and eternal increase. Thereupon depends eternal happiness, or eternal misery. For this reason, God has guarded this sacred institution by the most severe penalties, and has declared that whosoever is untrue to the marriage relation, whosoever is guilty of adultery, shall be put to death. This is scriptural law, though it is not practiced today, because modern civilization does not recognize the laws of God in relation to this moral status of mankind. The Lord commanded, "Whosoever sheddeth innocent blood, by man shall his blood be shed." Thereby God has given the law. Life is an important thing. No man has any right to take life, unless God commands it. The law of God as to violation of the marriage covenant is just as strict, and is on a parallel with law against murder, notwithstanding the former is not carried out.—Gospel Doctrine, pp. 341-343.

The trivial manner in which many look upon marriage in this present day is an abomination in the sight of God. The Lord also said:

It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement:

But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.—Matt. 5:32-33.

Again he said:

Behold, it is written by them of old time, that thou shalt not commit adultery.

But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her in his heart already.

Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart, for it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell.—Matt. 5:29-31. I.S.

This instruction would be followed to the letter, if men and women had the love of God in their hearts. But this is not so. Even in the Church of Jesus Christ marriage is treated too lightly by many members and there have been many broken families because of the hardness of the hearts of husbands and wives. In the world marriage is too frequently treated as a jest. Men and women enter the sacred relationship on a whim or fancy, and on another whim or fancy that relationship is broken. Some there are who enter marriage with the understanding that they will separate at some future time. The home, because of this attitude, has lost its sanctity. If there is no sanctity in the marriage relation there can be none in the home and the unity of the family is bound to be broken. Broken family ties bring untold misery and heartaches which cannot be assuaged or remedied.

One of the most wicked and devilish doctrines ever advocated is the doctrine of "trial marriage." The downfall of nations in the past, in large measure, has been due to the cheapness with which the marital bonds were held, and to the violation of the sanctity of the home. Loose morals and disrespect for women is the natural outgrowth of the vulgar and iniquitous understanding which so many today have for these sacred covenants and obligations. The greatest glory that can be given to man is found in the eternal covenant of marriage—the power to become gods, even the sons of God and to possess the power to create and hold the everlasting right of increase. The cheapness and vulgarity with which the world looks upon and receives marriage is one of the potent factors of disintegration of the home and of the nations. The world today is practicing unchastity, and the Lord has said that the committing of this sin is second only to murder.

Intemperance. All who prize the gift of salvation realize that the exaltation which they seek is based, among other things, upon cleanliness of life. Sanctification of the body comes through obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. No body can be sanctified when it is filled with filth. Liquor even in its milder forms makes the user besotted. The Spirit of God cannot dwell in such tabernacles. The use of tobacco has a like effect upon the body. It impairs and destroys. It makes the body, created in the image of God, unclean, and no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven. Now that the appeal is being made by greed and corruption to the women, inviting them to partake of tobacco, the downfall of the nations is accelerated. It seems that a large percentage of men and women today love filthiness rather than cleanliness and the making of their bodies worthy to stand in the presence of God.

The Violation of the Sabbath. There are many other trends of the human family which point in the direction of evil and destruction, but they cannot be mentioned here. However it is expedient that a word be said about the sacredness of the Sabbath day. It is bad enough to see this important commandment broken by the individual citizen of this and other lands, but when government officials encourage the violation of this sacred day, how can it be expected that the people will show much respect for the laws of God or for the laws of man?

Recently in Berlin the Olympic games were held. The greatest of the sports were reserved for the Sabbath day. But then, here in America, we do just as bad, if not worse, than that. Sunday is the great holiday, the day of pleasure in many parts of our fair land. There are a few spots still remaining where this law is observed; but the desire to break the commandments of the Lord is strong in the breasts of most citizens of the United States.

To our shame here in the land, which should be the land of Zion, and where the people should be pure in heart, the Sabbath day is not observed as it should be as a day of rest and worship. Even our state and city officials frequently join in the advocacy of the violation of this divine law. How can we claim a right to the blessings of the Almighty when we do such things?

One of the reasons the Lord gave for the captivity of Israel was that the people "despised" his judgments, and walked not in his statutes, but polluted his Sabbaths; "for their heart went out after idols," said the Lord.

I am the Lord your God; walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; and hallow my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your God.

These words to ancient Israel come pealing down the vista of time with prophetic warning to the people of the present day, but they heed not the warning because they are "lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God."

Footnotes

Lynchburg, Va., April 9.—(AP)—Bishop Edwin Mouzon, of the Methodist Episcopal church, South, is "deeply concerned" over the public's lack of knowledge of the Bible's contents.

He said answers by 18,434 Virginia high school students to a questionnaire showed:

Sixteen thousand could not name three prophets of the Old Testament.

Twelve thousand could not name the four gospels.

Ten thousand could not name three of Christ's disciples.

---
Notas:
[^1] President Elmer G. Peterson of the Utah State Agricultural College, who spent several months in Europe in 1936, in an address before the student body of the college, Thursday, October 15, 1936, in the course of his remarks made the following comments:
[^2] For a full discussion of this topic see "Gospel Doctrine," chapter 16, and "The Way to Perfection," chapters 34, 35, and 36.
