Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 34

MODERN TRENDS IN GOVERNMENT

"When the Times of the Gentiles is Come In." Speaking of the punishment which should befall the Jews and the city of Jerusalem, the Savior said:

And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring;

Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after these things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.—Luke 21:24-26.

In the present dispensation the Lord has confirmed this saying in the following words:

And this I have told you concerning Jerusalem; and when that day shall come, shall a remnant be scattered among all nations;

But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

And in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth.

And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound.

And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel;

But they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men.

And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.—D. and C. 45:24-30.

In the dispensation of the Meridian of Time, the Gospel was first presented to the Jews and then, sometime after the resurrection of Christ, was taken to the Gentiles. The promise was made that in the present, or last, dispensation, when the Gospel should be restored, it would be presented to the Gentiles first and then later would go to the Jews. We are now in the midst of the fulfilment of this promise. For one hundred years and more since the restoration, the Gospel has been preached almost exclusively among the Gentile nations. The scattered sheep who have mixed with the Gentile nations have been gathered out by the hundreds of thousands into the Church of Jesus Christ.

Jerusalem was trodden down of the Gentiles from the destruction of that city and the scattering of the Jews in the year 70A.D., until the close of the year 1917. At that time the British armies took possession of Palestine during the World War. Since that time the Jews have been invited to return, and they have been doing so in great numbers. They are still gathering in fulfilment of this prophecy, but they are returning in their unbelief in Christ as their Messiah, although, as the Book of Mormon declares, many of them are "beginning" to believe, or to believe in part, in Christ. Their return, and the fact that the land has been proclaimed as a gathering place for them, is the sign the Lord gave the world that the times of the Gentiles is drawing to its close.

The Gathering of the Jews. This great event, the gathering of the Jews, was to come in a day when tribulation and distress are laying hold of the nations. It was to be in a day of wars, and rumors of wars; when men's hearts should be failing them for fear; when their love for the truth and their fellow men should wax cold, and they should be saying that Christ delayeth His coming until the end of the earth. All of these things we are seeing today. Never has there been such a time of commotion and perplexity among the nations. However, the next great world war will not come until the Jews are gathered in sufficient numbers for the purpose of the Lord to be fulfilled. Whether that time is here now or is for the future we are not prepared to say.

Prophecy foretells, nevertheless, that the remnant will be gathered; they will be cultivating the land and dwelling under their own fig trees and vineyards, when the clouds of the great storm will burst upon their heads. If one will read the daily press one will soon discover that the nations are even now preparing themselves for this second and final great struggle.

"The Gentile fulness now comes in And Israel's blessings are at hand: Lo! Judah's remnant, cleansed from sin, Shall in their promised Canaan stand."

But while they stand in their "promised Canaan," they will not be cleansed from their sin until Christ shall come to cleanse them. The manner of his coming and their cleansing will be presented later.

The Modern Trend of the Nations. The modern trend of the nations is towards dictatorship. It is taking form in two great camps, but, nevertheless, the direction is the same, although it is being reached by different routes. On the one side the direction which is to make an end of all nations, is through communism; on the other side it is being reached through Fascism and Nazism. While these two forces are apparently arrayed against each other, nevertheless the goal to be reached by them eventually is the same.

The Lord said that the beginning of the end was to be at the rebellion of South Carolina, at the commencement of the Civil War in the United States. From that place war was to be poured out and the time was to come when it would be poured out on all nations, and "with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations."—D. and C. 87:6.

It has been thought by many that the World War was the last great struggle, but the Lord said these judgments should be poured out until he shall make an end of all nations. The warfare upon the earth has scarcely ceased, if it has ever ceased, since the firing of the first gun at Fort Sumter. As soon as peace is declared in one part of the earth, war raises his ugly visage in another. The World War did not frighten the world into peace. Its horrors were so great that honest souls felt and hoped that it would be the end; but peace will not come through fright. Fear may postpone the inevitable conflict, but when greed and wickedness prevail upon the face of the earth, there will be no peace and the final conflict is sure to come.

The Word of the Lord is for All Flesh. When the Lord commanded that his word should go forth to the nations in this last dispensation, he declared:

Verily I say unto you, O inhabitants of the earth; I the Lord am willing to make these things known unto all flesh;

For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion.—D. and C. 1:34-35.

That day has now arrived and peace has been taken from the earth never again to return until Christ comes to restore it. The angels have been sent on their mission to reap down the earth and to bind the tares that they may be burned. They are at work among the nations. President Wilford Woodruff as early as 1893, and frequently thereafter, made a declaration similar to this:

In one of the revelations the Lord told Joseph Smith:

"Behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields;

But the Lord saith unto them, Pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also.

Therefore let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe, then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo! the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned."

I want to bear testimony to this congregation, and to the heavens and the earth, that the day is come when those angels are privileged to go forth and commence their work. They are laboring in the United States of America; they are laboring among the nations of the earth; and they will continue. * * *

We cannot draw a veil over the events that await this generation. No man that is inspired by the Spirit and power of God can close his ears, his eyes, or his lips to these things.—M. S. 58:738-9.

Peace Has Now Been Taken From the Earth. That day has now come when the angels have gone forth and they are at work among the nations. As I write I have before me the press dispatches which have just come over the wires. They are printed as follows:

CAPITALS OF OLD WORLD BRISTLE WITH HOSTILITIES

Fascist and Communist Tension Gains in Many Parts of Europe; Italy Speeds Arms Making, Paris Sees Trouble in Alsace-Lorraine.

Increasing tension in Europe Saturday was evidenced by the following developments:

Rome—Premier Mussolini announced that the vast war machine of Italy is being tooled into still greater perfection, whereupon the cabinet adopted his recommendations for increasing the work week and coordinating the national defenses.

Moscow—Should Russia denounce the Spanish nonintervention pact, Germany will consider itself "free to act," according to a report by the Russian official news agency, The Tass.

Strassbourg, France—Communist meetings scheduled in Alsace and Lorraine over the week-end brought 5600 mobile government guards hurriedly into the sectors to aid local police of the frontier provinces. German border guards were expected to be ready to prevent any possible nazi-communist clash.

Vienna—With the establishment of a dictatorship by Chancelor Kurt Schuschnigg and the abolishment of the heimwehr, or home guard, troops and storm police occupied public buildings to guard against a new putsch. The Vienna garrison was ordered to maintain a state of readiness.

London—British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden will wait a few days before attempting to salve the diplomatic breach between Russia and Italy over the Spanish civil war nonintervention pact, informed sources said Saturday night. This will give time for tempers to cool before negotiations are begun.

These dispatches depict the serious and strained condition which confronts all Europe and Asia. Similar dispatches are in the papers almost daily. Careful observers declare that a break is bound to come if this tension is maintained. And to come over what? Where is there the statesman with wisdom and knowledge sufficient to give us a clear explanation?

Increase of Armaments. Since the Civil War in the United States, warfare has undergone wonderful changes. The nations have been in a mad race to outdo each other. The steel battleship has made it necessary for the steel gun that will pierce the battleship's armor. Bigger guns mean thicker armor plate. Science has been at its wits end in each of the nations, devising ways and means for further and more terrible destruction. The World War increased this madness rather than being the means of bringing permanent peace. Each nation, looking over its borders and seeing the preparation being made by other nations, has felt the need of speeding up its own program of defense. Nations have attempted to enter into mutual agreements with each other to cut down this expense and limit the preparations for war, but in this they have not succeeded. Increased armament has meant increased armies, and increased armies have meant increased burdens for the people to carry in taxes. And so the mad race goes on. Where and when will it end? Nobody knows when or where the conflict will begin in its frightful slaughter, but we do know that it will not end until Christ comes.

The world's armed forces in 1913, before the outbreak of the World War, were 29,095,288 men. In 1934 there had been an increase to 38,473,994, not including aircraft. At that date Germany, Austria, Hungary and Bulgaria were limited by treaty in their air forces, and Germany in her army to 100,000 men, but these treaties were not kept. Since 1934, this number has been materially increased.

Through it all we will discover in the end that the Lord's hand will eventually direct and control these forces. These striving, unhappy nations, unhappy and striving because of their greed and wickedness, will in the end bring to pass the cleansing of the earth. It is decreed, the Lord has said, that the wicked shall slay the wicked.

I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth.

I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man.—D. and C. 63:32-33.

"Wars Increase as Man Grows More 'Civilized.'" The following is taken from the "Literary Digest" of January 20, 1934:

Two Scientists, Charting the European Record, Find That the Index Number of Mars Rose From 2.678 in the Twelfth to 13,735.98 in the Twentieth Century.

Does war tend to decline as nations become more civilized? Many philosophers have said so, but now two sociologists of Harvard University have turned the cold and dispassionate eye of science upon the question, and have decided that future wars, fiercer than any ever fought before, apparently can be avoided only by a miracle. Far from declining, wars increase in number and intensity as nations progress, and the worst flare-up since the dawn of history has occurred in our own century.

These scientists are Prof. Pitirim A. Sorokin, chairman of the department of sociology at Harvard, and Nicholas N. Golovin, formerly a Lieutenant-General in the Imperial Russian Army. They have reached their conclusion through a study of all the wars known to have taken place in Europe, ancient Greece and the Western Roman Empire over a period of more than 2,400 years—from 500B. C. to 1925A. D. During this period in Greece, Rome, Central Europe, Germany, Italy, France, Great Britain, Spain, the Netherlands and Russia, there occurred 902 wars (not battles).

Each was studied from five points of view; the duration of the war, the size of the fighting force, the number of casualties, including killed and wounded, the number of countries involved, and the proportion of the combatants to the total population of the belligerent nations.

From these five "variables" a total index number was computed for each war, in order that they might be reasonably expressed in terms of a common denominator.

Out of this study these scientists declare that they have discovered that war has tended to increase over all of Europe in the later centuries. They say they have learned that in these countries war grew from 2.678 in the twelfth century to 13,735.98 in the first twenty-five years of the twentieth century. Their table shows the growth by centuries. Up to the seventeenth century the wars were comparatively insignificant; beginning with that century war increased during the eighteenth, with a lull in the nineteenth, yet in that century they were more than one hundred times greater than in medieval centuries.

These men conclude that "all commendable hopes that war will disappear in the near future are based on nothing more substantial than hope and a belief in miracles."

The Rise of Gog and Magog. The time will come, notwithstanding these scientific figures, when war will end. Men will beat their swords into plowshares, and cease to learn war any more; but that day will not come until men have lost their hate for each other, and that will not be until Christ comes. War is not over; the present conflicts in the earth, and the recent conquests, which were as brutal and barbaric as those of ancient times, lends proof to this statement. Then, if prophecy is to be fulfilled there awaits the world a conflict more dreadful than any the world has yet seen. John saw this in vision and it has also been partly described by other prophets.

In the early days of the Church (1837) Elder Parley P. Pratt published a warning to the nations. The book in which this appeared passed through several editions during the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It has been published many times since and translated into a number of languages. What he said then in relation to the future, and events now taking place, is so vivid and timely that it is presented here in part:

You will please turn and read the 36th, 37th, 38th, and 39th chapters of Ezekiel. In the 36th chapter you will discover a promise, that Israel is to return from all the nations whither they have been scattered, and to be brought again to the land which God gave to their fathers; Jerusalem is to be filled with flocks of men, and all the desolate cities of Judea are to be rebuilt, fenced, and inhabited; the land is to be fenced, tilled, and sown, insomuch that they shall say: "This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden." "I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it; and the heathen shall know that I the Lord build the ruined places, and plant that which was desolate. So shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men, and they shall know that I am the Lord." In the 37th chapter you will find, after the vision of the resurrection of the dead, the Prophet goes on to speak of the two nations becoming one nation upon the mountains of Israel, and one king being king to them all; and when this takes place they are no more to be divided into two kingdoms. Moreover, the Lord's tabernacle is to be with them, and His sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. He will for ever be their God, and they shall be His people. "And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them forevermore." Now, it is a fact well known, that Judah and the ten tribes have never been one nation upon the mountains of Israel since the day they were first divided into two nations.

But when this does take place, even the very heathen are to know it, and are to be convinced of the true God, as was Cyrus. Now, if the missionaries shall convert the world before the Lord does this great work, then it will save the Lord the trouble of doing it in his own way, and it will save the trouble of fulfilling the prophets, and the word of the Lord will fail, and all the world lay hold of infidelity. Well did the Lord say, My ways are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your thoughts. Chapters 38 and 39 present us with a view of many nations united under one great head, whom the Lord is pleased to call Gog; and being mounted on horseback, and armed with all sorts of armor, they come up against the mountains of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land. Their object is to take a prey, to take away silver and gold, and cattle, and goods in great abundance.

This is an event which is to transpire after the return of the Jews and the rebuilding of Jerusalem; while the towns and the land of Judea are without walls, having neither bars nor gates. But while they are at the point to swallow up the Jews, and lay waste their country, behold, the Lord's fury comes up in His face, a mighty earthquake is the result, insomuch that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and all the creeping things, and all men upon the face of the earth shall shake at His presence, and every wall shall fall to the ground, and every man's sword shall be turned against his neighbor in the army, and the Lord shall rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him an overflowing rain, great hailstones, fire and brimstone. And thus He will magnify Himself and sanctify Himself, in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that He is the Lord; thus they shall fall upon the open field, upon the mountains of Israel, even Gog and all his army, horses and horsemen; and the Jews shall go forth and gather the weapons of war, such as handstaves, spears, shields, bows and arrows; and these weapons shall last the cities of Israel seven years for fuel, so that they shall cut no wood out of the forest, for they shall burn the weapons with the fire; and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, and they shall gather gold and silver, and apparel, in great abundance. At this time the fowls of the air and the beasts of the field shall have a great feast; yea, they are to eat fat until they be full, and drink blood until they be drunken. They are to eat the flesh of captains, and kings, and mighty men, and all men of war. But the Jews will have a very serious duty to perform, which will take no less than seven months; namely, the burying of their enemies. They will select a place on the east side of the sea, called the valley of the Passengers, and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude, and they shall call it the valley of Hamon Gog. And the scent shall go forth, insomuch that it shall stop the noses of the passengers; thus shall they cleanse the land. "And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them; so the house of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God from that day and forward. And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity; because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hands of their enemies; so fell they all by the sword. According to their uncleanness, and according to their transgressions, have I done unto them, and hid myself from them. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name; after that they have borne their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me when they dwelt safely in their own land, and none made them afraid. When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered them out of their enemy's lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations; then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, which caused them to be led into captivity among the heathen; but I have gathered them into their own land, and have left none of them any more there. Neither will I hide my face any more from them; for I have poured out my Spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord God. * * *

Zechariah, in his 14th chapter, has told us much concerning the great battle and overthrow of the nations who fight against Jerusalem; and he has said, in plain words, that the Lord shall come at the very time of the overthrow of that army; yes, in fact even while they are in the act of taking Jerusalem, and have already succeeded in taking one-half of the city, and spoiling their houses, and ravishing their women. Then, behold their long-expected Messiah, suddenly appearing, shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, a little east of Jerusalem, to fight against those nations and deliver the Jews. Zechariah says the Mount of Olives shall cleave in twain, from east to west, and one-half of the mountain shall remove to the north, while the other half falls off to the south, suddenly forming a very great valley into which the Jews shall flee for protection from their enemies, as they fled from the earthquake in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah; while the Lord cometh and all the saints with Him. Then will the Jews behold their long-expected Messiah, coming in power to their deliverance, as they always looked for Him. He will destroy their enemies, and deliver them from trouble at the very time they are in the utmost consternation, and about to be swallowed up by their enemies. But what will be their astonishment when they are about to fall at the feet of their Deliverer, and acknowledge Him their Messiah! They discover the wounds which were once made in his hands, feet, and side; and, on inquiry, at once recognize Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews.—Voice of Warning, pp. 38-54, 1881 Ed.

"What Are These Wounds?" Confirming the prophecy of Zechariah, the Lord said to the Church in March, 1831, that at this time his arm shall fall upon the nations.

And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake.

And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly.

And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king.—Doctrine and Covenants 45:47-53.

The Heathen Nations to be Redeemed. When this great event takes place the heathen nations, according to the word of the Lord, are to be redeemed. The resurrection of the just shall take place and it will be followed by the resurrection of the inhabitants of the terrestrial order "at the coming of Christ." Then shall those who died without law also have place in the first resurrection, and "it shall be tolerable for them." Then Satan shall be bound and no longer have place in the hearts of the children of men, and the great Millennial reign will be ushered in.

The Blindness of the Nations. Unwittingly, in their lust for power and their jealousies and fears, the nations of the earth will bring all of this to pass. They have placed their trust in the arm of flesh, which cannot save, and have forsaken the arm of God, which is mighty to save. The feeling today in the world, nation against nation, is extremely tense. Armies are stationed on every border watching and fearing lest some overt act by some other people may be committed. Far more tense is the feeling existing today than it was in 1914 when the world was plunged headlong into the whirlpool of blood and destruction.

Strange it is, that the world cannot learn its lesson without passing through untold suffering, needlessly brought upon it because it will not repent. The Lord does not delight in the shedding of blood, nor in the offering of human sacrifice upon the altar of liberty, but he has decreed wars among the wicked, because they will not repent. The time is at hand when the "wrath of God is to be poured out upon the wicked without measure; until the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he measured to his fellow man."

For the hour is nigh and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe; and all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that wickedness shall not be upon the earth.—Doctrine and Covenants 29:9. [^1]

Footnotes

Europe today presents the astounding spectacle of nations with a common cultural objective engaged in a bitter controversy over points of doctrine and threatening at any moment to begin the fratricidal struggle which if it occurs will probably be the death knell of European civilization. The beginnings indeed may be in Spain where over the rival claims of communism and fascism a nation is being destroyed.

The problem is so large and complicated that there is extreme difficulty in anyone attempting an explanation of the paradox. The explanation may be in the compounding of the individual evil which is in all of us and not absent from the excellent people who make up these European empires. Economic greed plays no small part in it, the desire of men to possess what others may think is an inordinate share of the world's wealth; and the particularly effective form which greed assumes when it takes national and other organized form with capable directors, dictators or prime ministers responsible for results and in the case of nations with armies and navies available to back up their claims and with complete control of publicity and propaganda. There is something very venal in the nationalisms of Europe. We happened to be in Geneva when the League of Nations was assembling last month at which time England and France attempted the discrediting of Ethiopia, outrageous in view of their former protestations, in order to get Italy back into the League in order in turn, by preventing a German-Italian alliance, that Italy could be used to forestall German ambition. Under the guise of a moral and ethical procedure, these nations in the League and out are proceeding by any means whatsoever to advance their respective national self interests. Obviously the game of politics becomes under such conditions in part a game of subtlety and deceit in the presence of which what we have thought were moral considerations have little or no chance to control situations, or even to exist. In other than the political field, the League, it should be said, is doing some excellent work. * * *

In any case, two or three hundred million people are now living under dictators, dictators with scientific weapons at their disposal of such destructiveness that civilization conceivably could be wiped out if they are ever loosed, and under a political organization which gives men no choice. It is impossible for anyone who has not seen it to sense fully the degree to which democracy and human liberty has been crushed on the continent of Europe. The Scandinavian countries, Czechoslovakia and a few other small areas are glorious exceptions.

May I say one other thing? There is a definite correlation between the decline of freedom and democracy and the decline of Christianity in these countries. There is not one among us pharisaical enough to condemn these people struggling not only to maintain that standard of living which our civilization presumes as its objective but struggling to live, for the very bread with which to feed themselves and their children. They are caught by a great and evil matrix which binds them to forms and usages which in many cases must express the opposite of their heart's desires.

"In the centers of learning and power the idea of a personal God, as revealed to us in the New Testament, and to whom every individual and every nation is accountable, has almost if not entirely disappeared. Philosophy, probably I should say not philosophy which the Greeks so glorified but rather half-baked philosophers, and our incomplete interpretation of a developing science, have been factors in this uprooting. In the quest for wealth and power rulers perforce must deny the validity of a doctrine which would invalidate them if their followers ever accepted it. In any case and whatever the causes, in critical and important places any real sense of individual relationship to a Supreme Being has disappeared and these nations no longer believe that they are accountable to this Just Judge for their acts. Christendom, so-called, has to a marked degree everywhere in it become Godless. This, I believe, is the root of the world's ills. Christianity, under the benign influence of which our civilization has developed, is now denied by the very nations it made great and powerful. This is treason, probably the most serious treason ever committed upon earth. And who can believe that we can escape the penalty for such an act?

America, separated by two oceans, has yet a little time in which to decide, every man for himself, and the nation as a result of our composite influence, how his life and the national life shall be adjusted to these basic truths. Europe, it would seem over a dangerously large part of it, has decided, I am speaking of officialdom and that extraordinarily powerful grouping of men in their various other social and economic organizations; no one can deny the power of Christian doctrine in the hearts of men and women everywhere. It may be that there is enough faith left in man to stay the great and dreadful days about which our prophets centuries ago spoke.

---
Notas:
[^1] President Elmer G. Peterson of the Utah State Agricultural College, who spent several months in Europe in 1936, in an address before the student body of the college, Thursday, October 15, 1936, in the course of his remarks made the following comments:
