Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 36

THE CHURCH

Antiquity of the Church. Some people think that the Church of Jesus Christ was not set up until Christ came in the Meridian of Time to establish it. His mission in relation to the Church was that of a restorer. He did not introduce something new that the world had not seen before, but re-introduced that which had been taken away through transgression, even the fulness of the Gospel. In the very beginning of the history of mankind God was known as Everlasting. The Lord said to Moses: "Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?" (Moses 1:3.) Then, again, at an earlier time, he said to Enoch: "Behold, I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also." (Moses 7:35.) In the twenty-fourth chapter of Genesis we read that Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called upon the name of the Lord there proclaiming him to be "the Everlasting God." To Malachi the Lord said: "For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed."

Since God is Everlasting and changes not, then in all consistency we should expect to find his plan for the salvation of mankind to be the same in all ages of the world. The reason why men have reached the conclusion that our eternal Father gave us, through his Only Begotten Son, something new and different from that which was given to the ancients by which salvation is obtained, is due to the fact of faulty translations of the scriptures and the elimination of many plain parts in which the truth of these things was told.

The history of ancient times is very brief as it has come to us and therefore only a very few of the details regarding the government of the Church in early ages have been recorded. This brevity, with the lack of detail concerning the organization of the Church, is the reason why mankind stumble and accept erroneous views. From the Pearl of Great Price (Moses) we learn that the same principles which are given to save us now through the mercy of Jesus Christ, were taught to Adam in the beginning. The Church was organized in the very beginning, and has always been on the earth when and where an authorized servant clothed with the Priesthood could officiate in the principles of the Gospel.

Definition of the Chruch. In Dr. William Smith's "Dictionary of the Bible," revised and edited by Dr. H. B. Hackett and Dr. Ezra Abbot, an accredited work in the Christian world, we find the following:

VII. Definition of the Church. The Greek Church gives the following: "The Church is a divinely instituted community of men, united by the orthodox faith, the law of God, the hierarchy, and the Sacraments." (Full Catechism of the Orthodox Catholic, Eastern Church, Moscow, 1839.) The Latin Church defines it as "the company of Christians knit together by the profession of the same faith and the communion of the same sacraments, under the government of lawful pastors, and especially of the Roman bishop as the only Vicar of Christ upon earth." (Bellarm. De. Eccl. Mil. iii.) * * The Church of England, "a congregation of faithful men in which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered according to Christ's ordinance in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same." (Art. xix.) The Lutheran Church, "a congregation of saints in which the Gospel is rightly taught and the sacraments rightly administered." (Confessio Agustana, 1631, Art. vii.)

After giving these and a number of other definitions from other churches, the editors make the following observation:

These definitions show the difficulty in which the different sections of the divided church find themselves in framing a definition which will at once accord with the statements of Holy Scriptures, and be applicable to the present state of the Christian world. We have seen that according to the Scriptural view the church is a holy kingdom, established by God on earth, of which Christ is the invisible King—it is a divinely organized body, the members of which are knit together amongst themselves, and joined to Christ their head, by the Holy Spirit, who dwells in and animates it; it is a spiritual but visible society of men united by constant succession to those who were personally united to the Apostles, holding the same faith that the Apostles held, administering the same sacraments, and like them forming separate, but only locally separate, assemblies, for the public worship of God.

Then in a spirit of apology for the divided and jarring condition in which the Christian world is so hopelessly shattered into separate and independent parts, the authors say:

This is the Church according to the Divine intention. But as God permits men to mar the perfection of his designs in their behalf, and as men have both corrupted the doctrines and broken the unity of the Church, we must not expect to see the Church of Holy Scripture actually existing in its perfection on earth. It is not to be found, thus perfect, either in the collected fragments of Christendom, or still less in any one of those fragments; though it is possible that one of these fragments more than another may approach the Scriptural and Apostolic ideal which existed only until sin, heresy, and schism, had time sufficiently to develop themselves to do their work.

Then expressing a view which is accepted by many Christian scholars, even more broad and liberal than this, the statement continues and says that the term "Church" is a technical name for the professors of the Christian religion—

We must fix our attention solely on that which makes the Christian religion differ from the religions which are not Christian. This difference is constituted by the Christian religion having Jesus Christ, his Revelation, and his precepts for the object of its contemplations and the motive of its actions. The Church, therefore, consists of all who acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ the blessed Savior of mankind, who give credit to his Gospel and who hold his sacraments, the seals of eternal life.—Art. The Church.

What the Church Really Is. The Church of Jesus Christ, is, as defined by these scholars, a "holy kingdom," established by God on earth, of which Christ is "the King." It is an organized society "knit together amongst themselves," by definite and divine laws that are immutable. It is a government which is subject to law—divine law of which God is the Author—and therefore it cannot be changed. These learned gentlemen are sadly in error in their views when they declare that God "permits men to mar the perfection of his designs in their behalf." If this means anything, it means that men have the veto power over the laws of God, and if they do not like them, may in their "own behalf" change them to suit their "own behalf." If that were true, then God would not be "from everlasting to everlasting," the same "unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them." If the Church consists of "all who acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ" no matter what their creed may be, then confusion and disorder reign in the Church of God, and then God and his Church cease to be.

It is true of the Church, as Dr. B. A. Hinsdale says in his work, "The American Government," that "government is the instrument or agent which society uses directly to secure these ends, viz., Justice and progress." So too, the Church is a means to an end, that of progress and justice for men, or to bring to pass the eternal life of man. The Church must, therefore, have definite laws and regulations. These cannot be changed, because God is the Author and he is unchangeable. His name is "Endless and Eternal;" it is, the "Everlasting God." These names are his because he possesses these qualities, and therefore he cannot change. It is just as reasonable for a man to teach that he has the right, or the power, or that society has, to set aside the law of gravity, or of light, or any other one or many of the laws of nature. It would be just as reasonable for men to legislate and proclaim that the ocean shall stop its ceaseless motion and the beating of its waves upon the shore; that water shall no longer freeze or turn into steam, as to proclaim that man may mar the work of God and set aside any of the laws that govern in his kingdom which have been established for man's salvation.

"Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion. Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?" Neither will he appoint except it be by law, even the law which came by and through him and his Father, according to the eternal appointment before the foundations of the earth were laid. The Lord has said that he "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven; and he that repents not, from him shall be taken even that light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts."

The Church of Jesus Christ is, then, a divinely organized body of worshipers, bound together by the common acceptance and obedience to divine law, which is given them from the Father and the Son for their eternal progression, and the only legal government on the earth.

An Order of Government. Elder Orson Pratt, in 1848, wrote a treatise on "The Kingdom of God," or the Church. This treatise was something new and an astonishment to the world in his day, because men had lost sight of that kingdom. Elder Pratt, in defining the Kingdom of God says:

The Kingdom of God is an order of government established by divine authority. It is the only legal government that can exist in any part of the universe. All other governments are illegal and unauthorized. God, having made all beings and worlds, has the supreme right to govern them by His own laws, and by officers of His own appointment. Any people attempting to govern themselves by laws of their own making, and by officers of their own appointment, are in direct rebellion against the Kingdom of God. The antediluvians were overthrown by a flood, because they rejected the government of the Almighty, and instituted their own governments in its stead. Noah and his family were the only loyal and obedient subjects to the legal power: they alone were saved. The universal desolation and utter abolishment of all the unauthorized man-made governments of the old world, should have been an everlasting warning to all future generations to avoid the same rebellion, and to establish no governments on the earth of human origin. But alas! the posterity of Noah soon revolted from the only legal, rightful power, and set up for themselves forms of governments of their own invention. The rebellion soon became so general that all the inhabitants of the earth, except Melchizedek, Abraham, Lot, and a very few others engaged themselves in it, supporting and upholding kings and other officers in their usurped authority, and suffering themselves to be governed by human laws, instead of revealed laws from God. From that time until the present, empires, kingdoms, principalities, republics, and numerous other corrupt, illegal, unauthorized powers, have multiplied themselves in the four quarters of the globe.—Orson Pratt's Works, pp. 41-42.

In other chapters this subject in regard to the governments of the earth and the right of Christ to rule, have been discussed, so we will not continue this topic in this place. It is in order, however, to point out how that government, the Church, is officered and what is the nature of its laws, therefore the words of Elder Orson Pratt, which are so clearly expressed, are now continued:

The Kingdom of God is a theocracy. And as it is the only form of government which will redeem and save mankind, it is necessary that every soul should be rightly and thoroughly instructed in regard to its nature and general characteristics. The beauty, glory, power, wisdom and order of the Kingdom of God (the Church) may be more fully understood by a careful examination of the following subjects:

First. The nature and character of the King.

Second. The character and requisite qualifications of the subordinate officers.

Third. The nature and character of the laws of adoption, or the invariable rule by which aliens are admitted into the kingdom as citizens.

Fourth. The nature and character of the laws given for the government of all adopted citizens.

Fifth. The character, disposition, and qualifications necessary for every citizen to possess.

Sixth. The rights, privileges, and blessings enjoyed by the subjects in this life.

Seventh. The rights, privileges, and blessings promised to the faithful, obedient subjects in a future life.

We cannot in our limited space go into all the details of the argument presented by Elder Pratt in the presentation of these seven items. They will be given, therefore, only in brief outline.

First. The King. God is the King. In him exists all legal authority. He alone has the right of originating a system of government on the earth. He claims this right by virtue of His having made man and the earth he inhabits. Man therefore, is indebted to God for his own formation and for the formation of the planet on which he dwells. He also claims the right of establishing His government among men, by virtue of His superior wisdom and power.* *

I will now tell you the reason why the King has kept silence so long. It is because He has had no subjects to converse with; all have turned away from Him and advocate other governments as being the rightful and legal authority. They killed off, and utterly destroyed, every true subject of His kingdom, and left not a vestige of it upon the earth; and, to add to their guilt and wickedness, they have introduced idolatry in its worst forms, and utterly turned away from the true and living God.

Second. The character and requisite qualifications of subordinate officers.

As the persons of the Father and the Son cannot be everywhere present, it is therefore impossible for them to attend in person to all the multiplied affairs of government among intelligent beings; therefore, God, in establishing a government among such beings, has always called persons of their own number to officiate in His name. The character of these persons, previously to their calling and appointment, has generally been that of honesty and sincerity; otherwise they have not differed materially from other men.

The various officers, called of God to administer the affairs of His government, are apostles, prophets, bishops, evangelists, elders, pastors, teachers, and deacons. God has only one way of calling these different officers, and that is by new revelation. No person was ever authorized to act in the name of the Lord, unless called by new revelation. Among the vast number of national governments now upon the earth, where is there one that even professes to be the Kingdom of God, or that its officers were called of God as was Aaron?

Third. The nature and character of the laws of adoption, or the inevitable rule by which aliens are admitted into the kingdom as citizens.

Wherever the Kingdom of God exists on the earth, all mankind are required, first, to become legal citizens thereof; and afterwards, to obey strictly all its laws unto the end of their days. To become a legal citizen in the kingdom is of infinite importance; for salvation is only to be obtained in the Kingdom of God. All other kingdoms or governments will be broken to pieces and destroyed, while the Kingdom of God will endure for ever. * *

It will be perceived that the great congregation of sinners to whom the apostles addressed themselves (i.e. in Jerusalem) were required:

First. To believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God.

Secondly. To repent of their sins.

And, thirdly. To be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ.

And they were promised that, after attending to these three things, they should receive, first, A REMISSION OF THEIR SINS, and, second, THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST. But are these all the rules necessary to be complied with in order to become legal heirs of the kingdom? No; there is one more condition which the sacred historian has neglected to mention in his history of the conversion of these three thousand; but as he has mentioned it in other parts of his history, in connection with the conversion of others, we are not left in ignorance of it. It is THE LAYING ON OF HANDS of the ministers of Christ for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Faith, repentance, baptism and the laying on of hands, are the four rules of adoption. Remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, are the two blessings of adoption which are inseparably connected with obedience to the rules. Both the rules and the blessings of adoption are the same in all ages and dispensations of the Gospel.

Fourth. The nature and character of the laws given for the government of all adopted citizens.

After having complied with the rules of adoption, mankind are considered the legal citizens of God's kingdom; and as such, they are required to obey strictly all the laws, ordinances, statutes, commands, counsels and words of the Great King, and in all things show themselves faithful, honest and loyal subjects of His government. That the citizens of the kingdom may be able to render strict obedience to its laws, they should make themselves thoroughly acquainted with them, and thus obey understandingly. Persons ignorant of the laws of the kingdom are liable to be deceived. They may suppose themselves obeying the law, when, in fact, they are only complying with some vain and foolish tradition of men. They are in constant danger of transgressing laws of which they are ignorant, and of neglecting to observe others that are of importance.

Fifth. The character, disposition, and qualifications necessary for every citizen to possess.

After being adopted into the Kingdom of God it is necessary that all citizens should cultivate such a character and disposition as shall be most pleasing to their King. Whenever the King shall give them advice or counsel upon any subject, they should, without any hesitation, adhere strictly to that advice or counsel. It is a great thing to find out the will of God, but it is still greater to do it. God requires the most perfect obedience on the part of His subjects. We may not always discern the end or result of doing as we are commanded; but this is no excuse for disobedience.

Sixth. The rights, privileges, and blessings enjoyed by the subjects in this life.

The faithful subjects of the Kingdom of God are entitled by promise to certain rights and privileges which are not granted to the citizens of any other kingdom. All the children of the kingdom have the right of offering up daily petitions to the King. This inestimable right or privilege is one with which the citizens of other governments are not favored. It is not only granted as a privilege, but it is also enjoined as a duty upon all the inhabitants of the kingdom, to plainly make known all their wants, and represent all their grievances or wrongs, which they may have endured from the citizens of other governments. * *

The blessings promised to the children of the kingdom in this life, are wisdom, knowledge, joy, healings, miracles, tongues, interpretations, revelations, visions, dreams, the ministry of angels, prophesyings, power to cast out devils, power against deadly poisons, and in fine, all the other gifts of the Holy Ghost as recorded in the scriptures of truth.

Seventh. The rights, privileges and blessings promised to the faithful, obedient subjects in a future life.

Eternal life is the greatest of all the gifts of God. It is a blessing promised to all the faithful subjects of His kingdom. The hopes of a future life of happiness that will never end, serve to comfort and cheer them through all the sorrows and tribulations of the present life.

The blessings of exaltation promised to the faithful will be found in another place so need not be further discussed at this point. Here we will present further instruction, however, dealing with some of these saving principles.

Where is the Kingdom, or Church? The Prophet Joseph Smith, correcting some of the sectarian ideas on this point, had this to say:

Some say that the Kingdom of God (Church) was not set up on the earth until the day of Pentecost, and that John did not preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; but I say, in the name of the Lord, that the Kingdom of God was set up on the earth from the days of Adam to the present time. Whenever there has been a righteous man on earth unto whom God revealed His word and gave power and authority to administer in His name, and where there is a priest of God—a minister who has the power and authority from God to administer in the ordinances of the Gospel and officiate in the priesthood of God, there is the Kingdom of God; and in consequence of rejection of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the Prophets whom God hath sent, the judgments of God have rested upon people, cities, and nations, in various ages of the world, which was the case with the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, that were destroyed for rejecting the prophets.

Now I will give my testimony. I care not for man. I speak boldly and faithfully and with authority. How is it with the Kingdom of God? Where did the Kingdom of God begin? Where there is no Kingdom of God there is no salvation. What constitutes the Kingdom of God? Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the Kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the Kingdom of God is not.

In these remarks, I have no allusion to the kingdoms of the earth. We will keep the laws of the land; we do not speak against them; we never have. * * *

Whenever men can find out the will of God and find an administrator legally authorized from God, there is the Kingdom of God; but where these are not, the Kingdom of God is not. All the ordinances, systems, and administrations on the earth are of no use to the children of men, unless they are ordained and authorized of God; for nothing will save a man but the legal administrator; for none others will be acknowledged either by God or angels.—D. H. C. Vol. 5:256-259.

This knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.—Joseph Smith, D. H. C., Vol. 5:389.

The Decrees of God Immovable. In March, 1842, Joseph Smith the Prophet instructed the Saints in the City of Nauvoo, on the first principles of the Gospel. In the course of his remarks he said:

God has made certain decrees which are fixed and immovable; for instance, God set the sun, the moon, and the stars in the heavens, and gave them their laws, conditions and bounds, which they cannot pass, except by His commandments; they all move in perfect harmony in their sphere and order, and are as lights, wonders and signs unto us. The sea also has its bounds which it cannot pass. God has set many signs on the earth, as well as in the heavens; for instance, the oak of the forest, the fruit of the tree, the herb of the field—all bear a sign that seed hath been planted there; for it is a decree of the Lord that every tree, plant, and herb bearing seed should bring forth of its kind, and cannot come forth after any other law or principle.

Upon the same principle do I contend that baptism is a sign ordained of God, for the believer in Christ to take upon himself in order to enter into the Kingdom of God, "for except ye are born of water and of the Spirit ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God," said the Savior. It is a sign and a commandment which God has set for man to enter into His kingdom. Those who seek to enter in any other way will seek in vain; for God will not receive them, neither will the angels acknowledge their works as accepted, for they have not obeyed the ordinances, nor attended to the signs which God ordained for the salvation of man, to prepare him for, and give him a title to, a celestial glory; and God hath decreed that all who will not obey His voice shall not escape the damnation of hell. What is the damnation of hell? To go with that society who have not obeyed His commandments.

Baptism is a sign to God, to angels, and to heaven that we do the will of God, and there is no other way beneath the heavens whereby God hath ordained for man to come to Him to be saved, and enter into the Kingdom of God, except faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, and any other course is in vain; then you have the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost.—D. H. C., Vol. 4:554-555.

Here the Prophet has pointed out the only way a man can become a citizen of the Church or kingdom of God.

I will conclude this subject with another quotation from the Prophet:

Every man lives for himself. Adam was made to open the ways of the world, and for dressing the garden. Noah was born to save seed of everything, when the earth was washed of its wickedness by the flood; and the Son of God came into the world to redeem it from the fall. But except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. This eternal truth settles the question of all men's religion. A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom, but he can never see the celestial Kingdom of God, without being born of water and of the Spirit. He may receive a glory like the moon, or a star, but he can never come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God. Wherefore, we again say search the revelations of God; study the prophecies and rejoice that God grants unto the world seers and prophets.—Evening and Morning Star, August 22, 1832.
