Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 37

CHURCH ORGANIZATION

The Church a House of Order. We have seen in the previous chapter, in the definition given of the Church, that there is an idea prevailing among a great many people professing to be followers of Christ, that the Church may be a house of confusion. We discover that the Christian world is a house of confusion with its conflicting creeds and organizations, yet there are those who say that this condition, while not according to "Divine intent," is one which the Lord permits and recognizes. He has said, however, and that in emphatic terms, that his house is a house of order, and not a house of confusion. The Church is a house of order because it is properly organized. It could not be properly organized if it were not built upon the plan which the Lord has given. If we take away any part of that organization which he has given for the perfecting of his work, then the Church would cease to be a house of order. Every part is necessary in its place, and no earthly power has the right to eliminate any of these essential parts or substitute something else in the stead thereof.

In the so-called Christian world we find that the organization of the Church as it was constituted in the days of Jesus Christ and his apostles has been greatly and fearfully changed. Men have "marred" the work according to their varied views and substituted according to their own convenience. This has been done without any revelation or sanction from on high, and, therefore, they are under condemnation, for the Lord has said that "no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law," and that "everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God."

By One Spirit Are We Baptized Into One Body. Writing to the members of the Church at Corinth Paul made the appeal that they be true to the Church and not become divided or deny the spiritual gifts. In the course of his instruction Paul used this forceful and convincing illustration:

For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body; so also is Christ.

For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.

For the body is not one member, but many.

If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?

And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?

If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?

But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him.

And if they were all one member, where were the body?

But now are they many members, yet but one body.

And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee; nor again, the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary:

And those members of the body, which we think to be less honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant honor; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.

For our comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered the body together, having given more abundant honor to that part which lacked:

That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another.

And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it.

Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.—I Cor. 12:1-27.

The oneness of the body of Christ must be maintained, or else it is not the body. Those who realize the weakness in divided Christianity are sometimes led to argue that Paul had reference to the divided sects and parties when he made mention of the members of the body. They overlook the fact that in speaking of the members he stressed the harmony which should exist among them that the body might function properly and, that there be no schism between its parts. The Christian world today is composed of many parts, but they are not parts of one body, but of many bodies. Moreover, the gifts which are spoken of in the first part of this discourse to the Corinthians, are not among their churches. Neither do they show by their fruits their unity. The World War was fought between conflicting so-called Christian nations, thus proving that they were not in any sense parts of the Church of Jesus Christ. "And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?" was the pleading of our Lord with the people, and then he added:

Whoso cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I will shew you to whom he is like:

He is like a man which built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock; and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it; for it was founded upon a rock.

But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great.—Luke 6:46-49. Compare Matt. 7:16-29.

Of Necessity there are Presiding Officers. The fact has been referred to several times that no government can be directed properly or exist without constituted officers. No government can exist without an official head; neither can it exist with a head alone. Even in despotic governments, the despot who rules must have aids to assist him in his ministry, even in the accomplishment of evil. In the Church, Christ is the Head, and he has called to his ministry, to assist in his kingdom, many officers, and has defined the special duties of each. All of these are necessary to the success of the work. No office can, by the power of man, be abolished; neither has man the right to add thereunto in the ordinations of the Priesthood. All of the offices have been determined by revelation and cannot be changed without commandment from the Head. There may be called, however, many helps in the government of the Church. The officers of the auxiliary organizations are of this class. All of these labor under, and are directed by, the officers in the Priesthood. The Lord said in the revelation on Priesthood: "Of necessity there are presidents, or presiding officers growing out of, or appointed of or from among those who are ordained to the several offices in these two Priesthoods."

The necessity for these presiding officers is too apparent to require any argument. Let it be understood by these presiding officers, however, that they are no better than those over whom they preside, simply because they have been called to preside. In the world it is frequently thought by those who are called to positions of presidency or grave responsibility, that they are better than those whom they direct. This feeling should not exist within the Church. Presiding officers are called because there must be directing authority there as in every other organization. The faithful member who submits to the rule and direction, in righteousness, of the presiding authority, and is true to every covenant and obligation, is just as worthy before the Lord as the presiding officer.

The fact that a man is called to preside over his fellow-members does not entitle him to a greater exaltation. If he should fail to magnify his calling, he may find himself debased. The magnifying of a calling will, of course, accrue to the interest of the individual who is faithful; but lest we should boast when authority of presidency is bestowed upon us, and we be led to think that we are superior to our fellow-members because of that fact, the Lord has definitely and most emphatically informed us that we may receive no greater reward than they.

The Leveling Influence of the Gospel. On the sixteenth day of February, in the year 1832, the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were privileged to gaze into the eternities. The Lord granted them a vision concerning the salvation of man the equal of which cannot be found anywhere else in the world. The purposes of the Lord in relation to the final destiny of the entire human family were shown to them, and they were commanded to write the vision that it might be preserved. They saw the punishment, in part, of the sons of Perdition, and were told who they would be. The inhabitants of the telestial world were also described, and their kingdom revealed as one into which innumerable hosts of mankind would go. The assignments in this, the least of the kingdoms of redemption, are given to the vicious and unclean inhabitants of the world. They have degrees of glory among them of varied and unnumbered measure according to the calculations of mortal man. Into the terrestrial kingdom will go several other classes who are not entitled to the exaltation in the kingdom of God. Here will be gathered the honorable men of the earth—men who have kept themselves clean morally, who have been honest, just and kind. Likewise, those who have been without law and others who have "not been valiant in the testimony of Jesus"—hence have been members of the Church upon whom responsibility has been placed, but have not honored that responsibility—will also be assigned to this kingdom. The third and highest kingdom—the celestial—is where God and Christ dwell. There are, even in this kingdom, different degrees of glory, but it is the privilege of every member of the Church, who will receive and be true to every covenant and obligation, to gain the exaltation. All who gain the highest exaltation, the Lord has said, are made "equal in power, and in might, and in dominion." All power is given unto them, they become "gods, even the sons of God, wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's." These are made priests and kings.

This great honor and glory is promised to all who will obey the fulness of divine law. The presiding officer may obtain it if he is faithful to his trust; if he is not he may not receive it. The humble member, if he is willing to abide by all the covenants and regulations, will also receive this reward. So we see that the presiding officer and the member over whom he presides, if both are equally faithful and obedient, receive the same reward—"all that the Father hath." One is not above the other for they are made "equal in power, and in might, and in dominion."

Duties of Presiding Officers. It is not the purpose of this writing to go into detail in relation to the various quorums and the general duties of the officers and members holding the Priesthood. These things have been treated many times and are to be found in many places. [^1] In the Doctrine and Covenants may be found the word of the Lord covering the duties of the men who are ordained and explaining the character of the several offices. These sections and parts of sections, should be carefully read and understood by all members of the Church.

The duty of the presiding officers of the Church is to direct the work of the Lord in all of its departments. We have learned that the great work and glory of the Lord is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Outside of the Church this immortality will come, for immortality is the free gift of God to every creature. In order to obtain the resurrection and immortality—the power to live forever—a person does not have to become a member of the Church. This will come to all, "both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous, and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost," (Alma 11:44) for this is the gift of God through the atonement of Jesus Christ.

To obtain eternal life, a person must abide in the law of the Gospel. This great gift cannot be obtained outside of the Church which the Father and the Son have established. It comes only through obedience and willingness to live in humble and constant harmony with the laws of God. It is the duty of the officers of the Church to see that the members so live and are worthy of this blessing.

Man's Relationship to God. The Prophet Joseph Smith has taught us through the revelations he received the true relationship of man to God. From his teachings the following is taken:

All men know that they must die. And it is important that we should understand the reasons and causes of our exposure to the vicissitudes of life and of death, and the designs and purposes of God in our coming into the world, our suffering here, and our departure hence. What is the object of our coming into existence, then dying and falling away, to be here no more? It is but reasonable to suppose that God would reveal something in reference to the matter, and it is a subject we ought to study more than any other. We ought to study it day and night, for the world is ignorant in reference to their true condition and relation. If we have any claim on our Heavenly Father for anything, it is for knowledge of this important subject. Could we read and comprehend all that has been written from the days of Adam, on the relation of man to God and the angels in a future state, we should know very little about it. Reading the experience of others, or the revelation given to them, can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God. Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose. Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject.

We are only capable of comprehending that certain things exist, which we may acquire by certain fixed principles. If men would acquire salvation, they have got to be subject before they leave this world, to certain rules and principles, which were fixed by an unalterable decree before the world was.

The disappointment of hopes and expectations at the resurrection would be indescribably dreadful.

The organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth. Hence the importance of embracing and subscribing to principles of eternal truth by all men upon the earth that expect eternal life.—D. H. C. Vol. 6:50.

Knowledge Saves Mankind. In another place the Prophet says: "If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses, for if we are not drawing towards God in principle, we are going from him and drawing towards the devil." Moreover, there is a difference between seeing the kingdom of God and entering into it. Here again we are instructed by the Prophet: "It is one thing to see the kingdom of God," he says, "and another thing to enter into it. We must have a change of heart to see the kingdom of God, and subscribe to the articles of adoption to enter therein."

The Church government is given that we might, by virtue of its blessings and ordinances obtain perfect knowledge. The fulness of exaltation is only found with in the Church organization and is based upon obedience to its laws. "There is a law," we are told, "irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundation of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated: and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated."—D. and C. 130:20-21.

Again it is written:

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness.

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day.—D. and C. 50:23-24.

The Church is the custodian of truth and light, and while men may be blessed with knowledge outside of the Church, they cannot obtain the fulness unless they "continue in God," and they cannot continue in God unless they are in his organized society. Jesus declared himself to be the Spirit of Truth, for he is the possessor of the fulness of truth. This same fulness is promised to all the obedient, but they cannot be obedient unless they "come unto God" through the organization of his Church. It is also written:

And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments.

He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things.—D. and C. 93:27-28.

The Purpose of Man's Existence. The restored Gospel has given to the world the perfect understanding concerning man's existence. It has marked out with some detail where he is from, why he is here and where he is going, and why. The Book of Mormon declares: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." The purpose of the mortal life is, then, to prepare man for joy in the eternal existence. The fulness of joy, however, cannot come outside of the Church organization. Again I quote from the Prophet Joseph Smith:

Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God. But we cannot keep all the commandments without first knowing them, and we cannot expect to know all, or more than we now know unless we comply with or keep those we have already received. That which is wrong under one circumstance, may be, and often is, right under another.

God said, "Thou shalt not kill;" at another time He said, "Thou shalt utterly destroy." This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed. Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire. If we seek first the Kingdom of God, all good things will be added. * * *

He never will institute an ordinance or give a commandment to his people that is not calculated in its nature to promote that happiness which he designed and which will not end in the greatest amount of good and glory to those who become the recipients of his law and ordinances.

Blessings offered, but rejected, are no longer blessings, but become like the talent hid in the earth by the wicked and slothful servant; the proffered good returns to the giver; the blessing is bestowed on those who will receive and occupy; for unto him that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundantly, but unto him that hath not or will not receive, shall be taken away that which he hath, or might have had.—D. H. C. Vol. 5:134.

The Value of Church Membership. With a proper knowledge of the Church and its organization, and what it means in the salvation of mankind, it is very strange to understand how lightly some members of the Church hold their membership. They move from place to place without one thought of their Church standing. Some have actually kept themselves aloof in unknown places for fear they might be called upon to perform some service, or to avoid some responsibility which they fear they would be called upon to do if they were known. Others have hid from their fellow members because of sin. Whatever the cause may be, it shows a lack of understanding and appreciation of their standing before the Lord as members of his Church. President Joseph F. Smith once said: "My standing in the Church is worth to me more than this life—ten thousand times. For in this I have life everlasting. In this I have the glorious promise of the association of my loved ones throughout all eternity." At another time he said:

Some people may not care very much whether their names are recorded or not but this comes from ignorance of the consequences. If their names are not recorded they will not only be cut off from the assistance which they would be entitled to from the Church, if they needed it, but they will be cut off from the ordinances of the house of God; they will be cut asunder from their dead and from their fathers who have been faithful, or from those who shall come after them who shall be faithful, and they will be appointed their portion with the unbelievers, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. It means that you will be cut off from your fathers and mothers, from your husbands, your wives, your children, and that you shall have no portion or lot or inheritance in the Kingdom of God, both in time and in eternity. It has a very serious and far-reaching effect.—Gospel Doctrine, pp. 133-134.

He that receiveth my law and doeth it, the same is my disciple; and he that saith he receiveth it and doeth it not, the same is not my disciple, and shall be cast out from among you;

For it is not meet that the things which belong to the children of the kingdom should be given to them that are not worthy, or to dogs, or the pearls to be cast before swine.—D. and C. 41:5-6.

"Wo unto them who are cut off from my church," the Lord has said, "for the same are overcome of the world. Wherefore let every man beware lest he do that which is not in truth and righteousness before me."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] For a discussion of the duties of the officers and the nature of the offices in the Church the reader is referred to the following: "Discourses of Brigham Young;" "Gospel Doctrine," by President Joseph F. Smith; "Articles of Faith," by James E. Talmage; "Lesser Priesthood and Church Government," by Joseph B. Keeler, and many other discourses and publications which deal with these matters.
