Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 38

NATIONS OF DESTINY

The Lord Rules in the Nations. When the Israelites came out of Egypt under the leadership of Moses, they were organized in a divine theocracy. The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, was their Lawgiver, and had they hearkened to the prophets who were sent among them, they could have continued as a nation in favor with the Lord unto this day. When they turned from the ways of truth, rejected their prophets, and forgot the warnings given them by Moses, the Lord permitted other nations to come upon them to vex them. The Philistines, Moabites, and other peoples who remained in the borders of Canaan, frequently served the purpose of the Lord in punishing Israel. After the kingdom of Israel had departed from the Lord so far that its people seemed to be beyond repentance, the Lord permitted the Assyrians to carry them off captives into Assyria. It is likely that the Assyrians played their part in this captivity without one single thought that in doing so they were fulfilling the will of the Lord, pronounced by the prophets since the days of Moses. Their prophets declared that they should be carried out of the land, which was given to Abraham as an everlasting inheritance, when the time should come that they would not keep the Lord's statutes and commandments.

About one hundred and thirty years later, when the Babylonians carried the people of Judah captive, it is more than likely that these Babylonians were imbued with the impression that they were carrying out their own ambition to rule the surrounding nations and make and keep their empire the one great kingdom in the world. They had no thought that they were furthering the purposes of Jehovah, yet they were fulfilling the prophetic warnings given to Israel by Jeremiah. In Babylon the rebellious Jews were disciplined, and in some respects trained and benefited, by this captivity. It is a fact that it cured them of their former weakness of idol worship. Moreover, this punishment was designed, as a punishment for their transgressions and rebellion. They had persecuted and stoned their prophets. They had turned to the evil practices of the neighboring tribes, as their brethren of the kingdom of Israel had done before them. Nebuchadnezzar and his successors were instruments in the hands of the Lord in fulfilling the words of the Jewish prophets.

Accomplishing the Lord's Purposes. Isaiah, more than one hundred years before the birth of Cyrus, the Persian, called him by name in prophecy and spoke of him as the Lord's anointed; "That saith to Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundations shall be laid. Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut: I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight."—Isaiah 44:28; 45:1-2.

This is a strange saying predicting the return of Judah, even before their captivity, by one hundred years. The Lord declared the very name of the king who should be the instrument in his hands in the restoration of Judah and the building of his Sanctuary in Jerusalem. Cyrus, of course, had no idea that he was preparing the way for the fulfilling of this prophecy when his Persian armies conquered Babylon. So remarkable is this prediction by Isaiah, that the faithless and worldly-minded critics of the modernistic school have declared that it could not have been written by Isaiah. They have, therefore, ascribed this prediction to some later writer who, they say, made the record after the accomplishment of these events. It is well known that the Persians entered Babylon by turning the great river Euphrates from its natural channel and then entered the city through the river bed, thus taking the revelling and besotted city by surprise. In this way the two-leaved, gates were opened and the loins of kings were loosed, and the opposition to the Persian advances successfully overcome. And this was revealed to Isaiah and he was commanded to write it more than one hundred years before the event. Moreover, why should it be thought something strange for the Lord to name a man before he is born? He knows the end from the beginning. It is extreme folly and ignorance to declare that the Lord does not have such power, or, having it, never uses it. We know that Joseph Smith was named, as was his father, thousands of years before he and his father were born.

Cyrus, in keeping with these predictions, fulfilled all of the purposes of the Lord. These wonderful predictions were shown to him, and he marveled. He saw the wonderful spirit and power of the captive Jewish prophets. He accepted their words and was pleased to send the Jews back to Jerusalem and gave the command that their sacred city and its Temple should be rebuilt. All of this was done under the direction and commandment of the Persian rulers, for to this end had they been called and this inspiration was upon them.

The Part of Rome in the Lord's Designs. The Israelites were the most favored people, in their time, upon the face of the earth. The sons of Jacob, son of Isaac and grandson of Abraham, became the heads of the twelve tribes of Israel. The Lord placed upon these tribes the promises made to Abraham. They were the beneficiaries of Abraham's faithfulness. Upon them the Lord bestowed the power of the Priesthood and the privileges of salvation. He gave them inspired prophets to teach and guide them that they might continually dwell under his benign influence. He gave them sacred laws and was willing to be their King and Ruler perpetually. They were to be a peculiar people whose customs and government were to transcend the customs and government of any other people in the nature of their wisdom, importance and righteousness. Moses, shortly before he was taken away, said to them:

Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to possess it.

Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.

For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?

And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day?

We have already stated in another place, that the Lord promised to scatter them and bring their enemies upon them, if they failed to heed these counsels. Among these punishments it was predicted that the Lord would send against them a nation from far, "from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand. A nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favor to the young." It was to be a nation of iron whose mission would be to scatter them.

When the Romans came and fulfilled this prophecy, it was, so they thought, just a part of their work of conquest. The ambition of Rome, like that of the great nations of Babylon, Persia, and Macedonia under Alexander, was to conquer the known world. They sought for worldly power and dominion. The Roman thought himself superior in every way to the people of other tribes and nations. These same ideas have influenced the world in every age. The strong feel their superiority over the weak. The early fathers who settled this American continent felt that way. They were superior in power and knowledge to the native Lamanites, and that they were superior they took for granted, and so felt they were entitled to conquer, or drive the wild men from their lands and possess them. So it was with Rome. By superior force the Romans felt themselves to be superior, intellectually and every other way, to other peoples.

In subjecting the Jews to their rule they were carrying out their great policy of world conquest. Moreover, Palestine lay in the direct route between the west and the east and for that reason was to be subdued. Little did the Romans think that they were instruments in the hands of the Lord in the conquest of Palestine. It is easily seen in this latter day that such a condition was necessary at the time of the birth of Christ and during his ministry. It was revealed to Nephi that the Jews, at that particular time, were the most wicked of all people upon the earth. Having the Roman yoke upon their necks restricted the Jews and granted freedom to Christ and his disciples, which freedom would not have been exercised had the Jews possessed their ancient independence. Moreover, the Romans were appointed by divine decree to scourge and punish Judah for the rejection of the Messiah, and through them commenced the great work of dispersion which was continued until the present day. So we might go on with further detail citing from the pages of history how, as Isaiah said, the Lord has put hooks in the noses of nations and bridles in their lips, to turn them in the way he would have them go.

"I will Lift Up Mine Hand to the Gentiles." Promises were made to the Gentiles in the blessings conferred upon Abraham. In part these blessings have been fulfilled, and are now being fulfilled, through the scattering of Israel and the mingling of the blood of Israel among the Gentiles. Even in the punishments which were meted out to these chosen people who had been the recipients of the greatest blessings, we find much good. While they were being punished at the same time they were leavening the Gentile lump with the blood of Abraham, according to the promise. The result is that the Gentiles are also of the house of Israel by descent. Particularly is this true of the nations of Protestant Europe and America.

In the gathering of Israel in these last days, the Gospel has first gone to the Gentiles. Ephraim, who was rebellious in former times and mixed himself among the nations, is the first to be honored in this last dispensation. From the Gentile nations he is being gathered, and the time will come when he will be called upon to minister to his fellows of the other tribes, including gathered Judah.

Zechariah declared that four horns (nations) were responsible for the scattering of Israel, and four carpenters (nations) will be instrumental in the gathering of Israel. While it may be a matter of speculation in attempting to name these four carpenters, nevertheless it is plain to see that Great Britain is one nation which is called upon to play a leading part. The following prediction is from Isaiah and was spoken of the gathering of Israel:

Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people; and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

And kings shall be thy nursing fathers and their queens thy nursing mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their face towards the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.—Isaiah 49:22-23.

Britain's Mission in the Return of the Jews. Today we see the fulfillment of this prophecy in the gathering of the Jews to Palestine. It is very evident that Great Britain is acting the part of one of these carpenters, and, as a leading nation of the Gentiles, is carrying their sons and daughters back to their ancient home of Israel. This is their right, for the blood of Israel is abundantly distributed among the British people. No nation has loved liberty and exercised more tolerance than Great Britain. Wherever her conquests have led her, the people have been benefited. Their government has been bettered, their liberties preserved and founded upon British law which has stimulated and influenced the world for good.

Today the Jews are returning to Palestine. In a marvelous manner we see the promises, made by all the prophets concerning the return of Israel, being fulfilled. This return of the Jews to Palestine is occurring as repidly as they can be cared for by those who have the control over that land. The set time to favor Judah and Ephraim has come. For one hundred years Ephraim has been gathering to the land of his inheritance. Since the World War Judah has been gathering to the land of his inheritance. The Arabs, kinsmen of Judah, who have occupied the land for many generations, are complaining at the return of the Jews. In the bitterness of their spirit, the Arabs are harassing the ancient people and their protectors. Notwithstanding this, Britain is a nursing father to the Jews and is protecting them in their return. Does the great powerful nation of Great Britain, which has been favored of the Lord for more than a thousand years, and which still has a magnificent and important work to perform, realize to the full the part she is playing in the divine purpose of this gathering? If she realizes it, and in part we may say she does, her understanding is only partial, not fully comprehending the true greatness of that mission. On the shoulders of the Philistines shall Israel continue to fly, until the purposes of the Lord are all fulfilled.

Great Britain is a wonderful nation. She has been greatly blessed and guided. Her mission is not ended. The Lord is calling on her now, to fight his battles and carry out his designs, and will continue to do so if she will continue to serve him until he comes to reign.
