Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 39

THE MISSION OF THE UNITED STATES

The United States and Its Mission. While it is very clear that the United States is not the great nation which is to come, known as the Kingdom of God, yet it, too, is a nation with a mission. It has been, from the beginning, divinely favored of the Lord. It still has a great work to perform, and every loyal citizen should live to help in the performance of that mission, by upholding its constitutional law and by righteousness. Moreover, he should follow the counsel of the Almighty and see that good men are sought for, and good men and wise men chosen, to fill all important positions. "When the wicked rule the people mourn," is a saying verily true. A great deal in relation to the mission of the United States was fulfilled in the establishment of religious and personal freedom and extending protection to its citizens. It is a divinely given right that all men should have the privilege of worshiping according to the dictates of conscience. This principle was a wonderful contributing factor in bringing back to the world the Gospel with all its keys and powers in this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.

A Mighty Nation Among the Gentiles. The Book of Mormon speaks of a mighty nation which was to be raised up by the power of the Lord among the Gentiles upon this land which is choice above all other lands. This great nation was to be an example to all other nations. It had the mission to teach other powers the principle of freedom and religious liberty. The United States has been a wonderful force in restraining the nations of the Old World in their natural and ancient propensity of oppressing the weak and enslaving the innocent. It was from this American land, and from the great nation raised up to the Gentiles upon it, that the doctrine of the "voice of the people" has been proclaimed with such power that it has been heard and its influence felt in all the world. By its proclamation and example, representative government has been benefited and the freedom of the people in other lands increased. While it is true that back in the days of wicked King John, the early dawning of freedom for the downtrodden appeared, it remained for the United States, through the inspiration of the Almighty which rested upon the founders, to proclaim the fulness of political and religious emancipation from the chains which bound the souls of men so long. It is here, as our martyred president proclaimed, where the Lord established "government of the people, by the people, and for the people," and we are under obligation to ourselves and our fellow men of all nations, to see that this principle does not perish from the earth. Six hundred years before the birth of Christ the Lord declared that in the last days the land of America—called then the promised land—should be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles.

There Shall Be No Kings upon the Land. Joseph Smith never could have said by his own wisdom that there "shall be no kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles." Neither had he the power to enforce it had he said it. When the Book of Mormon was translated the nations of Europe were monarchies. The tendency in the school of statesmanship was towards monarchial authority. It is true that our republic had been established and that the feeling in this land was repulsive to any doctrine tending toward the rule of kings. But the proclamation of the Lord uttered six hundred years before the birth of Christ was that this land should be free from the domination of kings; that the Gentile nations upon it should rule themselves. This commandment and prophecy has been carried out until this day, and we have reason to believe that it will continue indefinitely.

The attempt has been made to establish the rule of kings in America, but these attempts have failed with disastrous results to those who inaugurated the schemes. This had to be, for the Lord, has said: "For he that raiseth up a king against me, shall perish, for I, the Lord, the king of heaven, will be their king, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear my words."

The Land of Zion. This land of America has been named by the Almighty the Land of Zion. It is reserved for a righteous people. Therefore let the Gentiles who have an inheritance upon it take heed that they do not turn from Jesus Christ who is the King of this land, and who has granted to them the measure of freedom which they now possess and which may be continued unto them through their humility and faithfulness. If we will be true to our Redeemer then this land will be a land of Zion unto us. Zion is the pure in heart. The land of Zion is dedicated and consecrated as the home of the pure in heart. The Lord has been very jealous of this land in the past, and he does not change. If we are not pure in heart, it will not be a land of Zion unto us.

"And I Will Fortify This Land Against All Nations." This prediction cannot have reference to the building of great forts and embattlements along the borders of America, for America is wonderfully free from such things as these. It is true that there are to be found defense works in strategical places along the sea coast of the land in many places. To the everlasting credit of the United States and her neighbors on the north and south, there does not stand between these nations a single fortification. In full confidence we expect to live at peace. The Lord has, nevertheless, fortified the whole of America against the greedy hands of aggression by any of the powers of the other half of the world. When America was discovered the powerful nations began to take possession and to divide up the territory among themselves. It is a very remarkable thing that can be accounted for in but one way, that they have been forced to relinquish most of these holdings to the peoples residing upon the land, who are in many cases, weaker than themselves. The only way to account for such a strange thing is in the fact that the Lord so willed it. While Canada is a part of the great British Empire, yet this colony governs itself and is to all intents and purposes a free and independent nation.

Why have the nations lost their hold on America? Because they tried to dominate it and set up their unjust and monarchial rule contrary to the proclamation of the Lord that this land should be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles.

Protected by Divine Power. A recent writer declared that the American people are not skilled in governmental knowledge and the art of diplomacy, yet, for some reason, this country is protected by some unseen power against their own mistakes and ignorance. Just why this is, the observer does not know. From this writing the following is taken:

Not without reason, Europeans cried out that this government was anarchy let loose in the world. Nearer to anarchy than this, no government can come and be a government. What future could be predicted for such a lack of government, in such a situation.

This was written of the Thirteen Colonies at the close of the Revolutionary war, when they seemed to be falling apart and without any common or united purpose. The article continues:

In less than 100 years France and Russia had vanished from this continent. Spain had yielded Florida, Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, California. England had been pushed back on the north. The whole vast extent of the country had been covered by one nation, a tumultuous multitude of men under the weakest form of government in the world. How did this happen?

The characteristic of American history is that everything appears to happen by accident. Nothing seems planned or intended. Other nations adopt policies and pursue them; their history is formed by the clash of these policies. But America moves by a kind of indirection. Always in American history the unintended, the apparently irrational, happens.—Rose W. Land, in the "Saturday Evening Post."

The faltering and apparently misdirected acts of this nation have been overruled for good. The reason is clear to every Latter-day Saint. It is because this nation has been given a mission among the nations of the earth, and to be the protector of the weaker nations upon this land.

The Monroe Doctrine. The greatest and most powerful fortification in America is the "Monroe Doctrine." A full discussion of this doctrine is given in another place, so we merely refer to it briefly in passing at this point. It might appear to the casual observer that this doctrine came by chance, as many things, it seems, have done, but this is not so. It was the inspiration of the Almighty which rested upon John Quincy Adams, Thomas Jefferson and other statesmen, and which finally found authoritative expression in the message of President James Monroe to Congress in the year 1823.

The spirit of this doctrine was in the blood of the people of the United States. Weak as the United States was at this time, it appears that this proclamation by its President which was sent to all the world, was beyond the nature of boldness, it was extremely rash. How could we enforce it against the powers of the Eastern World? With some grumblings and a show of displeasure the nations of Europe did not take to this proclamation very kindly, but they did respect it. Today it has been firmly established and is recognized, at least outwardly, by the nations. There have been some occasions when it seemed it would lead the United States to war, but every administration since that day of President Monroe, has maintained this proclamation. We can imagine what might have happened many times in the past if we had no such doctrine. The weaker nations on this hemisphere would have been swallowed up by the greedy powers in other parts. It has been respected, not only because of the fear other powers have had of incurring the hostility of the United States, but more than that, because the God of this land proclaimed liberty to the Gentiles upon this land. There shall be no kings raised up unto the Gentiles on the land of Zion, and the mission given to the United States, by divine decree, is to see that this commandment is respected.

"He That Fighteth Against Zion Shall Perish." "Wherefore, he that fighteth against Zion, both Jew and Gentile, both bond and free, both male and female, shall perish," is the word of the Lord spoken by Jacob, brother of Nephi. The term Zion has several meanings. It refers to the whole American hemisphere, for the Lord designated this land to be the land of Zion. The strict and definite meaning of the word is "the pure in heart." The pure in heart have been promised, by the word of the Lord, protection in the days of wickedness, when the judgments of the Almighty are passing over the nations. Nevertheless, Zion, as that term has reference to the members of the Church collectively, shall also be punished "if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her," the Lord has said. He will "visit her with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fires." All of these things will be withheld while the nations are being punished, if the members of the Church will keep faithfully their commandments. If they will not, then we have received the warning that we, like the rest of the world, shall suffer His wrath in justice.

Protection Guaranteed on Conditions of Righteousness. From the beginning to the present, the Lord has fought the battles of the nations on the land of Zion. He will continue to do so as long as they will remain humble, but when they reject the counsel of the Holy One of Israel—as they are doing today—and continue in wickedness until their cup is full—then destruction will come upon them. Our great nation is guaranteed protection against all other nations on the one condition, that of righteousness. When we, as a nation, turn away from the Living God to the excessive practice of abominations and wickedness, then protection will be withdrawn. It is decreed by the Lord that the time will come when he will make an end of all man-made governments.

And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations;

That the cry of the saints, and of the blood of the saints, shall cease to come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabbaoth, from the earth, to be avenged of their enemies.

Wherefore, stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the day of the Lord come; for behold, it cometh quickly, saith the Lord. Amen.
