Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 40

THE KINGDOM OF GOD

The Earth is the Lord's. At the beginning of this discussion the question of the ownership of the earth and all things upon it was considered. Every person professing belief in Jesus Christ as the Redeemer of the world and the Only Begotten Son of God, by and through whom all things were created, must agree with the Psalmist: "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein." Since this is true the time must come when the present order of things must change and a perfect universal and divine theocracy be established upon the earth, never again to be destroyed or overcome by rebellious men who seek their own selfish ends and the usurpation of political power. It cannot be successfully disputed that the rightful Ruler of this earth does not at this present time occupy his place of power and honor which belongs to him. If he ruled upon the earth today, and his law was supreme and enforced among all peoples, there could be no more war, no strife, no envying or wickedness of any kind among the people. There would be only happiness and peace for every man would seek the welfare and eternal blessing of every other man among every race and people.

Perilous Times. It is very apparent that we are living in perilous times. Rulers in some of the nations are despotic and dictatorial; the freedom of many peoples has been taken from them even as it was in ancient days of monarchial despotisms. The freedom and liberty which by divine right belong to the people in many places have been destroyed and they have become pawns in the hands of wicked, unscrupulous dictators. Jealous nations are watching each other fearful that some political, territorial, or trade advantage, will be seized upon by some rival power to the disadvantage of themselves. With greedy eyes some nations are gazing upon the territory of weaker nations and seeking a pretext by which they may pounce upon them and the coveted territory thus be seized. The day has come when fear has entered into the hearts of worldly rulers. The whole world is in commotion and a fearful looking forth to the time when war shall again be poured out without measure upon the inhabitants of the earth. Even in this land, dedicated by the shedding of blood to liberty, and where the hand of the Lord guided our fathers in righteous endeavor to establish freedom of conscience, equality and justice, for all the oppressed, we find strife and commotion. Organizations are at work intent on the overthrow of constitutional government and the setting up of some such system as today prevails in some distant parts of the earth. The liberties of the people are threatened. The Constitution of the United States is in grave danger, as it was predicted by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The United States government, as it was established by our fathers, is the best form of government which the mind of man has been able to create. Latter-day Saints know that this is the result of the inspiration of the Almighty as well as the wisdom of man. While the founders of our country profited by the experience of the past for many generations, it is also true that the Spirit of the Lord was the dominating factor in the framing of the Constitution of the United States. It is the duty of all members of the Church to uphold and sustain this government and to stand by the Constitution and preserve it from all unwarranted and destructive attacks. This is our duty until Christ shall come to take his place as the rightful Ruler of all the earth. The fact remains that while we have a government here, the fundamental laws of which were directed by and given to us through the inspiration of the Lord, nevertheless the government is not the Kingdom of God which eventually is to be set up and have dominion over all the earth. No one need take offense at this saying, for the men and women in our nation who are the most law abiding and patriotic hold to this view, which has been proclaimed by divine commandment, and they, like the righteous in times of old, confidently look for the coming of a country, and "a city whose builder and maker is God."

The Kingdom and the Church. The expression "Kingdom of God," and "Kingdom of Heaven," are used throughout the New Testament and other scriptures interchangeably. These terms, at times, have reference to the Church, and at other times, to the kingdom which shall be set up in power to have governmental control over all the earth when Christ comes to reign. In a revelation given to the Church in October, 1831, the Lord said:

Call upon the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth.

Wherefore, may the kingdom of God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thine enemies may be subdued; for thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever, Amen.—D. and C. 65:5-6.

The distinction here made clarifies the organized work of the Lord upon the earth—the Church, from the kingdom of Christ which is in heaven. The time will come when the kingdom in heaven. will come and be united with the kingdom upon the earth, according to the words of our Redeemer and his prophets, and then they will be joined as one. In that day will be fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah and Micah, "for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."

The following passages have a clear reference to the Church:

Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet, Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.

But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.

When our Lord sent his disciples out to teach the people, he said unto them:

And as ye go, preach, saying: the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are placed before you:

And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.

But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say,

Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.

When the Pharisees accused him of casting out devils by the power of Beelzebub, the prince of the devils, Jesus answered them:

And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges.

But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you.

* * * * *

And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come, he answered them, and said, The kingdom of God cometh not with observation;

Neither shall they say, Lo, here! or Lo, there! For, behold, the kingdom of God has already come unto you.—Inspired Scriptures.

All of these scriptures, and many more that could be cited, clearly have reference to the Church as the Kingdom of God set up on the earth with the authority and keys of salvation. There are many other passages referring to the Kingdom of God, or the kingdom of heaven, which have reference to the kingdom which will be set up in power to govern all the earth as a political kingdom. The following are a few of these passages:

But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.

For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his angels, and then he shall reward every man according to his works.

Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.

When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory:

And before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats.

And he shall set the sheep on the right, but the goats on the left.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

When Christ stood before Pilate, accused by the Jews of sedition because he claimed to be a king, Pilate said unto him: "Art thou then King of the Jews?"

Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?

Pilate answered, Am I a Jew: thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done?

Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from thence.

The parables of the sower and the tares, the ten virgins and the husbandman and the servants with the talents, have reference to the Kingdom of God which is to be set up when Christ comes the second time to rule upon the earth. Likewise the instruction given to the disciples, as recorded in the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, concerning the second coming of Christ has to do with his kingdom in power upon the earth. The ancient apostles had a perfect understanding that Christ was coming to reign on the earth for one thousand years. In the epistles they dwell upon this great event with warnings to the saints to watch in faithfulness and endure to the end.

The Second Coming of Christ. The Savior taught his disciples that he would come to earth again in the last days in power and great glory to set up his kingdom and bring to pass the end of the world. By end of the world is not meant the end of the earth, but the end of the reign of Satan, or of wickedness. Isaiah by the spirit of prophecy speaks of the second coming, and declares that at that day Christ will come in the clouds in the clouds of heaven with dyed garments, glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength. And when the inhabitants of the earth ask, "Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine vat?" He will answer: "I have trodden the wine press alone: and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come."—Isaiah 63:1-4. Compare D. and C. 133:63-74.

Since the fall of Adam and his ejection from the Garden of Eden, Satan has usurped authority and dominion upon the earth. This he could not have done if the children of Adam had not hearkened to him and followed him in his wickedness. In the wisdom of the Almighty, this domination by the forces of evil with Lucifer at their head has been permitted that men might be tried and proved according to the plan declared before the foundation of the earth was laid. The time is near, even at our doors, when this unrighteous domination of the earth and its inhabitants, governments, kingdoms, and peoples, by Satan shall come to an end. No one knows better than Lucifer that the days of his power are near their end. For this reason he is raging in the hearts of the people and stirring them up to anger and strife, as predicted by Nephi. For this reason the whole earth is filled with violence which will increase until Christ comes as the Prince of Peace to set all things in order. Shortly after the restoration of the Church, the Lord said:

For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion.

And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world.

The time has now come when peace has been taken from the earth, and the devil has, today, power over his own dominion. That dominion will soon cease to be. The other part of this prophecy is about to be fulfilled. The scourge of the Lord is now passing over the nations, as he promised it should in the day of wickedness, "and the report thereof" is vexing all people, but we have been told that "it shall not be stayed until the Lord come."

Yea, thus saith the Spirit: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, for the kingdom of heaven is soon at hand; yea, the Son of God cometh in his glory, in his might, majesty, power, and dominion. Yea, my beloved brethren, I say unto you, that the Spirit saith: Behold the glory of the King of all the earth; and also the King of heaven shall very soon shine forth among all the children of men.

And also the Spirit saith unto me, yea, crieth unto me with a mighty voice, saying: Go forth and say unto this people—Repent, for except ye repent ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of heaven.—Alma 5:50-51.
