Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 42

DESTINY OF THE EARTH

"Worlds Without Number." In the visions given to Moses when he was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain, the Lord revealed the history of the creation of this earth. In this vision "Moses saw God face to face," and the Lord said to him: "Behold, thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands, but not all, for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease. Wherefore, no man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth." So the Lord opened the spiritual eyes of Moses and he "beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marveled and wondered." While the voice of the Lord was still speaking, "Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God. And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore.

As the vision continued Moses was given the privilege of looking also into the great expanse of heaven, and there he beheld innumerable worlds, and as he looked, he marveled, and he said unto the Lord: "Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?" And the Lord answered:

For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten.

And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many.

But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them.

And it came to pass that Moses spake unto the Lord saying: Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content.

And the Lord God spake unto Moses, saying: The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine.

And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words.—Moses 1:31-38.

Some of the Stars are very Great. Centuries before the time of Moses, visions of similar character were given to Abraham while he was in Ur of the Chaldees. The Lord gave him the Urim and Thummim by which the heavens were revealed to him. He also stood in the presence of the Almighty and talked with him face to face, and Abraham saw that some of the stars were very great, and that one of them was nearest to the throne of God. There were also many other great ones which were near to the throne, and the Lord said to him: "These are the governing ones; and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God: I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest." Then the Lord said "that Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest. This is the reckoning of the Lord's time, according to the reckoning of Kolob." Abraham was then informed that there was a principle of divine mathematics by which be might know when he looked into the heavens, that where there was one planet, or world, above the earth in its magnitude and time of reckoning, that there was still another above that and so on until you come to the throne of God. Kolob was near the throne and was the greatest, the Lord said, "of all the Kokaubeam." [^1]

And thus there shall be the reckoning of the time of one planet above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob, which Kolob, is after the reckoning of the Lord's time; which Kolob is set nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all those planets which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest.

And it is given unto thee to know the set time of all the stars that are set to give light, until thou come near unto the throne of God.—Abraham 3:9-10.

"Island Universes." Modern astronomers have confirmed the teachings of Abraham and Moses in relation to the greatness of the universe and the innumerable stars extending in all directions as far as telescopes, and other instruments of man's invention, are able to reach. Our earth belongs to what astronomers call an island universe. There are a great many of these island universes, each a system composed of worlds without number. These systems are also called galaxies, and we are informed that we belong to the great system of which the Milky Way forms a part. In our galaxy, we are told, there are many great suns thousands of times larger than our sun; in fact some of these if placed where our sun is, would extend out into space beyond the orbit of Mars and some of the other distant planets. Yet, some of these stars are so far away from us that they appear only as points of light in the heavens. In fact some of the other systems, or island universes, are so far away that the entire group of billions of stars composing them appear merely as points of light, and some are so far away it is thought that we cannot find them even with the improved means at our command today.

These island universes appear as nebulae, and at one time were thought to be worlds in course of creation, but now it is discovered, they are great systems. The brightest of these is in the constellation of Andromeda and is reckoned according to man's time as being nearly one million light-years away from the earth. At present the farthest known nebulae is three million light-years away. The new two-hundred inch telescope which is now being erected in California is expected to reveal nebulae three times as far away as that.

The purpose of this brief statement is merely to give some faint idea as to the greatness of the works of God, the end of which no man has seen, and which no man will ever see without the revelation of God, for the Lord has said, "There is no end to my works, neither to my words." This creation is ever going on. Worlds are filling the measure of their creation, dying, receiving their resurrection and place in the great universe, and others are coming to take their place and go through the same course of development. In this way the work of the Lord is one eternal round.

The Things of God, Spiritually Discerned. Paul declared that "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him." Constantly we are confronted with the deductions made by men to the effect that in course of time the sun will die; the earth will also die. Recently one of the astronomers declared that Mars was a dying world which was shown by the redness of its color, and that eventually the absorption of the oxygen by the rocks upon the earth will bring an end to all life upon the earth. But the Lord has other plans, and all the speculations of men shall fail, for his ways are not as man's ways, and he prepared the end of the earth before its beginning.

Sir James Jeans, the English scientist and astronomer, has said:

Into such a universe we have stumbled, if not exactly by mistake, at least as a result of what may properly be described as an accident. The use of such a word need not imply any surprise that our earth exists, for accidents will happen, and if the universe goes on for long enough, every conceivable accident is likely to happen in time. It was, I think, Huxley who said that six monkeys, set to strum unintelligently on typewriters for millions of millions of years, would be bound to write all of the books in the British Museum. If we examined the last page which a particular monkey had typed, and found that it had chanced, in its blind strumming, to type a Shakespeare sonnet, we should rightly regard the occurrence as a remarkable accident, but if we looked through all the millions of pages the monkeys had turned off in untold millions of years, we might be sure of finding a Shakespeare sonnet somewhere amongst them, the product of the blind play of chance. In the same way, millions of millions of stars wandering blindly through space for millions of millions of years are bound to meet with every sort of accident, and so are bound to produce a certain limited number of planetary systems in time. Yet the number of these must be very small in comparison with the total number of stars in the sky.—"The Mysterious Universe," pp. 4-5.

Continuing his statement, this noted scientist further says:

Life can only exist inside a narrow temperate zone which surrounds each of these fires at a very definite distance. Outside these zones life would be frozen; inside it would be shrivelled up. At a rough computation, these zones within which life is possible, all added together, constitute less than a thousand million millionth part of the whole of space. And even inside them, life must be of very rare occurrence, for it is so unusual an accident for suns to throw off planets as our own sun has done, that probably only about one star in 100,000 has a planet revolving around it in the small zone in which life is possible.

Just for this reason it seems incredible that the universe can have been designed primarily to produce life like our own; had it been so, surely we might have expected to find a better proportion between the magnitude of the mechanism and the amount of the product. At first glance at least, life seems to be an utterly unimportant by-product; we living things are somehow off the main line.—"The Mysterious Universe," pp. 5-6.

Creation of Life the Crowning Glory. This picture by Sir James Jeans is a very sad comment and a discouraging belief indeed; but fortunately we know it is not true. To say that life cannot exist except under the peculiar conditions which we experience upon this earth in our mortal state, is neither scientific nor correct. Neither can a man speak with authority and say that life, as we find it on the earth, is a by-product discovered rarely in the universe only where conditions such as are found on mother earth obtain. Life on this earth is in varied forms and subject to many different conditions. What some life requires even here would bring destruction to other life in this mundane temporal sphere. What laws may have been given to other spheres and how life is regulated elsewhere in the universe, we have no means of knowing by any scientific investigation. We are, in this world, limited to the laws and conditions which the Almighty gave to this world. The scriptures teach that God and celestialized beings live "in ever-lasting burnings." Mortals, or flesh and blood, cannot endure these conditions, but would be consumed. Under the protection of the Almighty the companions of Daniel were saved in the fiery furnace which was so hot that it slew the would-be executioners, and when these three righteous men were called forth, there was not even the smell of fire upon them, and they were unharmed.

Things do not come by accident in the universe. The strumming of monkeys never could produce a sonnet of Shakespeare, much less the works of the British Museum, neither did this world or any other world come by chance. Man does not know the extent and number of worlds such as ours—opaque bodies circling around these celestial "fires"—throughout the universe. Our earth, through the strongest telescopes yet known, would not appear or be recognized if it were circling around the star Centauri, the nearest of the fixed stars to the earth.

"The Earth Transgresseth Not the Law." This earth of ours was designed by the Father to become a celestial orb. In the Doctrine and Covenants (Sec. 88) we are given a very clear and definite statement in relation to this earth and its destiny. From that revelation this is taken:

And the spirit and the body are the soul of man.

And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul.

And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it.

Therefore it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for celestial glory;

For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father;

That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified.

Then the Lord states that the inhabitants of this earth who live so that they are not worthy of a place on the earth when it becomes a celestialized body will have to make their abode on some other sphere. (See Chapter 43.) Then he adds:

And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—

Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it.

For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body.

They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened.

The Several Stages of the Earth's Existence. From this scripture we learn that the earth was created for glory, to become a habitation of celestial beings; that God the Father will come and dwell here after the earth is sanctified. This earth has passed through several stages, it has three more stages through which to pass before it is glorified. After the fall of Adam a curse was placed upon the earth, that curse is upon it now. It is passing through its telestial order. Before many years have passed it will be cleansed from its iniquity and pass into the terrestrial order. This will come at the advent of Jesus Christ and the Millennium of peace.

The scriptures say that Enoch saw the day of the coming of our Lord to offer himself a sacrifice for sin. Because of the wickedness of the world, Enoch wept, but his eyes were opened in vision and "it came to pass that Enoch looked upon the earth; and he heard a voice from the bowels thereof, saying: Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me. When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face? And when Enoch heard the earth mourn, he wept, and cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord, wilt thou not have compassion upon the earth: Wilt thou not bless the children of Noah." In answer to his pleading the Lord said:

As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you, concerning the children of Noah;

And the day shall come that the earth shall rest, but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve.—Moses 7:60-61.

So the promise was made that the earth should rest for a season. This season will come when Christ comes. At that time we will have, so Isaiah declares, "new heavens, and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered nor come into mind." (Isaiah 65:17.) These new heavens and new earth will be the earth and its heavens in its purified, or restored state, during the Millennium. It will be the condition which is spoken of in the Tenth Article of Faith. It will not be the final new heaven and earth, for at the time of this change mortality will still be upon the earth. The enmity of man and of beasts will disappear. Every corruptible thing, "both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed." There will be no more death as we see it, for men will live until they are old; infants shall not die, and when the change comes from mortality to immortality it will be in the twinkling of an eye. This condition of glorious change will continue for one thousand years, and then there shall come another change, and the earth shall die.

"The Earth Shall Wax Old Like a Garment." The Lord has said: "For in mine own due time will I come upon the earth in judgment, and my people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth. For the great Millennium, of which I have spoken by the mouth of my servants, shall come. For Satan shall be bound, and when he is loosed again he shall only reign for a little season, and then cometh the end of the earth." (D. and C. 43:29-31.) This passing away of the earth was well understood by ancient prophets. Isaiah has predicted it in several places. One of these is as follows:

Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.—Isa. 51:6.

But this passing away of the heavens, and this means, of course, the heavens pertaining to the earth, and the growing old of the earth, must not be interpreted in the terms so frequently indulged in by those who do not accept the word of the Lord and depend upon their worldly knowledge. Fortunately the Lord has given us a key to the passing away of the earth. Like all other mortal things it must die; but it will, as we have already stated, come forth again. In another place the Lord has said that when the Millennial reign is ended, "and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season—

And the end shall come, and the heavens and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand.—D. and C. 29:22-25.

The Celestialized Earth. John saw "a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea." This has reference to the third, and final change yet future, which shall come to the earth, after it is cleansed and purified by fire. For the earth shall die by fire and thus be purified; through this death and disintegration and purification which will follow, the earth will be raised to its celestial, and final state, that of glory. The Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and the earth will be Christ's.

Then the white stone mentioned in Revelation 2:17, will become a Urim and Thummim to each individual who receives one, whereby things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known.—D. and C. 130:9-10.

When the earth is cleansed and celestialized, Christ will make his final report to his Father. Before that day Michael shall lead his forces against Lucifer who shall be banished with his followers into the second death. Mortal conditions will end following this great last battle. Paul says the last enemy to be destroyed is death, and it will be after the destruction of this enemy, and when every living thing—as spoken of in the Doctrine and Covenants, section twenty-nine—has received its resurrection, that Christ will make his final report and be able to say to the Father that he has finished his work so far as mother earth is concerned. "And when all things shall be subdued unto him then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him that God may be all in all."

Footnotes

"Fig. 1. Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the celestial, or the residence of God. First in government, the last pertaining to the measurement of time. The measurement according to celestial time, which celestial time signifies one day to a cubit. One day in Kolob is equal to a thousand years according to the measurement of this earth, which is called by the Egyptians Jah-oh-eh.

Fig. 2. Stands next to Kolob, called by the Egyptians Oliblish, which is the next grand governing creation near to the celestial or the place where God resides; holding the key of power also, pertaining to other planets; as revealed from God to Abraham, as he offered sacrifice upon an altar, which he had built unto the Lord.

"Fig. 4. Answers to the Hebrew word Raukeeyang, signifying expanse, or the firmament of the heavens; also a numerical figure in Egyptian signifying one thousand: answering to the measuring of the time of Oliblish, which is equal with Kolob in its revolution and in its measuring of time."

Abraham was taught this knowledge of the stars by the Lord who commanded him to declare it in Egypt, therefore Abraham taught the Egyptians astronomy.

---
Notas:
[^1] In the explanation of the facsimile in the Book of Abraham, we are given this further information:
