Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man ( 1936)

CHAPTER 43

THE DESTINY OF MAN

"Behold! This Is My Work and My Glory." After explaining to Moses that there were innumerable worlds that have been created, and as one passes away to its exaltation another comes, the Lord declared that the purpose of these creations is to furnish habitations for his children, and he says: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." In other words, there is but one purpose in the creation of earths like unto this where we dwell, and all other worlds throughout the universe, and that purpose is to provide habitations for mankind. We are his offspring and hence the crowning glory of all of his creations. The creation of earths, then, is but a means to an end. Rather than man being "a by-product," and "somehow off the main line" in the order of created things, man is the most important product and all other things are made for him; for "Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet." If there were no human beings and other animate things, there would be no need for earths or suns throughout the universe, for they are to serve, and are serving, the same purpose for which houses are built by men upon the earth.

The Three Stages of Existence. Since, then, the great work of the Lord is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man, we must expect the fact to be that man is found inhabiting these worlds throughout the universe. The destiny of man is to pass through three estates. First he existed as a spirit in the presence of God. Second, by and through the goodness and mercy of the Father, he is privileged to come to earth, here or somewhere else, and pass through mortality partaking of all the vicissitudes of which the mortal life has to offer. The third and final estate is that of the resurrection, the coming forth from the grave after death, the spirit and body being inseparably united. This is immortality. This gift will be given to every mortal creature whether he be good or bad, whether or not he seek it. This is unconditional redemption. Of this unconditional redemption, Elder Orson Pratt has said:

Unconditional Salvation. The universal redemption of the posterity of Adam from the fall will be fully accomplished after the earth has been filled with its measure of inhabitants, and all men have been redeemed from the grave to immortality, and the earth itself has been changed and made entirely new. * * * The children of Adam had no agency in the transgression of their first parent, and therefore they are not required to exercise any agency in their redemption from its penalty. They are redeemed from it without faith, repentance, baptism, or any other act, either of the mind or body. * * * Unconditional redemption is a gift forced upon mankind which they cannot reject, though they were disposed. Not so with conditional redemption; it can be received or rejected according to the will of the creature. * * *

Redemption from the original sin is without faith or works; redemption from our own sins is given through faith and works. Both are the gifts of free grace; but while one is a gift forced upon us unconditionally, the other is a gift merely offered to us conditionally. * * *

The earth, like the posterity of Adam, was cursed because of the original sin, and like them, it will be redeemed unconditionally, and restored again unto the presence of God.

Conditional Salvation. Conditional salvation is as universally offered as is unconditional salvation, but it will not be received by all. It is based upon obedience to the laws of God, faith, repentance, baptism by immersion, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Nor is this all; it requires obedience constantly and to the end. Again quoting Elder Pratt:

Redemption from the second death, as we have already observed, is conditional. Man having voluntarily committed sin, must voluntarily comply with the conditions of redemption; otherwise he must suffer the penalty. If any should feel disposed to doubt whether the second penalty will be inflicted, let them look at the infliction of the first, during the past 6,000 years. The first death with all its attendant evils, has extended its ravages among all nations and generations since the first law was broken. If God, then, has fulfilled his word in the first provocation to the very letter, why should any one suppose that he will not inflict the second death as a penalty of the second provocation? All generations bear witness to the faithfulness of his word spoken in the garden of Eden; why, then, should we suppose that justice shall be frustrated, and his word become null and void in regard to any future penalty with which the sinner is threatened? If the sin of one man brought the first death upon unnumbered millions, why not the sin of each man bring the second death upon himself? * * *

Though all mankind are to be fully redeemed from the effects of the original sin, yet, we have great reason to fear that but a few will be redeemed from their own sins. Those few who are redeemed will receive the earth for an eternal inheritance; for the earth, as we have already observed, will be unconditionally redeemed from the curse of the original sin, and so far as that sin is concerned, it will be no obstacle to the earth's entering into the presence of God.—M. S. 12:70

From these very clear words of Elder Orson Pratt we discover that there is a salvation coming to every soul without any act upon his part, and then, there is another salvation, which, perhaps, we should designate as the exaltation, which will be given to the few. The Savior said, as it has been revealed to us in our day:

For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do ye know me.

But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also.

This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law.

Broad is the gate, and wide the way that leadeth to the deaths; and many there are that go in thereat, because they receive me not, neither do they abide in my law.—D. and C. 132:22-25.

Worlds Are Habitations for Living Creatures. From the revelations of the Lord to his people it is made known that there never was a time when worlds did not exist, and the purpose of their existence was, and is, to provide habitations, or residences, for his offspring. Not only for his offspring, but for every creature. Jesus declared himself to be "the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I AM, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven before the world was made." In the great work of God worlds like our earth are constantly coming into existence, and like our earth they are ordained to pass through a certain course marked out for them, then die, and finally to rise again to eternal duration, according to the plan of the Designer. When they are so raised they will inherit such glory as the Lord has assigned to them just as he has assigned, and will assign, glories to human beings. We are led to believe that some worlds are built to become telestial habitations in their final estate; others to become terrestrial worlds, and still others to be prepared for celestial beings and to have a celestial glory. That is the destiny of this earth. These worlds are thus designed—ordained—and pass through their careers and go on to receive their eternal station through a resurrection. They become eternal and immortal, and pass beyond the power of disintegration, in spite of all that is declared to the contrary in the scientific deductions by men who do not understand the nature of the great work of God.

Earth Destined to Rise to Glory. The town of Bethlehem was small, and judged by its number of inhabitants, was little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of Bethlehem came the Ruler of Israel, "whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting." Of all the cities of Judah this small spot was the one to receive the greatest honor. So it is with mother earth. The sphere on which we have been permitted an inheritance—provided we live a celestial law—is but a speck of dust in comparison to some of the great worlds of our universe. Nevertheless, it is destined to rise to the rise to the greatest heights and to possess the greatest honor and glory which can be given by its Creator. It is to become a celestial globe and the fit habitation of all who are redeemed and are entitled to celestial exaltation, through the mercy and blood of Jesus Christ.

Jesus the Creator. John says our Lord was in the beginning with God and that he was God. "All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men." This truth is confirmed in modern revelation, or more correctly speaking, in ancient revelation revealed in modern times. The Lord revealed himself to Moses, as we have shown, saying that worlds without number had been created, "and by the Son I created them which is mine Only Begotten." From these and many other revelations we are taught that Christ worked throughout the universe building worlds long before this world was formed. Whatever he did at that time in the making of worlds, or earths, before this earth was prepared for its inhabitants, was done while he was a spirit, for he had been appointed to Godhood and was recognized by his Father as his Only Begotten Son to be born in the flesh upon the earth. In the Meridian of Time Christ came into this world, in fulfilment of the promise and appointment. He is the Firstborn in the spirit, and the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. Because of this Jesus had life in himself, as his Father had life in himself, and at all times death was subject to him, and at no time was he subject to death, although he had the power to lay down his life and take it again. This great blessing distinguishes Christ from all other human beings born into this world. By virtue of this power he became the Redeemer of all things upon the earth, and even of the earth itself.

Is it not a matter of great significance, and one in which we should take great pride, that notwithstanding the fact that innumerable worlds were created by the Son under the direction of the Father, before Jesus Christ was born into this world, that the honor was reserved for this little speck of an earth to receive him and give to him, by the power of the Father, his body of flesh and bones? In this way our Lord belongs to this earth in the same way that we all belong to it, having received his body, as we received ours, from the dust of the ground. How can we escape the thought that this earth has been honored far beyond many other worlds which were created by the Only Begotten Son of God? Yet, lest we be led too far in boasting, let us remember that the Lord said to Enoch, that of all his creations his children here on this earth have been the most wicked:

Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made! and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren.—Moses 7:36.

The Redemption of the Soul. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 88, we are given a very clear statement in relation to the earth and the destiny of its inhabitants. From this revelation the following is taken:

And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it. * * *

And they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom.

For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory.

And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a terrestrial glory.

And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom cannot abide a telestial glory; therefore he is not meet for a kingdom of glory. Therefore he must abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory.

And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—

Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it.

For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body.

They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened.—D. and C. 88:17, 21-28.

The Inhabitants of Earth Assigned to Different Worlds. The statement the Lord has given us in the foregoing scripture; and in other scripture, is so plain that this earth is created especially for the few who are willing to keep the celestial law, that it is a wonder that we cannot all so understand it; yet this question is constantly discussed in Priesthood quorums, Sunday Schools and other places, with the expression of various conflicting views. It would be a blessing if we could settle it once and for all.

In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus said that the meek should inherit the earth. The meek are those who in humility, as little children, keep the fulness of the law of God. They are heirs of the celestial kingdom. Those who live upon the earth who are only willing to live the telestial or terrestrial law, must inherit some other world suited to their condition. For, we see from this written word, in the resurrection they receive bodies, celestial, terrestrial or telestial, according to the law which has been observed. We learn, therefore, that the great majority of the inhabitants of this earth will not inherit a permanent residence upon the earth when it becomes celestialized. While they have place, honor, and wealth in mortal life, the time will come, because they have not abided in the law which was given to this earth—the celestial law—when they will be assigned to a world which is terrestrial or telestial. "All kingdoms have a law given; and there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified."—D. and C. 88:37-39.

We learn, then, that there have been prepared from all eternity past, and there will be prepared to all eternity to come, worlds for the children of God to dwell upon. To the terrestrial and the telestial kingdoms, the inferior orders, the greater part of the earth's inhabitants will go. This earth, because it abides the law of the celestial order, is to be crowned with the fulness of the celestial blessings and glory. Christ and his Father will come here, for this is the abode of Christ; and the saints of God shall possess the kingdom and it is revealed that they shall "be made kings and priests unto God and his Father."

And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand.

But, behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth—yea, even all.—D. and C. 29:23-26.

The Degrees of Glory. I have quoted before the words of Lehi: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." This saying reveals the purpose of life; for this is the purpose of God towards all of his children. Even with those who reject the counsels of God and refuse to come into his kingdom through the acceptance of his divine law, it is the plan of the Almighty to do for them just the best that can be done.

As this is true, we can reasonably expect that other worlds than ours are peopled with beings akin to ourselves, and that this condition prevails with regularity throughout the entire universe; not only in our system, but also in the innumerable galaxies beyond our system. This thought is borne out in the words of the Lord to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants:

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: that he lives!

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.—Sec. 76:22-24.

The Earth to Shine as the Sun. Perhaps it is well at this point to present some of the sayings of our brethren who have discoursed upon this subject. First, from President Young:

The Latter-day Saints are believers in the atonement of the Savior, and I would like to have the Elders of Israel understand as far as they can all the points of doctrine in regard to the redemption of the human family, that they may know how to talk about and explain them. No one who believes in the Bible and in the mission of the Savior believes that the wicked are going to possess this earth; but they believe that when it is prepared it will be given to the Saints and they will inherit it. * * *

For us to think that we have an inheritance on the earth is folly, unless God has declared, and sealed it upon us by revelation, that we shall never fail, never doubt, never come short of glorifying him or of doing his will in all things. No person, unless he is in the possession of this blessing, has the least right to suppose that he has an inheritance on the earth. For the time being we have our wives, children, farms and other possessions, but unless we prove ourselves worthy, what we seem to have will be taken from us and given to those who are worthy, consequently we need not worry with regard to the defects of one another.—J. of D. 17:117-118.

When it (the earth) becomes celestialized, it will be like the sun, and be prepared for the habitation of the Saints, and be brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory; it will be a body of light. John compared it, in its celestialized state, to a sea of glass.—J. of D. 7:163.

I suppose this is one of the lowest kingdoms that ever the Lord Almighty created, and on that account is capable of becoming exalted to be one of the highest kingdoms that has ever had an exaltation in all the eternities. In proportion as it has been reduced so it will be exalted with that portion of its inhabitants who in their humiliation have cleaved to righteousness and acknowledged God in all things.—J. of D. 10:175.

The kingdoms that God has prepared are innumerable. Each and every intelligent being will be judged according to the deeds done in the body, according to his works, faith, desires, and honesty or dishonesty before God. Every trait of his character will receive its just merit or demerit, and he will be judged according to the law of heaven, as revealed; and God has prepared places suited to every class. The Savior said to his disciples: "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto myself, that where I am, there ye may be also."

How many kingdoms there are has not been told to us; they are innumerable. The disciples of Jesus were to dwell with him. Where will the rest go? Into kingdoms prepared for them, where they will live and endure. Jesus will bring forth by his own redemption, every son and daughter of Adam, except the sons of perdition, who will be cast into hell. Others will suffer the wrath of God—will suffer all the Lord can demand at their hands, or justice can require of them; and when they have suffered the wrath of God till the utmost farthing is paid, they will be brought out of prison. * * * Sectarians have not the Priesthood; but all of them who live according to the best light and intelligence they can obtain through faithfulness to what they believe, as taught unto them, will receive a kingdom and glory that will far transcend all their expectations, or imaginations, or visions, in their most excited moments. * * * All they have ever desired or anticipated they will receive, and far more; but they cannot dwell with the Father and the Son, unless they go through those ordeals that are ordained for the Church of the Firstborn. The ordinances of the house of God are expressly for the Church of the Firstborn.

"Go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned; and these signs shall follow them that believe. In my name," etc. This is the law of the Celestial Kingdom, and those who hearken to this law, and embrace its truths in their faith, and live them in their lives, will be brought to enjoy the presence of the Son, and will dwell with him and the Father. And all the residue, who do not sin against the Holy Ghost, will be punished according to their deeds, and will receive according to their works, whether it be little or much, good or bad.—J. of D. 8:154.

The following very pointed statement comes from Elder Orson Pratt:

Are the wicked to receive the earth as an inheritance, No; for Jesus did not say, Blessed are the wicked, for they shall inherit the earth; this promise was made only to the meek. Who are the meek? None but those who receive the ordinances of the Gospel, and live according to them; they must receive the same ordinances the earth has received, and be baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, as this earth will be when Jesus comes to reign upon it a thousand years; and be clothed upon with the glory of God, as this earth will be; and after they have died as the earth will die, they will have to be resurrected, as this earth will be resurrected, and then receive their inheritance upon it.—J. of D. 1:293.
