Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. I .

ANCESTRY

GREAT men are the commissioned guides of mankind who rule their fellows because they are wiser.—Carlyle.

Back in 1856, when Salt Lake City was in its infancy and many of its inhabitants were still living in log cabins and all its business places faced a wide and often dusty street—in a pioneer home, standing where Z. C. M. I. now stands, a son of promise was born. When this child was nine days old, his father died. His widowed mother was left in poverty. If the delicate infant were to survive, which many doubted he would do, he must have the tenderest care. He survived, and the story of his accomplishments as a boy and a man should, for all time, stir the imaginations of aspiring youth.

This frail boy, his mother's only child, lived to see Salt Lake become a great metropolis and one of the most beautiful and attractive cities in the world. On his eighty-second birthday he was honored with a testimonial which remains unmatched by any tribute that has been paid to any other citizen of his state. At that time it was said that he knew the city and its people better than any other living person and that he had contributed more to its growth than any other living man.

At the time of his death, in his eighty-ninth year, he was recognized as a leader of men and stood at the head of the greatest ecclesiastical organization of the world.

What was behind this brilliant and remarkable career? What is the source of goodness and greatness in men? Heber J. Grant's religion gives a clear answer to these weighty questions. We lived before we were born. We are dual in our personalities. We have a mortal and spiritual inheritance, both of which are tremendously important in shaping our destiny. Some have been able to trace their physical ancestry through many generations, but the story of our spiritual existence is closed. No matter how we try, we cannot remove the veil that hides the past. The finite mind cannot penetrate the realm of the infinite, and therein lie the answers to these searching questions. Where did we come from? What did we do there? How did our experience there affect us here? These questions can find answer only through the light of revelation.

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these were many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and He saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. [^1]

This scripture reveals clearly that there were in the spirit world, noble and great ones, destined to become the prophets, teachers, reformers, statesmen, and leaders in the world. Among them were the children of destiny, the poets, philosophers, scientists, soldiers and those whose names have illuminated the pages of history. The part we played, the development we made in our primeval existence, carries over and becomes a part of us here. What we are here, in large measure, is the result of what we were in our pre-mortal existence. Among those who stood as leaders, "the noble and great ones," in that primeval world were such spirits as Heber J. Grant. In the hope of finding something that would justify ancestral pride and inspire to better endeavor, many find interest in tracing their lineage back through the generations to discover who their forebears were and what they did.

Heber J. Grant's ancestry for a long way back is well-authenticated. There need be no guesswork about who his ancestors were or what they did. He descended from a notable line. Patriots, preachers, pioneers, reformers, civic and religious leaders are found among them. They belonged to the aristocracy of their time and rank with the very best men and women of their day. Archibald F. Bennett says of them:

The ancestors of our President have made much history, whether presiding over states and armies, over earldoms or counties, over local courts or congregations, or only their own families. Each generation must be judged according to the standards of that period. But as one reads over the intimate and authentic story of their lives, as it has been recovered and reconstructed, there comes an overwhelming feeling that here is an honorable parentage, a noble lineage of the best men and women of their day. [^2]

President Grant was well-born and wisely reared. His immediate ancestors were no less renowned than those who preceded them. From his father and his mother he inherited qualities of great worth.

JEDEDIAH M. GRANT

His father, Jedediah M. Grant, was born February 21, 1816, in Windsor, Broome County, New York, and died December 1, 1856, in Salt Lake City, Utah, at the age of forty years, nine months, and ten days. He was a tall, straight, sinewy young man, with a flaming zeal for truth. In his seventeenth year he joined the Church, and in the following year went with Zion's Camp from Kirtland, Ohio, to Jackson County, Missouri, and was subsequently chosen as one of the seventies. He was among the first elders of the Church to preach the gospel in the Southern States.

June 25, 1844, two days prior to the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, Jeddy was chosen by the Prophet as one of two trusted messengers to carry word to Governor Ford of Illinois that the Prophet would be in Carthage the following day. Those were momentous days; trust could not be lightly placed, consequently, this showed the great confidence which Joseph Smith had in Jedediah M. Grant.

As a young man Jeddy passed through the persecutions of Missouri and Illinois, and in the summer of 1847 he crossed the plains, arriving in Salt Lake Valley in October of that year. This journey was beset with tragedies and physical hardships that not only tested his faith and measured his physical endurance, but also overwhelmed him with grief. First, his little daughter, Margaret, died and was buried in a shallow grave in a lonely place on the plains. Soon after, his wife, Caroline, unable to endure the hardships and tragedies of the journey, sickened and died. It was her dying request to have her remains brought to the valley for burial and likewise to have the remains of her little daughter brought here and laid beside her. Jeddy, of course, consented, and with his own hands made a crude coffin from rough boards, strapped it to the side of his wagon, and placed in it all that was mortal of his young and beautiful wife; then he continued the sorrowful journey to the valley, where she was laid peacefully away. If Caroline Grant was not the first pioneer buried in the valley, she was among the very first. She died a martyr for the truth.

As soon as Jeddy could make the necessary arrangements, he went back to get the remains of his little girl. To his great sorrow he discovered that the wolves had dug up her body, devoured it, and scattered her bones so there was nothing left to bring. Sad though the circumstances were under which Jedediah M. Grant entered Salt Lake Valley on that October day of 1847, his spirit was not broken.

The loyalty and assistance which he gave to President Brigham Young, and his demonstrated leadership soon brought him recognition. On January 19, 1851, he was elected the first mayor of Salt Lake City, and on April 7, 1854, he was ordained an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ and chosen by Brigham Young as Second Counselor in the First Presidency of the Church. He was prominent in the political, religious, and economic affairs of the territory. Very early in his life Jedediah became distinguished as a preacher of righteousness. He was known for his resourcefulness, his courage, and for his power of conversion. He was a man of action, always helpful, hospitable, generous, and kind. He was one of the most enterprising and progressive men in that distinguished group of pioneers.

The year 1856 closed what was known in the Church as the "Reformation." This was a call to repentance. The general text was: "Saints, Live Your Religion." People were encouraged to renew their covenants by baptism, to observe cleanliness in their persons and dwellings, to put their families in order, to cultivate their grounds and gardens carefully, and not to seem too anxious to have more land than they could attend to themselves, to gather into and build up the forts and settlements.

This appeal concluded by "praying that all those who did not feel to do right might have their way open to leave the people and the territory of Utah; and those who did, to come forward and do their first works over." Jedediah M. Grant was one of the most ardent advocates of the "Reformation." He threw his heart and soul into it, sometimes holding two and three meetings in one night, and died as a result of overwork.

RACHEL RIDGEWAY IVINS GRANT

The ancestors of Rachel Ridgeway Ivins Grant, the mother of President Heber J. Grant, were of English descent and came to the new world in 1690. They were among the earliest settlers of Long Island. In 1760 they moved to New Jersey and played an important part in the history of that state. Rachel was born March, 7, 1821, in Hornerstown, New Jersey. She was the sixth child, and the third daughter in the family of Caleb Ivins, Jr., and Edith Ridgeway Ivins. Her grandfather, Caleb Ivins, was a prosperous man, beloved by all who knew him. Rachel's father died when she was six years old and her mother, when Rachel was nine. Her family was separated, and Rachel lived first with her grandfather on her father's side and late with her cousin, Joshua Wight and his wife, Theodosia. Her grandparents on both sides were Quakers, and Rachel was brought up under that influence. Her older sister, Anna, the mother of Anthony W. Ivins, became converted to the Church and prevailed on Rachel to go and hear the elders. She subsequently read the Book of Mormon, the Voice of Warning, and other tracts. She recorded: "One day while attending the Baptist Prayer Meeting, our pastor admonished me for the course I was taking and said that if I did not stop going to the Mormon meetings, I could not hold my seat in the Baptist Church, and they would be obliged to disfellowship me for listening to false doctrine." This seemed to settle the question in her mind, and she soon gave her name for baptism, saying: "Oh, what joy filled my being! I can sing all day long and rejoice in the promises of the gospel." About this time she met the Prophet Joseph Smith and Brother Jedediah M. Grant, her future husband. In 1842 she went with her cousins, the Ivinses, to Nauvoo, where she became well-acquainted with the Prophet. She left this description of him: "He was a fine, noble-looking man, always so neat. When he was preaching, you could feel the influence and power. He was not at home very much. He was always so jolly and happy, different in that respect from his brother, Hyrum, who was more sedate and more serious."

Her first year in Nauvoo was a very happy one. The second year, turmoil grew more pronounced and culminated in the martyrdom of the Prophet and the Patriarch. Rachel finally concluded to go back to New Jersey, which she did, and in 1853 the Ivinses decided to go to Utah and invited her to go with them. What to do was the question. Her brothers tried to prevail on her to remain in the East, offering to settle upon her an annual income for life if she would renounce the hated religion of Mormonism. After prayerful consideration, she decided to cast her lot with the pioneers in the West. As a result, she was destined to know sorrow and poverty, but the day never came when she regretted her decision. The trip across the plains was surprisingly pleasant. The party traveled in comparative comfort. For several years Rachel had suffered from an annoying cough which threatened to develop into tuberculosis, but the journey cleared up every symptom of lung trouble, and never after was she afflicted with it. She and her relatives arrived in Salt Lake City, August 10, 1853. Jedediah M. Grant took them to his home and provided for their immediate necessities. According to the legend, Rachel had been in the valley nearly two years when Jeddy invited her to go for a ride and explained to her that President Young had asked him to marry her for time and have her sealed to the Prophet Joseph for eternity. She consented to this and became Jedediah M. Grant's seventh wife. She was married to him in 1855, and on November 22, 1856, her son, Heber, was born and was but nine days old when his father died. These were grave days for Rachel. With the exception of her older sister, Anna, her only kin in the Church was this child. He was all she had to live for and to work for.

She lived to the advanced age of eighty-nine and died one of the most highly esteemed and universally loved women in the community. All the subsequent days of her tranquil life were closely interwoven with those of her son. It is gratifying to know that this boy lived to add honor and luster to the name of the father he had never known and to make glad and happy all the remaining years of his widowed mother.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Improvement Era, Vol. 44, page 665. (As told to Rachel G. Taylor.)
[^2] Ibid., Vol. 44, p. 665.
