Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. II .

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH

SINCE Rachel Grant was left a widow at the age of thirty-five, she found it necessary to support herself and to care for her infant son. She had been reared under affluent circumstances. Never before had she felt the pressure of want, but when it came, she did not complain. There was a native nobility about her which reverses and hard circumstances could not subdue. Notwithstanding her poverty she moved with ease and confidence among the best and most prosperous people of that day. She was sometimes hired to go into a home and to sew for a family, and she would take her little boy with her; then she might be invited as a dinner guest for an evening party in the same home.

Heber led the life of a normal boy. During the years of his childhood, his mother supported herself and him by sewing and by taking in boarders, and only through the most rigid economy was she able "to make ends meet." She told him that she would take care of him while he was young, and he could take care of her when she was old. He recalled days of scarcity when four pounds of sugar was the family supply for a year, when flour cost $18.00 a hundred, and when butter was an almost unknown luxury. He remembered a Christmas when his mother wept because she had no money to buy him a stick of candy.

There was a very close companionship between Heber and his mother. Naturally she became the dominant influence in shaping his life. Her prayers were a source of inspiration to him in his childhood and in his manhood. One of the most stimulating influences in his life was the great faith which she had in his future. She made him feel that he would become a man among men, a success in business, and a leader of the Church, if he would do what was right.

Heber J. Grant was a child of destiny. For years his mother cherished in her heart promises which were made to him in his childhood. She had perfect faith in the fulfilment of those promises, if he lived worthy of them and only on that condition.

Referring to his mother, Heber said, "My mother always told me: 'Behave yourself, Heber, and some day you will be an Apostle. If you do not behave yourself, you will not be because we have in a revelation recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, the following statement: "There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundation of the world upon which all blessings are predicated and when we obtain any blessing from God it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated."' I said, 'Mother get it out of your head. I do not want to be an Apostle; I do not want to be a bishop; I do not want to be anything but a businessman. Just get it out of your head.' After I was called to be an Apostle, she asked me about the meeting where this blessing was given and whether I remembered it, and I said, 'No, I do not remember anything only that when Aunt Zina was talking she said, "You will become a great man in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and one of the Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ."' She said, 'That is the reason I have told you to behave yourself. I knew it would not come true if you did not live worthily, but it has come true.' Then she said, 'Do you remember Heber C. Kimball picking you up when you were a young boy and putting you on a table and talking to you at a great dinner he was having with a lot of his friends?' 'Yes.' 'Do you remember anything he said?' 'No, I only remember that he had the blackest eyes I ever looked into. I was frightened, that is all I can remember.' 'He prophesied in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ that you would become an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ and become a greater man in the Church than your own father, and your father, as you know, became one of the counselors to President Brigham Young. That is why I have told you to behave.'"

Heber longed for a college education but was denied that opportunity. However, he attended the best schools they had at that time and received a good training for business. This is his own frank account of his school days:

"The first school I ever attended was the Doremus School where the old adobe knitting works stood. I got whipped once for telling the truth—one of the bigger boys gave me a mauling because I told the truth about him. I was sent up twice to be whipped by Brother Doremus. Both times I ought not to have been. The second time I was to be whipped, instead of going upstairs I ran home. Brother Doremus taught upstairs, and Sister Doremus had the little children downstairs. I was then living in the Main Street home. The first time I was whipped was the only time I was ever upstairs.

"When any child had to be whipped, they had what seemed to me to be a great big willow, but I guess it was a little switch. I was told to go up there again but did not do it. I ran home and was nearly exhausted for fear someone was after me. I told Mother all about it and that I ought not to have been whipped because it was not my fault, and she fixed it so that I could return to school without being whipped. I remember that they gave little prizes, and I was given a prize which was a piece of paper about three or four inches long and about an inch and a half wide with one word, 'Truthful,' in blue ink, well printed. I saved it until after I was married; I prized it very highly.

"After the Doremus School I attended a school in a small dwelling on West Temple Street just below the center of the block where the Grant Brothers' livery stable was built. Matthias F. Cowley's mother was the teacher. I afterwards went to the Brigham Young schoolhouse where Sister Granville was the teacher. Orson Whitney and others were pupils there. I was baptized in the font behind Brigham Young's schoolhouse. . . . I think the font was far enough south that when they made First Avenue they had to tear down the font.

"The fall I became nine, Mother and I went to St. George for the winter, and I remember that I went to school there in a tent. We traveled to St. George in a wagon. It was just after the October conference. Aunt Anna and Cousin Tone had come up to conference, and we went back with them. The first night we stopped at Brother Standring's—Rebecca Standring's, who was afterwards the president of the Relief Society—Edwin, I think was his name. The next night I think we stayed in Spanish Fork, and the next night at Salt Creek (Nephi), the next night Round Valley (Scipio), the next night Cedar Springs (Holden). I do not know where we stopped the following night; it was Meadow or Corn Creek. Then the next night it seems to me we camped in Wildcat Canyon. There was no Cove Fort then. We slept on the ground. They had been telling Indian stories. It was a beautiful moonlight night, and I do not think I went to sleep until after midnight. I was sure that I saw Indians crawling around in the sagebrush. The next night we stayed at Beaver, then Red Creek (Parowan), the next night Cedar City, the next Kanarra, from there to Toquerville. We then went to St. George. We stayed there about six months, and my teacher, I believe, was a Sister Everett. A man by the name of McGregor also had a school. Tone (Anthony W. Ivins) went to him; he was four years older than I.

"People went to St. George because it was pleasant. President Brigham Young built a house there, and he spent the winter months in St. George. They built a cotton factory, a three-story log building; it is standing there now. I carried one end of the chain to survey the ditch to the cotton factory, and Tone the other.

"I also went to Camilla Cobb to school before I went to the university. She had a private school, south of the Social Hall. After that I attended the university. I attended the university when the school was in a building that afterwards became the Deseret Museum, where Richards Street now is.

"A man by the name of Milton H. Hardy, who afterwards had charge of the State Mental Hospital at Provo, and a girl by the name of Young who lived on First South, and Sarah Francis Young, were the teachers. It was upstairs, and a number of us went there, and we had no teacher; we had to go up to the Council House to give our lessons, so we had a monitor to keep the boys quiet. Oscar Young was the monitor. There was a boy there we called 'Little Pill.' His father was a homeopathic doctor. As I was going in for a lesson one day, I saw him with a slate, pencil, and sponge. They had a vessel on top of the stove that had moisture in it. He squeezed some hot water on my seat for me to sit in. I saw him doing it and jumped back, and then sat down and straddled the water. Then I took my sponge and soaked up the water that was on my seat and rushed over to his seat and put it there. As I did it, he called Oscar Young's attention to what I was doing. Oscar said to me: 'Mop that water up; mop it up!'

"'Hold on,' I said; 'he put it on my seat first and I brought it back to him.'

"Oscar turned to him and said: 'Did you put that water on his seat first? You are a scrub to complain on him; you mop it up' and he picked him up, set him on the bench, and he rubbed it up.

"After that four or five of us decided to send this boy home sick. We had read somewhere that if you tell a person long enough that he is sick, it will make him sick. So, for four of five days we said: 'Why don't you go home? Look in the looking-glass, you're sick,' and he did go home sick.

"Dr. Park, president of the university, was called on a mission, but his health failed him, so he came back and was installed again as its president. In the meantime the Cook sisters were made managers of the university; Miss Ida came over to the Council House, and Miss Mary stayed at the Social Hall. They had an examination, and those with certain marks were to be promoted to the university, and those who failed from the university were to go to the Social Hall, which was part of the university then. I went up to the university.

"Miss Ida expelled me from school because I hit Heber Wells in the back before school started. She told me to go and take my seat. I said: 'School is not opened yet, Miss Ida, and I will come in at nine o'clock.'

"She said: 'You go and take that seat or go home.'

"I said: 'I will go home.'

"Then she said, 'I expel you from school,' and Miss Ida, of course, hadn't understood the situation. Heber was studying a piece in which there was the sentence: 'A blow, a blow, a bloody blow,' and he came up and hit me in the back and made that expression. I waited until he sat down, and I went up and hit him in the back and said: 'His brother, his brother,' and just as I hit him, Miss Cook saw me. Mother called and told her I was broken-hearted, and she sent for me to come back. Mother cried and felt so bad when I told her I was expelled from school, that I promised her I never would be expelled again, that I would make any apology that was asked for, and I would go back and behave myself very well.

"For three or four months I never whispered once, and then one day Miss Ida kept the whole school in for whispering and told us to study. I was so mad to be kept in when I hadn't whispered at all that I didn't study; I just sat there. She saw me sitting there. Finally some of the boys lifted their hands and asked to go out, and she let first one and then another go. Finally, I lifted my hand. She said: 'Keep your seat.'

"I said: 'If the others can go out, so can I.' I got up to go, and we met at the top of the stairs. She grabbed me by the collar, and I stepped two or three steps down, she still holding onto my collar. I lifted my feet; I knew she couldn't hold my weight. Then she moved to go around me, and I made a bound and lit on the bottom of the first platform, and she lit on top of me, and she never let go of her grip. Just then Mary Cook came in and said: 'Expel him from school.'

"I remembered Mother, and commenced crying and begged her pardon so they didn't expel me, and I went back upstairs." [^1]

Heber had an ambition for a college education, a degree from some great school, but he had to care for his widowed mother and he had no money with which to do this and to go to college; so this, he thought, was one of his cherished hopes he would have to abandon. About this time an unexpected opportunity came. He related:

"I met President George Q. Cannon, then our delegate to Congress, and he said: 'Would you like to go to the Naval Academy, or to West Point?'

"I told him I would.

"He said: 'Which one?'

"I said, 'The Naval Academy.'

"'All right, I will give you the appointment without competitive examination.'

"For the first time in my life I did not sleep well; I lay awake nearly all night long rejoicing that the ambition of my life was to be fulfilled. I fell asleep just a little before daylight; my mother had to awaken me.

"I said: 'Mother, what a marvelous thing it is that I am to have an education as fine as that of any young man in all Utah. I could hardly sleep; I was awake until almost daylight this morning.'

"I looked into her face; I saw that she had been weeping.

"I have heard of people, who when drowning, had their entire life pass before them in a few seconds. I saw myself an admiral, in my mind's eye. I saw myself traveling all over the world in a ship, away from my widowed mother. I laughed and put my arms around her and kissed her and said, 'Mother, I do not want a naval education. I am going to be a businessman and shall enter an office right away and take care of you and have you quit keeping boarders for a living.'

"She broke down and wept and said that she had not closed her eyes, but had prayed all night that I would give up my life's ambition so that she would not be left alone." [^2]

Her prayers were answered, and her appeal to the Almighty was inspired by promises made to her son in his childhood by those she looked upon as being the servants of God.

After declining the appointment to Annapolis he made up his mind to be a businessman and went to work. That was the end of his formal schooling. He soon became absorbed in his business affairs, but he utilized every spare moment of his time reading and improving his mind. As he read, it was his practice to mark passages that impressed him and to pass the book along to some friend. Many books that he gave away were "marked copies," which added to their value. When he became an Apostle, he had more and better opportunities for reading. He often had one of his daughters or his secretary read to him, especially in his later years. Thus he kept well-informed on current issues. While he had but few scholastic credentials, Heber J. Grant was well-educated.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gospel Standards, Durham, G. Homer, p. 248.
[^2] Ibid., p. 342.
