Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. III .

SURMOUNTING DIFFICULTIES

AMONG the richest legacies bequeathed to the world by Heber J. Grant is the record of his achievements. In his childhood he gave promise of the splendid accomplishments that crowned his long and wonderful life.

The words of Bulwer-Lytton: "Dream, O youth; dream nobly and manfully, and your dreams shall be your prophets!" stirred his soul.

He dreamed nobly and manfully. He charted his way, set up objectives, and with a firm and resolute hand he steered his course toward his goal. There was no listless drifting with the tide, no careless floating downstream. His ends were worthy; his objectives were clear; and his efforts were strong and effective. In the struggles of his childhood for excellence in the games which he played, and in the events of his illustrious life the power to hold steadfastly to his purposes seemed pre-eminent. There was no wasted effort due to doubt or indecision. The straight pursuit of a definite goal is an economy of the rarest kind. The will, the determination, or whatever mental quality it is which impels one to action is the secret of achievement; we shall see that Heber J. Grant had this quality in a glorified degree.

In his later life he wrote:

"As a boy of seventeen I dreamed about my future life—what I was going to do until I became thirty-five years of age; planned it and worked for it. The moment I was called to go to Tooele I said good-by to all my plans. I had never thought of holding a Church position. I had other plans; I had planned everything I was going to do and where I was going to get, and from the time I was seventeen until I was twenty-four years old, I accomplished every one of the things that I had planned to do and had dreamed about and worked for. I never would have done so without planning. We do not accomplish things without having the idea. No architect ever draws a plan of a building who has not in his mind an idea of what he is going to draw." [^1]

The ambitions and ideals of his youth clearly foreshadowed the achievements of his manhood. All the things his childhood prophesied were realized in his after-years. Those who knew him must have discerned in this frail but fair-faced youth characteristics that would some day make him distinguished. In these expectations they were not disappointed.

After the death of his father, Jedediah M. Grant, the property on Main Street was sold and the money divided among the Grant heirs—$500.00 of which came to his mother, Rachel Grant. With this money she purchased a little house on Second East. It must have been a very humble place in which to live. Her son records how as a child, six years of age, he felt about this transaction:

"I well remember coming home from school one night after Mother had moved to Second East. Nobody was in the old house on Main Street. You had to step down one step to the lawn. I sat on the ground and cried and then jumped up and shook my fist at the place and said, 'When I am a man I will buy you back.'"

He must have often thought of that resolve, when years afterwards he formed a syndicate and bought $350,000 of Z.C.M.I. stock. He came very close to fulfilling his early promise.

The story of some of his youthful achievements are delightfully told in his own words:

"As I was an only child, my mother reared me very carefully. Indeed, I grew up more or less under the principles of a hothouse plant, a growth which is long and lengthy but not substantial. I learned to sweep and to wash and wipe dishes but did little stone throwing and little indulgence in works which are interesting to boys, which develop their physical frames. Therefore, when I joined the baseball club the boys of my own age and a little older played in the first nine, those younger than I played in the second, and those still younger, in the third, and I played with them. One of the reasons for this was that I could not throw the ball from one base to another, and another reason was that I lacked the strength to run or bat the ball. When I picked up the ball, the boys would generally shout, 'Throw it here, sissy!' So much fun was engendered on my account by my youthful companions that I solemnly vowed that I would play baseball in the nine that would win the championship in the territory of Utah. My mother was keeping boarders for a living at the time, and I shined their boots until I saved a dollar which I invested in a baseball and spent hours and hours throwing the ball at Bishop Edwin D. Woolley's barn, which caused him to refer to me as the laziest boy in the Thirteenth Ward. Often my arm would ache so that I could scarcely go to sleep at night, but I kept on practicing and finally succeeded in getting into the second nine of our club. Subsequently, I joined a better club and eventually played in the nine that won the championship in California, Colorado, and Wyoming, and thus made good my promise to myself and retired from the baseball arena." [^2]

When he could not sleep because his arm ached as a result of throwing the ball, his mother would wrap it with bandages dipped in cold water to relieve the pain. A wise and marvelous mother, indeed!

"Referring to that wonderful mother of mine, I remember that one day we had at least a half-dozen, if not more, buckets on the floor catching the rain that came from the roof. It was raining very heavily, and Bishop Edwin D. Woolley came into the house and said, 'Why, Widow Grant, this will never do. I shall take some of the money from the fast offering and put a new roof on this house.' 'Oh, no, you won't,' said Mother, 'no relief money will ever put a roof on my house. I have sewing here,' and she said, 'I have supported myself and my son with a needle and thread for many years,' and later with a Wheeler and Wilcox sewing machine. (I had to be mighty careful not to take hold of a thread and pull it, for I might have my clothes fall off. They had not learned how to fasten the stitches with the machine, but later they made a sewing machine that overcame this difficulty.) Then Mother said, 'When I get through with this sewing that I'm doing now, I will buy some shingles and patch the holes in the roof, and this house will take care of me until my son gets to be a man and builds me a new one.' Bishop Woolley went away and said he was very sorry for Widow Grant and that if she waited for that boy to build a house she would never have one, for he was the laziest boy in the whole Thirteenth Ward. He went on to tell how I wasted my time throwing a ball across the fence behind the house hour after hour, day after day, and week after week at his adobe barn. Thank the Lord for a mother who was a general as well as a Latter-day Saint, who realized that it is a remarkable and splendid thing to encourage a boy to do something besides, perhaps milking cows, if he was on a farm, or encourage him if he had ambitions along athletic lines."

One day Heber was playing marbles with some other boys when the bookkeeper from the Wells Fargo Company Bank was walking down the other side of the street. One of the boys remarked, "That man gets $150.00 a month." Heber figured to himself that not counting Sundays, that man made $6.00 a day and that at five cents a pair, he would have to black 120 pairs of boots to make $6.00. He there and then resolved that some day he would be a bookkeeper in the Wells Fargo and Company's bank. In those days all the records and accounts of the bank were written with a pen, and one of the requisites of a good bookkeeper was the ability to write well. To learn to write well was his first approach to securing this job and the fulfilment of his resolve; so he set to work to become a penman.

At the beginning his penmanship was so poor that when two of his chums were looking at it one said to the other, "That writing looks like hen tracks." "No," said the other, "it looks as if lightning had struck an ink bottle." This touched Heber's pride and, bringing his fist down on his desk, he said, "I'll some day be able to give you fellows lessons in penmanship," and he was.

He wrote greeting cards, wedding cards, insurance policies, stock certificates, and legal documents. He said, "I once made $20.00 on New Year's Day by writing forty dozen cards with (Happy New Year) and a man's name written in the corner. The next New Year's Day I made $37.50 in five hours. I wrote on fifty dozen cards the words, 'Happy New Year,' and sold them and had to write more."

When Heber, still in his teens, was working as a policy clerk in the office of H. R. Mann and Co., he was offered three times his salary to go to San Francisco as a penman. He later became teacher of penmanship and bookkeeping at the University of Deseret (University of Utah).

George D. Pyper wrote of him, "He was a teacher of penmanship and bookkeeping at the University of Deseret, which was located on the corner of First North and Second West Streets in Salt Lake City. I was a student and recall his going from seat to seat inspecting the work of pupils. His style became my model. Many sheets of paper were used up with his copy before me."

At one of the territorial fairs in which he had not competed, he noticed the exhibits of four professional penmen. He remarked to the man in charge of the art department that he could write better than that before he was seventeen years of age. The man in charge laughed and said that nobody but a cheeky insurance agent would make such a remark. He handed the gentleman three dollars which was the fee necessary to compete for a diploma and sent for the specimen which he had written before he was seventeen and hung it up with the remark, "If you judges know good penmanship, when you see it, I will get the diploma." He walked away with a diploma for the best penmanship in the territory. He encouraged the art of good penmanship among the youth of Zion and offered many prizes for the best specimens.

He secured a position as bookkeeper and policy clerk in an insurance office at fifteen. About this he said: "I wrote a very nice hand, and that was all that was needed to satisfactorily fill the position which I then had. Yet I was not fully satisfied but continued to dream and scribble when not otherwise occupied. I worked in the front part of A. W. White and Company's bank and when not busy volunteered to assist with the bank work and to do anything and everything I could to employ my time, never thinking whether I was to be paid for it or not, but having only a desire to work and learn. Mr. Morfe, the bookkeeper in the bank, wrote well and took pains to assist me in my efforts to become efficient as a penman. I learned to write well, so well, that I often made more before and after office hours by writing cards, invitations, and making maps than the amount of my regular salary. At nineteen I was keeping books and acting as policy clerk for Henry Wadsworth, the agent of Wells Fargo and Company. My time was not fully employed, and I was not working for the company but for the agent personally. I did the same as I had done in Mr. White's bank, volunteered to file a lot of bank letters, etc., and kept a set of books for the Sandy Smelting Company, which Mr. Wadsworth was doing personally. My actions so pleased Mr. Wadsworth that he employed me to do the collecting for Wells Fargo and Company and paid me $20.00 a month for this work in addition to my regular compensation of $75.00 from the insurance business. Thus I was in the employ of Wells Fargo and Company and one of my day-dreams had become a reality.

"When New Year's Eve arrived, I was in the office quite late writing calling cards. Mr. Wadsworth came in and pleasantly remarked that business was good and that it never rained but what it poured or something to that effect. He referred to my having kept the books of the Sandy Smelting Company without compensation. He said a number of complimentary things which made me very happy. He then handed me a check for $100.00 which doubly compensated me for all my extra work. The satisfaction enjoyed in feeling that I had won the good will and confidence of my employer was worth more to me than twice $100.00."

As another means of developing himself, Heber played marbles in the spring. In this game, as well as in all others in which he took part, he became an expert. "Knuckle-down-Boston" was a popular game in those days. The boys would make a large ring on the ground with a stick and place the marbles in the middle of it. Then with knuckles on the line at the edge, they would shoot at the marbles and, if they were playing "keeps," the winner would keep all the marbles he knocked out of the ring. Heber was an adept player of this game, and his pockets frequently bulged with his winnings. His chief competitor and stout contender was Injun Charlie, an Indian boy adopted by Nelson Empey. Of course, they both played "Knuckle-down-Boston" with other boys in their neighborhood, but the playing of these two experts became notable and drew a large gallery of spectators. His early business instincts were revealed when, with his marble winnings, he would hire other boys in the neighborhood to do his chores.

It was circumstances such as this that caused Bishop Woolley to describe him as the laziest boy in the Thirteenth Ward. The bishop, seeing other boys working around Widow Grant's place, supposed that she had to hire the chores done because her own coddled son was not disposed to do them. What the bishop did not know was that her lazy son was paying to have the work done out of the rewards of his own skill, and simply demonstrating in his early youth what was later to be one of Heber's greatest assets, a keen business sense.

He was born with a strong artistic tendency and had in his youth an ardent desire to witness the performances in the Salt Lake Theatre, but had no money with which to buy the tickets. In 1862 when the theatre was opened his mother was engaged in the costuming department. About that time he appeared on the stage as one of the pickaninnies in Uncle Tom's Cabin. This was his one and only stage appearance in the Salt Lake Theatre.

THEATRE EXPERIENCES

He had supernumerated in the Social Hall and had taken part in the dramatic activities of the Wasatch Literary Association. As a result he became particularly fond of the theatre and, being unable to pay a third circle price of twenty-five cents, he gained entrance by carrying water in an improvised five-gallon coal oil can from a deep well behind the Social Hall for the thirsty people in the third gallery, and he repeated the journey as often as they emptied the can. He was so faithful in the performance of this chore of water-carrying that he was soon promoted downward to the second circle. As he grew in years, his boyhood dreams came true, and he became the principal stockholder of the Salt Lake Theatre and had the privilege of occupying a stage box with six seats where he could gaze with great satisfaction into the third circle, the rendezvous of his boyhood days.

George Pyper, writing of this, said: "It is rather an odd coincidence that I, also a young denizen in the third circle, often looked down upon the white-collared habitues of the parquet and dress circle and dreamed a dream and wondered if I would be able to pay for a seat downstairs. Then one day when we were grown up, Heber asked me if I would like to manage the Salt Lake Theatre. Between gasps I accepted, and for over thirty years we worked together in intimate association to bring Salt Lake City the best offerings in drama and opera that the country could afford. That was the Golden Age of drama in Salt Lake, an age that will probably never come again."

LEARNING TO SING

"My mother tried to teach me when a small child to sing, but failed because of my inability to carry a tune. I joined a singing class taught by Professor Charles J. Thomas, who tried and tried in vain to teach me when ten years of age to run the scale or carry a simple tune, and finally he gave up in despair. He said that I could never, in this world, learn to sing. Perhaps he thought I might learn the divine art in another world. Ever since this attempt, I have frequently tried to sing when riding alone many miles from anyone who might hear me, but on such occasions could never succeed in carrying the tune of one of our familiar hymns for a single verse, and quite frequently not for a single line.

"Nearly ten months ago, while listening to Brother Horace S. Ensign sing, I remarked that I would gladly give two or three months of my spare time if by so doing it would result in my being able to sing one or two hymns. He answered that any person could learn to sing who had a reasonably good voice, and who possessed perseverance, and who was willing to do plenty of practicing. My response was that I had an abundance of voice and considerable perseverance. He was in my employ at the time, and I jokingly remarked that while he had not been hired as a music teacher, however, right now I would take my first music lesson of two hours upon the hymn, 'O My Father.' Much to my surprise, at the end of four or five days, I was able to sing this hymn with Brother Ensign without any mistakes. At the end of two weeks, I could sing it alone, with the exception of being a little flat on some of the high notes. My ear, not being cultivated musically, did not detect this, and the only way I knew of it was by having Brother Ensign and other friends tell me of the error.

"One of the leading Church officials, upon hearing me sing, when I first started to practice, remarked that my singing reminded him very much of the late Apostle Orson Pratt's poetry. He said Brother Pratt wrote only one piece of poetry, and this looked like it had been sawed out of boards, and sawed off straight.

"At the end of two or three months, I was able to sing not only, 'O My Father,' but 'God Moves in a Mysterious Way,' 'Come, Come, Ye Saints,' and two or three other hymns. Shortly after this, while taking a trip South, I sang one or more hymns in each of the Arizona stakes, and in Juarez, Mexico. Upon my return to Salt Lake City, I attempted to sing 'O My Father,' in the big Tabernacle, hoping to give an object lesson to young people, and to encourage them to learn to sing. I made a failure, getting off the key in nearly every verse, and instead of my effort encouraging the young people, I fear that it tended to discourage them.

"When first starting to practice, if some person would join in and sing bass, tenor or alto, I could not carry the tune. Neither could I sing if anyone accompanied me on the piano or organ, as the variety of sounds confused me.

"I am pleased to be able to say that I can now sing with piano or organ accompaniment and can also sing the lead in 'God Moves in a Mysterious Way,' in a duet, a trio, or quartet. I have learned quite a number of songs, and have been assured by Brother Ensign, and several others well-versed in music, to whom I have sung within the past few weeks, that I succeeded without making a mistake in a single note, which I fear would not be the case, were the attempt to be made in public. However, I intended to continue trying to sing the hymn, 'O My Father,' in the Assembly Hall or in the big Tabernacle until such time as I can sing it without error.

"Upon my recent trip to Arizona, I asked Elders Rudger Clawson and J. Golden Kimball if they had any objections to my singing one hundred hymns that day. They took it as a joke and assured me that they would be delighted. We were on the way back from Holbrook to St. Johns, a distance of about sixty miles. After I had sung about forty times, they assured me that if I sang the remaining sixty they would have nervous prostration. I paid no attention whatever to their appeal but held them to their bargain and sang the full one hundred. One hundred and fifteen songs in one day and four hundred in four days, is the largest amount of practicing I ever did.

"Today, my musical deafness is disappearing, and by sitting down to a piano and playing the lead notes, I can learn a song in less than one-tenth the time required when I first commenced to practice." [^3]

His beloved and intimate associate, George D. Pyper, made these comments on the President's learning to sing:

"President Grant was born with less tune, time, or rhythm than most mortals, yet by his intense energy and persistance, he overcame this handicap."

The story of his experiences in vocalization is one of the most interesting episodes in his life. He has many times, in a humorous vein, told of his efforts to learn how to sing.

"President Grant's closest friend, the late Brigadier General Richard W. Young, wrote him from the Philippine Islands begging him not to lessen his dignity by trying to sing. 'You can't be the George Goddard of the Church,' warned Brother Young, and President Grant wrote back to the effect that he would yet sing in the Tabernacle, and he kept his word. It is doubtful if President Grant ever seriously studied technique, especially the art of phrasing, accentuation, mood, expression, except some instruction given him by Horace S. Ensign and Professor Evan Stephens, yet with his natural learning ability, his perseverance, his toil, added to a personal magnetism and a fine God-given voice, he was able to sing his Church hymns and such songs as 'The Flag Without a Stain,' and 'The Holy City,' with such remarkable skill as to elicit compliments from Professor Evan Stephens. President Grant's experience has been an object lesson in perseverance and has certainly demonstrated the truth of the adage often quoted by him: 'That which we persist in doing becomes easier to do; not that the nature of the thing is changed, but our power to do is increased.' His success in overcoming tone deafness is remarkable. He himself considered it one of the greatest accomplishments of his life.

"What is more important though, in the opinion of the writer, is not the learning of songs, but the enthusiasm for the musical art which his continual practice kindled in his heart, thus increasing his power to aid in the development of music among his people. Note the contribution which he made to this art: Early in his presidency, he organized the Church Music Committee. He declined the offer of the splendid McCune home for himself, which was made by Mr. and Mrs. Alfred W. McCune, but he accepted it as a home for the school of music. This home became the McCune School of Music and Art, while he himself preferred to live in a very humble cottage. It was under his administration that the Tabernacle Choir Sunday broadcast over nationwide radio networks was instituted. He helped musicians, he has encouraged the organization of choirs, he has sponsored the Tabernacle Choir in several trips to California and Chicago and authorized the Church Music Committee to establish courses of instruction for choristers and organists throughout the Church. He was indeed a friend of the divine art of music." [^4]

Developing his own talents was one of his chief objectives and the greatest source of his accomplishments. He never criticized other men's weaknesses but made war on his own. That practice has in it the very essence of personal growth. Self-analysis and self-discipline are the twin virtues that underlie individual development. He engaged in criticism of himself but not of others.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Improvement Era, Vol. 39, p. 689.
[^2] Ibid., Vol. 39, p. 687.
[^3] Ibid., Vol. 41, p. 712.
[^4] Ibid., Vol. 1, 688-689.
