Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. IV .

BUSINESS EXPERIENCES

AS a young man Heber J. Grant proceeded with boldness to play a large role in the economic history of his people. He was a pioneer in industry, second only to Brigham Young. Pioneering in industry requires much the same sturdy qualities that pioneering new lands requires: faith, vision, imagination, patience, and fortitude, backed by a determination that knows no failure. Heber J. Grant had all of these qualities.

A boyhood associate, Heber M. Wells, said this of him: "He has probably been instrumental in establishing and furthering the cause of more successful intermountain industries than any other man of his time. His personal credit, his unquestioned integrity, his super-salesmanship brought capital to the aid of the Church, the community, and private enterprises. In times of panic and in times of plenty Heber J. Grant has been able to raise a few dollars or millions where other men have failed to raise any amount. This has been done largely by his personal guarantee and persuasion. He has never repudiated or failed to pay a dollar of obligation for which he was directly or indirectly responsible, legally or morally, and the result is that today, as during all the many decades since he was a young man, he can walk into the offices of executives and directors of great financial institutions in America and be affectionately greeted by men who are proud to know him as a friend and a leader of financial industries." [^1]

Home industry was almost a passion with him. He fostered every enterprise that he thought would aid in making the people independent and self-sustaining.

His interest in local business undertakings is shown by the number of enterprises in which he was engaged. Ranching, cattle-raising, vinegar-manufacturing, soap-making, bee culture, merchandising, implement business, sugar industry, livery business, insurance, banking, brokerage, newspaper business were among his ventures. He never was engaged in any business that was not stimulated by his connection with it.

Nor was he ever engaged in any business or enterprise that was not worthy of public support. His motives were to help the people, create employment, advance the interests of the Church, and build up the community. In many of these enterprises he hoped to make money. He loved to make money. He said so. Not for selfish purposes but so he could share with others, so he could foster worthy causes and help those who deserved and needed it. His purposes were always commendable, and his business associates were of high repute.

BANKING

Prominent among the great enterprises with which he was actively identified was banking. Before he was twenty-one years of age, he was made assistant cashier of Zion's Savings Bank. Brigham Young was then president of the bank as well as President of the Church. The bank was in its infancy, and in addition to filling the office of assistant cashier, Heber J. Grant was janitor, paying and receiving teller, note teller, and bookkeeper. This is what he said about it: "I opened the bank promptly at ten o'clock and closed promptly at three p.m. I had to give a bond of $25,000 vouching for my honesty. I walked to the office of President Brigham Young, and just as he opened the door with his cape on his arm, I said, 'President Young, as you know, the other day I was elected assistant cashier of Zion's Savings Bank and Trust Company, and they require a bond of $25,000 to guarantee my honesty. I thought it would be a very appropriate thing for the president of the bank to sign my bond, and I have come up for your signature.' He smiled and said, 'Heber, I do not see how in the world I could get out of signing your bond. I said so many good things about you at the directors' meeting that if I refused to sign your bond they would accuse me of not telling the truth.' He remarked that it would be a real pleasure to sign it and that he would have his clerk make it out. 'But,' said he, 'I have had a very busy day, and I am just going out for a ride. My carriage is waiting for me.' He never lived to sign the bond. He died in a few days." [^2]

After Heber M. Wells, the first governor of Utah under statehood, retired from the city recorder's office, he expressed regret to President Grant that he had not learned more about business instead of spending his time working for the city. Whereupon the President suggested that he would go out and try to start a bank with a capital of $250,000 as a business enterprise. He did go out to raise the capital, but his friends insisted on making the capital $500,000, which he felt was a mistake. He raised practically the entire capital of $500,000 and there was not a single dollar of promotion fees in it. The new bank was named the State Bank of Utah and was opened in the spring of 1890 with Heber J. Grant as president and Heber M. Wells as cashier. But through circumstances beyond human control its life was short and precarious, for the year following its organization the panic of 1891 got under way. Its president, Heber J. Grant, lost everything and, to use his own words, "became more than $100,000 worse off than nothing."

The story of how he saved the State Bank of Utah and Zion's Savings Bank through the prolonged and disastrous panic of 1891, 1892 and 1893 is an interesting story. Here is the account of it as he dictated it:

"I made a trip in 1891 to New York to try to sell $100,000 of Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution notes owned by the State Bank of Utah. Money was then lending on the New York Stock Exchange at one half of one per cent a day—182 1/2 per cent per year.

"Before starting, I was talking with President Woodruff, who knew why I was going. He smiled and said, 'You are going East on a very difficult mission. Sit down on this chair and let me give you a blessing.' I sat down, and he gave me a wonderful blessing, stating that I would get all the money I needed and more would be offered to me if I needed it. I went out with a feeling of perfect assurance that I would be successful.

"I heard that the directors of the Deseret National Bank were laughing at the idea of my being foolish enough to think I could cash Z.C.M.I. notes in the East at six per cent per annum when money was a half of one per cent a day.

"I stopped at Omaha and asked the president of the Omaha National Bank, a fine gentleman by the name of Millard, to cash one note of $12,000. He laughed and said: 'The idea of your coming down here trying to get money when it is half of one per cent a day. Your bank is as well fixed financially, if not better, than ours. Young man, let me give you some advice. You go home, call all your banking friends together, and decide to lend a little more than would be considered strictly safe, and the money will circulate around and come back into your bank again, and you can take care of your own bank.'

"I told him it was money I was after and not advice, that I had to go East for $100,000, and that I intended to get it, and I would stop on my way home and tell him where I got it.

"He said, 'Well, Mr. Grant, it will be quite a long while before I see you.'

"When I got to Chicago, I asked the vice president of the Merchants Loan and Trust Company to cash two notes for $12,000 each. He did not even invite me to come into the bank. I stood outside of the counter. He smiled at my asking him for a loan and declined to cash these two notes. He said, 'Young man, have you read the morning papers?'

"I said: 'Certainly.'

"'Have you read the financial sheet?'

"I said: 'Yes.'

"'What is money loaning at in New York?'

"I answered, 'One-half of one per cent a day.'

"'Well, do you expect to get any money at six percent per annum?'

"I said: 'Yes, I do because that is the rate you charge your customers if their balances are good enough to justify your making loans.'

"He said: 'Young man, how long have you been in the banking business?'

"'Our bank is not quite a year old.'

"'I have been in the banking business all my life and my father before me. Let me give you some advice.' And he gave me the same advice that Mr. Millard of Omaha had given.

"I said: 'I did not come to Chicago to get that advice; I had the same advice from the president of the Omaha National. I told him I would stop on my way home and tell him where I got the money. I will do the same with you.'

"He smiled and said he did not expect to see me for a long time.

"When I got to New York, I doubled again my request and asked the vice president of the National Park Bank to take four notes of $12,000 each—$48,000.

"He said: 'Why, Mr. Grant, the idea of your coming into this bank with a panic on and money lending at one-half of one per cent a day and expecting to get a loan of $48,000 when we have never met before.'

"I said: 'Would you mind giving me a sheet of paper?'

"He handed me one and I wrote my name on it the entire size of the paper, and I brought my fist down on my signature and said: 'Do you know my signature?'

"He said: 'Yes.'

"I said: 'I did not come in here, sir, as a "gold brick" man, a stranger to you. You know my signature; your bank solicited us to open a bank account. You do not seem to know how to treat a customer decently. I will tell you how we do business in the wild and wooly west. If a man offers us a note, if it does not suit us, we let him talk to our committee and see if he cannot furnish some additional securities or endorsements so we could be justified in making the loan.'

"'As a rule,' he said, 'we do not allow anyone to meet with our committee; we only allow applications to be made in writing; they are very busy.'

"I said, 'All right. Give me another piece of paper, please, and I will write a letter to your committee. When do they meet?'

"He said: 'Within a half hour.' And as nearly as I can remember (I did not keep a copy of the letter) my letter read about as follows: 'I am asking you to cash four notes of the Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution of $12,000 each. They have never failed to meet their obligations from the day the institution was organized. They are not in distress financially; their notes will be paid. Our bank is in distress because of the panic, and the notes belong to our bank. We bought these notes without endorsement but knowing there was a panic on, I endorsed all of the notes, and I got twelve other directors to do the same, so you have the endorsement of thirteen men on these notes, and these men are worth more than a million dollars. Now if you want some more endorsements, I can get them for you. You have the endorsement of the bank that is in distress selling these notes; their capital is $500,000. If you do not want to buy a note guaranteed by thirteen reputable men and a bank of a half million dollars capital, take my advice and do not do business so far away from home.'

"I signed my name to it and when the committee met and the president of the bank saw the notes (I had left them with the vice president) he said: 'What? Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution with all-seeing eyes in the corner, and 'Holiness to the Lord' printed over it? That is good for sore eyes. When I was the third assistant cashier of this bank, it was my business by instruction of the president to purchase commercial paper that was for sale, and I was instructed to buy all the notes offered of Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution, and I haven't seen one of their notes now for about ten years; they have got in a position where they do not need any help from us. We must not fail to buy these notes from Mr. Grant.'

"So I got my money.

"Then I went to H. B. Chaflin and Company and asked Mr. John Chaflin if he would not cash five of Z.C.M.I. notes of $5,000 each for our bank, explaining that our bank was in distress, but Z.C.M.I. was not. He said: 'It will be a pleasure to do that for you, Mr. Grant.'

"I then went to Kuntz Brothers Bank and asked them to lend me $25,000. They said: 'Mr. Grant, you have never done any business with our bank, and we have all we can do to take care of our customers.'

"I said: 'Yes, but the name of Mr. Lewis S. Hills, the president of Deseret Bank, is on the back of these notes, and he is your customer, and he has written to you suggesting that you buy some Z.C.M.I. notes from our bank, and saying that he knows they are good. I have got all of the directors guaranteeing them."

"He said, 'Well, you don't do business with us, but I will take $15,000 of them.'

"I said: 'All right. I won't split hairs with you.'

"I immediately sat down and wrote the following letter to Mr. Orson Smith of Chicago, vice president of the Merchants Loan and Trust Company: 'Dear Mr. Smith: I have been here forty-eight hours, and I have $88,000. Can I send you the remaining $12,000 note? Kindly wire at my expense to H. B. Chaflin Company and ask them if they have loaned me $25,000 at 6 per cent; the National Park Bank, $48,000; Kuntz Brothers, $15,000; and wire if I can count on you for the other $12,000 that I need to make up the $100.000.'

"I did not think he would say yes, and I thought I would change my bank account when I went home. He telegraphed: 'Send the note.'

"Then I succeeded through my insurance friends in Hartford and in New York in borrowing a lot of money without the endorsement of our bank and without individual endorsements except my own. They all said: 'Why, Mr. Grant, we want you to sign this note.'

"I said: 'I cannot pay it, but I know it will be paid, and I am willing to sign it.'

"I borrowed $336,000, as I remember it, all told. Just before going to the train to go home, I received a telegram: 'We need $48,000 more.' I felt sure it was a mistake, that they did not need it. I started for Chicago and wired to one of my insurance friends in Hartford, and he made arrangements to get another $48,000 if I needed it after I got home. After I got home, it was not needed, and therefore it was never borrowed.

"From the day that President Woodruff blessed me and said I would get all the money I was going for and more if I needed it, I had a perfect assurance in my heart that his promise would be fulfilled, and it was fulfilled to the very letter.

"When I got back to Chicago, I stopped and told Orson Smith, vice president of the Merchants Loan and Trust Company, of getting the money, and he congratulated me and invited me to come in behind the counter. When I got to Omaha, I stopped and told Mr. Millard, as I had promised to do, and told him what I had done, that I got the $336,000. He immediately telephoned to the vice president and manager of the Union Pacific Railroad and said: 'Come down to the bank, I want to introduce you to a young man.' He said: 'I want him to meet the vice president of the Union Pacific Railroad, and the manager of the Union Pacific Railroad ought to meet a fellow who can get $336,000 at six per cent with money at half of one per cent a day.'

"I had a very pleasant visit with him. I cannot remember his name at this late date."

It was during those trying days that Heber J. Grant demonstrated his capacity to meet any emergency. Through his heroic endeavor, and against the most fearful odds, he prevented banks from being forced to close their doors when their deposits were melting like snow under an August sun. In 1912 the Utah State National Bank was created through the consolidation of three banks, the State Bank of Utah being one of the three merged institutions. No history of the Utah State National Bank (now the Utah First National Bank of Salt Lake City) could be truthfully written without giving grateful acknowledgment to Heber J. Grant for his helpful influence. Under his leadership it grew steadily in resources and influence until it became one of the strong banks of the country. For years he was president of the Utah State National Bank. He knew banking and the service which a sound bank should render and was a staunch supporter of this great enterprise in the state of Utah.

SUGAR FACTORY

In August, 1889, twenty-eight citizens of Utah became the incorporators and stockholders in the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company at Lehi. This was the first factory in America to be erected with American-made machinery by American workmen. The establishment of that sugar factory marked the beginning of an industry that has brought millions of dollars to the West and added value to every acre of land near a factory. It owes its very existence to Heber J. Grant and President Wilford Woodruff. This factory was situated in Lehi. The contract was given to C. H. Meyers and Company to erect it at a cost of $400,000. Soon after this contract was signed, the panic of 1891 came, and many of the subscribers were unable to meet their commitments. In January, 1891, a special committee was appointed to complete the factory. Heber J. Grant, then thirty-five years of age, was made a member of that committee.

This was his introduction to the sugar business. It was a significant day for that industry when he became identified with it. No other individual in the state of Utah gave to it so generously of his money and of his might. Had it not been for his great ability, his resourcefulness, his faith and confidence in the enterprise, it would have failed. He told in his own words how he raised the last $100,000 necessary to complete this factory. "The last $100,000 needed was loaned by Wells Fargo and Company of San Francisco. The manager of the bank there had formerly managed their branch bank in Salt Lake City, and I was at one time his personal friend. He told me that it would be impossible to lend the money, a thousand miles away, on local security, and in the midst of a panic. I told him he had believed in me as a boy, and now I wanted him to believe in me as one of the fifteen men managing the Mormon Church. He said, 'My boy, I would be glad to lend you the money, but my loan committee would not approve my doing so.' I finally said, 'Mr. Wadsworth, the Mormon Church will be alive when you and I are dead. I am sure that I can get you four notes of $25,000 each from the Mormon Church, payable in six, twelve, eighteen, and twenty-four months, and if you will write the names of twenty-five of the financially strongest men in Salt Lake City I can get twenty of them to guarantee these notes.' He laughed and said: 'My boy, you cannot do it.' I said, 'do not ask anything more, I know I can do it.' 'All right,' he said, 'If you can, you may have the money, and I will give you a hundred per cent margin. You have asked for a margin of five, you can have a margin of ten. I will write thirty names, and if you can get any twenty of them, you can have the money.' He wrote five or six names and then smiled and tore up his paper and said, 'Heber, let me see: 1875 to 1891 is sixteen years, and any man who was well-fixed sixteen years ago when I left Salt Lake City might be busted now. I will write to my successor in Salt Lake City and ask him to write the thirty names and tell him to hand you the $100,000 to draw on me with the note attached. If you get your signatures, I will not even submit the matter to my committee.'

"I secured twenty-four signatures. Three of the men were out of town, and only two of the thirty declined, and David Eccles, who overheard a discussion preceding their decline when I solicited their signatures, said, 'Heber, I overheard your story, is my name one of the thirty?' 'No,' I said, 'I never thought of going to Ogden for signatures.' He remarked, 'I would like to look at the notes.' I handed them to him. He did not read them but turned them over and endorsed them and as he handed them back, remarked, 'Heber, my name won't hurt them.' And, by the way, he could have bought all the property belonging to the other twenty-four. 'And,' he continued, 'when a note from the Mormon Church is not good for $100,000, Salt Lake City, will be like Nauvoo, Illinois, excuse my profanity, too damned hot for Mormons to live here. Any time the President would like to have my name on another $100,000 come up to Ogden. It will be a pleasure to endorse his note and tell President Woodruff that if he wants and cannot get renewal of these notes, I will take them up, and he can pay me in one year, five years, ten years, or whenever it is convenient.' I confess I would have thoroughly enjoyed hugging David Eccles at that time."

The beet sugar business was ultimately a financial success, but not until it had tested the faith and the soul fiber of all those who were connected with it in the years of its development.

During the postwar crisis of 1921 the beet sugar industry was again in jeopardy. It required re-financing, and Heber J. Grant secured the necessary aid. Of this circumstance, he said: "I went East to negotiate a renewal of the $7,000,000 with the banks of Chicago, St. Paul, and New York and finally succeeded in getting a renewal of the $7,000,000 and a pledge of $2,800,000, or forty per cent additional loan to pay for the small crop of beets. Subsequently a suggestion was made that the government, which, through the War Finance Corporation, was taking care of cotton raisers, ought to take care of the beet growers. Mr. Eugene Meyers was in Salt Lake City arranging for loans to stockmen, and the suggestion was that the government ought to finance the beet growers. Mr. Meyers said, 'I will give it my attention as soon as I get back to Washington, and I believe it can be done.' He wired, 'Send representatives to Washington of the various sugar companies, and I am sure the matter can be fixed up, but I don't believe that it can possibly be done by correspondence.' Henry H. Rolapp, who was then the president of the Amalgamated Sugar Company, Mr. Carlton of the Holley Sugar Company, Mr. Tetrikin, president of the Great Western Sugar Company, and myself went to Washington, also the vice president of the United National Bank in Denver. The Great Western and the Holley did not need any money, and we appreciated very much the presence of the officials of these companies being with us to vouch that the security which we offered would be good.

"When I reached Washington, Reed Smoot asked how much money we would need and I said, 'Ten million dollars.' He said, 'You ask for it. I have already converted the President of the United States that you are entitled to all you want.' He said, 'You ask for it.' Senator Reed Smoot took our party to call on the President, and President Harding turned to Mr. Meyers, the head of the War Finance Corporation, and said, 'Mr. Meyers, President Grant and his associates have here an enterprise that is entitled to all the money they want.' Then he turned to me and said: 'President Grant, this man Meyers has the whole United States behind him, you make him come through.'

"We succeeded in getting a pledge of ten million dollars as a loan from the War Finance Corporation, which was enough to take care of all the beet sugar factories in Utah and Idaho for the next year's beet crop. We used nine million dollars and a fraction, and it was all paid back in a year."

Few experiences in the world brought so much joy to the heart of Heber J. Grant as services of this kind: securing the money, paying it back, and saving the industry. For more than fifty years, Heber J. Grant was a steadfast and loyal friend to that great basic industry. When others lacked faith and lost courage, he never faltered in his support of the sugar industry and lived to see his vision and his foresight rewarded by abundant harvests to investors, farmers, factory workers, and all connected with it.

INSURANCE

Life insurance is a business of great magnitude. It touches the lives of half the people and most of the families of the nation. When it was almost in its infancy, Heber J. Grant had the vision to see the great part it was destined to play in the world and to become actively interested in it. Of all the enterprises in which he was early engaged, this was his first love, and it held first place in his affections to the day of his death. He believed that it was the highest expression of wisdom for a man to provide some insurance for those dependent upon him. This principle was a great factor in winning his constant loyalty to the insurance business. He began in the insurance business as a clerk in a fire insurance office when he was sixteen years of age. A few years later he purchased the business from his employer who was moving to San Francisco. On December 11, 1888, he effected a partnership known as the Heber J. Grant and Company. This company represented at one time all classes of insurance, including life. He wrote as high as a million dollars of life insurance in one year, which was a large amount for those days. He organized the Home Fire Insurance Company of Utah, now known as the Utah Home Fire Insurance Company, on September 30, 1886, with a paid up capital of $100,000. At the same time he organized a life insurance company known as the Home Life Insurance Company, a running mate for the fire insurance company. The fire insurance company is still operating, being licensed in a number of states and is one of the oldest companies west of the Mississippi River. The life insurance company continued for three or four years but, owing to difficulty in converting the people, the company finally dis-incorporated. The stockholders were paid every dollar of their investment, and the premiums were returned to policy holders, $140.00 for every $100.00 paid in. President Grant believed in life insurance next to his religion. Upon the death of Joseph F. Smith, who was the president of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company, Heber J. Grant became the president of the company. This was in November, 1918, and during his presidency the company grew in assets from $2,500,000 to over $16,000,000. His desire always was to give his own people a maximum of protection at a minimum cost. He believed the insuring public should have their protection as inexpensive as consistent with safety. He did not aim to build a great institution, but to maintain in a sound financial condition those companies with which he was connected.

He had all that it takes to make a great insurance agent. Henry B. Hyde, the founder of the Equitable Life Insurance Company, and one of the "Napoleons" of the life insurance business, visited Salt Lake City many years ago and heard Heber J. Grant when he was a young man speak in the Tabernacle. Mr. Hyde was greatly impressed and stopped after the meeting and said, "Mr. Grant, I have inquired your name. I am Henry B. Hyde, and my specialty is finding life insurance agents. I have listened to a natural-born agent today and I want his service." Then he asked, "What are you earning, young man?" He was informed that the salary was $300 a month. Mr. Hyde offered him $600 a month if he would join the Equitable and was insistent that he sign a contract with his company. President Grant told him that he gave his time to the Church and could only work twenty-four hours a week on insurance. Even this was satisfactory to Mr. Hyde, but the offer was refused. One of the President's objections, which he did not then state, was that money was worth six per cent in New York and three or four times that much here. In fact, loans were made at two per cent a month, and all insurance premiums paid here would be sent to the East.

Later President Grant went to New York to see Mr. Hyde, and Mr. Hyde said to him, "I am going to make you one of the wealthiest men in Utah." He told him how he would do it, and he could have done what he suggested. Henry B. Hyde built the Equitable from a $100,000 company to one of $300,000,000 before he died. It had a better net reserve than the biggest companies in the world. This wizard in the insurance business recognized in Heber J. Grant the qualities that go to make a really great insurance man.

No less interesting was President Grant's contact with Colonel Alexander G. Haws, his lifelong and steadfast friend. Colonel Haws said to President Grant on one occasion, "I can give you a $40,000 a year job as vice-president of the New York Life. I've known you from childhood, and you are my first choice for that position." President Grant told him that he was not getting a tithe of $40,000 from the Church, but that he could not accept his offer. Colonel Haws felt that he was making a very great mistake. The man who was appointed to the position, Mr. Perkins, went to New York for $40,000 a year. Subsequently he left the insurance company and went with J. Pierpont Morgan and Company who paid him a quarter of a million dollar salary and gave him an interest in the business. President Grant, commenting on this, said, "The officials of the New York Life told me a year ago when I called at their office that is what I might have received if I had stayed with the New York Life. The chairman of the board said, 'Mr. Grant, that salary of $250,000 was nothing. He got a million dollars a year dividend for ten years from the company as his share of the business.' I said, 'I missed a great opportunity, but I am not sorry.'"

At that time Heber J. Grant, as President of the Church, was president of the Hotel Utah, the Z.C.M.I., Zion's Savings Bank and Trust Company, Utah State National Bank, the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company, the Beneficial Life Insurance Company. In addition, President Grant was a director of the Union Pacific Railroad Company, president of the Heber J. Grant and Company and of the Home Fire Insurance Company. All of these extra assignments took of his time and energy, but never for one moment did they encroach on his real assignment as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, an institution of far greater scope and significance in the world than all the insurance or bank companies or industrial organizations, an institution destined to prevail as a master influence in the world. From the time he was twenty-five years of age up to the age of forty, he engaged in many business enterprises of which no two were alike. They covered a variety of fields.

Thus Heber J. Grant initiated many enterprises and made a substantial contribution to the industrial growth of his community.

In his autobiography he wrote. "In 1879 (23 years old) I purchased from Lorin M. Richards, a half interest in the Utah Vinegar Works at Ogden. In 1880 I purchased Mr. Richards' interests in the works, paying him $6,500. In 1881 my vinegar works were destroyed by fire. I had invested quite an amount of borrowed money in the business and had something over $6,000 of my own. After selling the real estate, damaged machinery and adding to the amount received $5,000, insurance money, and paying the same on my indebtedness, I was $3,000 in debt and had nothing to pay it with."

In February, 1884, he entered into a partnership with his brother, Joshua F. Grant, and George T. Odell, for the purpose of dealing in wagons, machinery, and agricultural implements. In 1885 the business of Grant, Odell, and Company was incorporated with a paid-up capital of $60,000, and he was made president of the corporation. This became a strong and prosperous business and for many years paid a substantial dividend to its stockholders. As a result of the depression of 1929 it was placed in a receivership and was finally liquidated.

He purchased ninety percent of the stock of the Salt Lake Herald. With the assistance of Horace G. Whitney, whom the President nominated, "one of the finest newspaper men that ever lived, both as a writer and as a business manager," the Herald became a great success within three years, making more than $12,000 a year.

His daughter, Lucy, has spoken of another enterprise. "We thought our fortune was surely to be made in soap when Father founded the Grant Soap Factory. The Grant soap was far better than any other laundry soap. We wrote hundreds of letters and enclosed folded circulars telling about the merits of this soap. All other soaps were banished from our house, and the Grant Laundry Soap was used for everything." The banishment of the other soap from "our house" is true to the Heber J. Grant tradition. He only wanted others to do what he was willing to do.

MOJAVE LAND AND CATTLE COMPANY

Anthony W. Ivins' journal contains the following reference to the organization of the Mojave Land and Cattle Company:

"In 1885 I engaged in the purchase of steers which I sold to parties who drove them north. The steers, brought from the Shivwit Mountains, about seventy-five miles south of St. George, were the finest I had ever seen in our country, and I was attracted to that part of the country by this fact. I finally bought the part of the Shivwit Mountains owned by the people of Washington County, Utah, and known as the Mojave Ranch, with several hundred head of cattle. This ranch and cattle I subsequently sold to B. F. Saunders. Mr. Saunders improved the ranch and did some fencing and put on a large number of cattle. He also incorporated the Mojave Land and Cattle Company. He owned all of the stock. I then interested my cousin, H. J. Grant, Jesse W. Fox, Jr., and L. W. Hardy, all of Salt Lake City, to invest with me in the enterprise, and we bought Mr. Saunders out, paying him $40,000 for the ranch and cattle. I was made manager of the company, and we started in business with good prospects for success."

This company continued in business until 1896 when A. W. Ivins was called to go to Mexico. Under his wise management it paid the stockholders annually a substantial dividend. It was one of the profitable enterprises in which Heber J. Grant was interested.

Referring to it, he said: "I was feeling as blue, financially speaking, as I ever did in my life when my cousin, Anthony W. Ivins, was called to go to Mexico. He had been marvelously successful in running ranches. He and I owned half of a fifty-thousand-dollar ranch that for years paid a twenty-five percent dividend regularly. The panic had come on and some institutions in which I had money were not paying dividends. The twelve-thousand-five-hundred dollars I owned in this ranch was paying an interest at six per cent on fifty thousand dollars of my debts.

"I was sitting in the Temple, feeling heartbroken (although I was one of the committee that nominated Brother Ivins to go into Mexico because I felt impressed that he was needed there and that the Lord wanted him to go there), when it came to me as plainly as though a voice had declared it:

"'You have no need of feeling sad because of your cousin's going to Mexico. He is going right where the Lord wants him to go, and you shall have the exquisite joy of welcoming him back into this room of the Temple as an Apostle of this last dispensation.'

"I immediately shed some tears of joy and gratitude. And this promise was fulfilled." [^3]

This association with his cousin, Tone, as he affectionately called him, was pleasant and profitable. Heber had implicit confidence in the judgment of his cousin and a profound admiration for his ability. Anthony Ivins was four years his senior and one of the ablest and most beloved men that this state has ever produced. The President's affection for his cousin was like that of David for Jonathan—he loved him above all other men, and well he might have done.

These men were both distinguished for their generosity and their humanitarianism. They were different in temperament, but each seemed to complement the other perfectly. Consequently, they made a strong team. Heber was brilliant and spectacular in action—fast to move to conclusions, and courageous almost to a fault. His honesty and integrity were stainless. A. W. Ivins knew cattle and horses and birds and flowers and men, and loved the great outdoors. He was refined in his tastes and in all respects a most estimable and companionable man of sound judgment and goodness of heart.

Time will work many changes, and when all the business institutions and enterprises with which Heber J. Grant was connected have passed away and are forgotten, his name will shine in the records of the race, as a great President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—the institution to which he gave his undivided heart and to which he consecrated his time, his talents, and his affections.

During the territorial days Heber J. Grant was elected a member of the Utah Legislature, and in 1885 was a member of the city council of Salt Lake City. No doubt he could have been the first governor of Utah under statehood had he chosen to accept the honor. As a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, he felt it unwise to aspire to the governorship of the state. He cherished this offer on the part of his friends most highly. He regarded it not only as a personal honor but also as a vindication of his mother's judgment in accepting the hard lot of the people of her faith rather than the comfort and security offered by her brothers in the East if she would renounce her religion and stay with them. He wanted to show them that she had chosen wisely. The idea made a great appeal to him; but if it involved a choice between his allegiance to his Church and to the state, if it conflicted with his duty as a Church leader, he would rather forego the political honor, no matter how great. His decision in this regard, which was a hard one to make, reflects great credit on him and is convincing proof of his allegiance to the Church. He lived to see the wisdom of his choice completely confirmed.

When he was forty years old, the age at which his father had died, he was frail, and his life's expectancy was none too promising. He was six feet and three-eighths of an inch tall in his stocking feet and weighed one hundred thirty-five pounds. However, at that age he had made two momentous decisions. Greed for wealth and thirst for earthly power are the besetting sins of ambitious souls. He had cast both of these aside. The first to go was the love of wealth. It came earlier, at twenty-four, when he accepted the call to go to Tooele; and the tempter came again when Henry B. Hyde said to him, "I am going to make you the wealthiest man in the state of Utah." As tempting as it was, this generous offer was not accepted. His second great decision was made when, at the age of forty, he refused the offer of the governorship of the state.

Back in 1936 this question was put to a member of the Presiding Bishopric, "What part has President Grant played in safeguarding the assets of the Church?" The answer was, "The part which President Grant has played in keeping the Church out of debt has been manifested in every way. He set his face like flint against contracting obligations greater than the revenues would justify and has nurtured, protected, and greatly enhanced its assets until today the Church owes not one red cent; but on the contrary, it is the owner of much real estate and other valuable investments of gratifying magnitude.

"President Grant, whose guiding genius is ever alert in all of these involvements, and who is a wonderful salesman, gives personal attention to the financial activities of every Mormon community, and he never neglects admonitions for the spiritual welfare of the members of the Church." [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Instructor, Vol. 76, p. 228.
[^2] Ibid., Vol. 39, p. 687.
[^3] Ibid., Vol. 41, p. 712.
[^4] Ibid., Vol. 1, 688-689.
