Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. V .

THE HOME LIFE OF THE GRANTS

THE best criterion by which to judge a people or a nation is the atmosphere of its firesides. Individual happiness and national well-being center there. Home building is the highest of the fine arts, the master job of mortal men and women. In no other way did Heber J. Grant show superior craftsmanship than in the selection of his companions and the creation of his homes. At one time he had three of them, and each was a center of faith and a refuge from the turmoil of the world, a haven of peace, confidence, and love.

LUCY STRINGHAM GRANT

Before his twenty-first birthday Heber J. Grant married Lucy Stringham, daughter of Briant and Lucy Ashby Stringham. Briant was one of the pioneers who arrived in Salt Lake Valley, July 24, 1847. He was then unmarried and twenty-four years of age. He lived twenty-four more years and died suddenly, leaving a large family with little to sustain them. At the time of her father's death Lucy was thirteen years old.

From all description she was a brilliant and beautiful girl—a leader in her mother's family and in the circle in which she moved. She began teaching school at fourteen years of age to help the family and married Heber J. Grant in her nineteenth year. She died at the age of thirty-five, leaving five daughters and a little son.

For several years during her short life she was an invalid, bedfast for months at a time, but to the last she directed her household.

Her photographs show that she possessed refinement, decision, and strength of character. She was intelligent and distinguished in personality and appearance—a beautiful woman. Rachel, her oldest daughter, pays this tribute in verse to her mother's eyes:

MY MOTHER'S VALIANT EYES

O! Mother dear, my heart goes back

Along the trail of yesteryears;

I see again your valiant eyes

Although my own are dim with tears.

You could not stay with love to light

My way when shadows should arise,

But you could leave a gift divine,

The memory of your valiant eyes.

I now can see how brave you were,

Your soul with bands of pain held fast,

Yet in your flashing valiant eyes

Was faith no shade could overcast.

When weary with the strife of life

My heavy hands would cease to fight,

A vision of your valiant eyes

Awakens courage for the right.

When death shall come with beckoning hand

And free my soul from earthly ties,

One boon I crave from out the dusk—

Love's greeting from your valiant eyes.

Lucy, her second daughter, gives this interesting and intimate account of her mother.

"Mother was medium in height. She stood erect. Her hair was almost black and very abundant. She wore it in the style of the day, with bangs in front and a high bob. Her features were marked and distinct, but her eyes were the loveliest I have ever seen. Many people who knew Mother have remarked what a fine-looking woman she was, so gracious and pleasing were her manners.

"She taught me a very simple prayer, as early as I could talk, asking Father in heaven to bless Father, Mother, Grandmother, and to bless Grandmother Grant and to make her hear, and to help me to be a good girl.

"A young boy who came to stay at our home when Father was away has told us about Mother's fervent prayers. He said those prayers had a deep influence for good upon his life.

"Mother was artistic and loved beautiful things. She did some pen and ink sketches which Father had framed, and they were in our house for years. I am sure if she had had the opportunity for even a little instruction she would have excelled in some of the fine arts. She was exceptionally kind and was greatly loved by all who worked in the home. Mother was an executive. She wasted no time. She planned everything. In the summer we had a sewing woman who made us a full winter wardrobe. Her work was all planned; Monday was washday; Tuesday, ironing day; Wednesday the basket of clothes which needed mending was by Mother's side; Friday was the day for sweeping and cleaning; and Saturday was also a cleaning day. During Mother's life we all seemed to have plenty of the necessities and comforts of life. There were men to milk the cows, take care of the grounds, and help around the house. A horse and surrey or a carriage was ready whenever we wanted one, as Father was interested in the livery stables. Theatre tickets were always available. Mother, however, did not turn us over to the hired help. It seemed to me she always knew where we were, and what we were doing. She took a special interest in all of our activities and in all of our friends. She made our home so pleasant and happy that we always loved to be there. I love to think back over those happy times when Mother sat under the gas light and we gathered around while she read from the Youth's Companion, Hans Brinker or the Silver Skates, Little Lord Fauntleroy, or some of Louisa Alcott's works.

"Mother was far ahead of her time in the matter of diet and the care of us when we were ill. We lived very simply with plenty of milk, vegetables, fruits, nuts, and raisins, wholewheat bread, and very little meat. She believed in the water cure. She had a great deal of literature which she studied on that cure. She practiced her skill on us, and while we hated to have the packs, I think her method was very effective. If we didn't feel very well, she would give us lots and lots of cold and hot water to drink. She would prepare a pack for our whole body by wringing a sheet out of very hot water, spread it on a quilt, and have us lie down on the wet sheet. By the time we were all wrapped up in the sheet it would be getting rather cold, but it soon warmed up to a steaming temperature when she loaded us with quilts and down puffs. We stayed in it an hour even if we did plead to get out, because it was so unbearably hot. After we were out, she gave us an alcohol rub. It was very effective, but sometimes we felt the cure was worse than the disease.

"Father bought us a little tea cart and horse, and the stipulations were that Rachel and I would take care of the horse. We readily agreed to it, but it was quite a chore. We had the horse to feed and curry, the barn to clean out, and the chore of hitching the horse to the cart. Once Flaxie, the horse, became too high-spirited, and Mother was afraid for us to drive him. We found we had not been exercising him enough, and feeding him too many oats. The oats were cut out of his diet temporarily.

"Mother's girlhood was hard. She didn't tell us very much about it. At fourteen she taught school at Granger. She lived with Charles and Margaret Spencer. They were Spencer Cornwall's grandparents. Aunt Margaret, as we called her, was always kind and thoughtful of Mother. For years she and Uncle Charley came every week with butter and eggs for us, and we often went to their home to spend the day during the summer months.

"Mother appreciated everything she had. After so many years of poverty, to have an abundance, and being able to help her brothers and sisters, and to give some of them a home, and to add to their happiness was a great joy to her. I believe one of the greatest pleasures of Father's life was doing nice things for his wives and family. He showered them with gifts. Mother had lovely jewelry, fine clothes, beautiful furniture and pictures in the home.

"When the Steinway piano arrived, we were old enough to take lessons. Father said he would pay for the lessons if we would play for him whenever he asked us. This seemed a reasonable request, but occasionally when he had company, he would call us to play before we thought we were well enough prepared. I remember I would get Mother to put my hair up in rags, that was the way we made curls in those days, so I could be presentable when asked to come into the parlor to play.

"She was a loving mother, efficient and capable, a tower of strength to her household, her husband, and her family. Her teachings were always a guide to the lives of her children who cherish forever her memory.

"It has been one of my most treasured desires to so live that I can meet that angel mother and report that I have tried to live as she would have had me live—true to the gospel and true to the family. Also to report to her that even though she was here with me but a short time, her teachings were indelibly impressed upon my young mind so that they have been a light to my path and have given me a desire to live in such a way that our meeting will be a joyous one, when I shall pass to the happy land where she and Father are waiting to greet us."

She died January 3, 1892, leaving the following children: Rachel, Lucy, Florence, Edith, Anna and Heber. Heber died in his seventh year and Edith, Mrs. Clifford E. Young, at the age of sixty-two, August 20, 1947.

AUGUSTA WINTERS GRANT

Although Augusta Winters Grant died in her ninety-fifth year, she was older by four months than her husband and older than Lucy Stringham or Emily Wells, his other wives. Augusta survived them all. This good man and these wonderful women lived the patriarchal order of marriage as only unselfish, and God-fearing people could do. These women, and all women like them, who subscribed to and lived this divine law belong to the elect of God, and their names will shine among the chosen ones when he comes to make up his jewels.

Mrs. Robert L. Judd, the only child of Augusta Winters Grant and President Heber J. Grant, wrote of her:

"Mother was born of pioneer parents in the little town of Pleasant Grove, Utah. With pardonable pride she traces back of her Mormon pioneer progenitors, Revolutionary stock from whom she is directly descended. Beyond these patriots in both her father's and mother's lines are sober-minded Puritans, and still farther back, in the time of Queen Mary, a predecessor who gave his life as a martyr for the Protestant cause." [^1]

Rebecca Winters, Augusta's grandmother and the daughter of the Revolutionary patriot, Gideon Burdick, died on the Nebraska plains in August, 1852, on her way to Utah and was buried in a lonely grave marked by an old wagon tire with only this inscription chiseled on it: "Rebecca Winters, age fifty years." In 1902, fifty years after her death, when the engineers who were laying out the Burlington Railroad discovered this grave, which was in the center of the proposed line, they concluded that it was the grave of a pioneer mother and considerately changed the line to miss the grave. Subsequently the railroad built a neat fence around it, and the Winters family has erected a small monument of temple granite on which is inscribed, among other things, the fourth verse of "Come, Come, Ye Saints."

Rebecca's son, Oscar, and Mary Ann Stearns, traveling with an advanced company, were married on the plains that summer by Lorenzo Snow. Arriving in Utah they settled in Pleasant Grove and he set about at once to make a home for his parents. They were unaware of his mother's death until they came to Salt Lake City expecting to meet her. Here they met the company with which she was traveling and learned for the first time the sad news of her death.

Augusta's father and mother were both schoolteachers, and quite naturally she became a schoolteacher. It is interesting to note that Augusta was one of the first of the little community in which she lived to leave her home and attend an institution of higher learning. When she was sixteen, she went to the Brigham Young Academy, then known as the Timpanogos Academy, and afterwards to the University of Utah. She began to teach when very young. She would save what she could, go to school until her savings were exhausted, and then return to teaching. In this way she completed her training. She was graduated from the University of Utah in 1877.

For two years she was principal of the Pleasant Grove School. Amy Brown Lyman, former president of the General Relief Society organization of the Church, was one of her pupils. She has this to say about her: "For her kindness, human sympathy, and understanding heart, we all loved her. She seemed to understand adolescent boys and girls and to realize that their restlessness is due in a measure to their quest for self-expression."

The next two years she attended the University of Utah and was invited by Dr. John R. Park, the president, to take charge of a department of the city schools in his first attempt to organize and grade them. Soon after she was made principal of the Seventeenth Ward Academy where many of her pupils were older than she was. Augusta taught school about ten years, and has many ex-pupils all over the state of Utah. She was born with a thirst for knowledge, and all her life she sought to satisfy it. When in New York, where her daughter Mary was attending Columbia University, she registered for a course. She was then nearly sixty years of age.

Mrs. Grant was one of the three women who in 1893 organized the Author's Club, whose object was a study of the best authors. She was also a charter member of the Friendship Circle. Both of these worth-while organizations are still active.

On May 26, 1884, Augusta was married to Apostle Heber J. Grant. While she was privileged to have but one daughter of her own, she also mothered nine other children. Six were her husband's and three her sister's. In addition to these, other nieces and nephews were given care and attention by this mother in her home and she assisted them in establishing themselves. She saw these young people grow to maturity, all happily married. This great and unselfish service on her part won the everlasting gratitude of these children and the praise and admiration of all who knew this noble woman.

When she went into the home of her husband to rear the six motherless children of another wife, she recorded in her diary: "This was a sweet privilege accorded to me." She opened her arms to those children and gathered them together with her own daughter and the children of her sister and brother.

Mrs. Grant had an interesting philosophy of life which deeply influenced her career. While she was a young woman teaching school, she decided that she would "always like to do what she had to do and would never want anything she could not have." This is a very noble philosophy. Always to like to do what you are compelled to do lifts one above the law of compulsion and reduces to practice the divine injunction "Whoso-ever shall compel thee to go a mile go with him twain." Never to want anything you cannot have is to submerge covetousness and greed and exercise a lofty self-discipline. These precepts were fixed and guiding principles throughout her wonderful life.

In the early '90's a board was established to further plans for a free kindergarten. Mrs. Grant was secretary of this board and was active in free kindergarten work for a number of years. Until this time the only kindergartens were private ones, for which the parents paid tuition. During this period she made it a practice to go to the Temple once a week and kept up this duty until her health would no longer permit her to go.

With all her winsome ways there was never a taint of vanity or self-conceit. Her charm, personality, quiet attire, fine tastes, and modest appearance, gave her an air of distinction which she herself never sought. With gifts and graces which qualified her for high public position she accepted only such offices and duties as would permit the full discharge of her domestic responsibilities.

Mrs. Grant traveled with the President widely and met many distinguished people, men and women eminent in science, in Church circles, in education, and in achievement. She was always ready at his instant call to take a voyage, to receive guests, or to make changes in plans. She was never frustrated. She was always peaceful, hopeful, self-reliant, and abundantly tactful. She was the ideal helpmate for her swift-moving, intensely active husband.

She spent one year on a mission with her husband in Japan. President Grant, then an Apostle, with Louis B. Kelsch, Horace S. Ensign, and Alma O. Taylor opened the Japanese Mission in 1901. At the end of a year President Grant returned to Salt Lake. When he went back to Japan, there were eighteen members in his party. Among them were Mrs. Grant and their daughter Mary.

When asked to write of her husband for the Relief Society Magazine on the occasion of his eighty-fifth birthday, she said:

"I appreciate the consideration and generosity which have always been shown me by my husband and hate to draw aside the veil of our intimacy except to say that no woman could have had a better husband."

There was a calmness and simplicity about this distinguished woman which impressed people. She adhered to the truth, never exaggerated, was always helpful, steadfastly cheerful, quietly efficient and prayerful. The question with her was not what she could get, but rather what she could give.

Mrs. Grant met life's problems calmly, cheerfully, and fearlessly. She never did a rash or ill-considered thing. Serenity, refinement, intelligence, and wisdom seemed perfectly integrated in her wonderful life. All of these characteristics were reflected in her charming personality and shone in her lovely face. Augusta Grant, in character and countenance, was one of the most beautiful women of her day. Quietly and modestly she moved in her wide circle of friends, loving and being loved by all.

EMILY HARRIS WELLS GRANT

Emily Harris Wells, daughter of Daniel H. and Martha Givens Harris Wells, was born April 22, 1857, in a small adobe house which stood on the block where the Hotel Utah now stands. Emily, one of a large family of brothers and sisters, grew to womanhood in a wholesome and happy environment. The Wells children were taught to work, to shun idleness, to improve their talents. Brilliant of mind, winsome in manner, graceful in accomplishments, Emily was a great favorite among the young people with whom she associated. She had a kind and understanding heart. She was a peacemaker, and hosts of friends came to her for advice and sympathy. Her father, Daniel H. Wells, belonged to the nobility of his day. He was a statesman, soldier, Church leader, and stood at the head of a distinguished family. Among his children were churchmen, military men, businessmen, artists, and writers—all honorable men and women, a credit to the state and nation. Daniel H. Wells gave his children all of the educational advantages of that period. They were among the aristocracy of their time.

On May 27, 1884, Emily was married to Apostle Heber J. Grant, as his third wife. Her oldest daughter, Dessie, gives this interesting account:

"She was married with the consent and approval of Lucy, Father's first wife. Mother and Aunt Lucy had grown up in the same community and had been friends for many years. On the other hand Mother had met Augusta Winters Grant, Father's second wife, only a few times before her marriage."

During the first six years of her married life she was on "the underground," as they called it. This forced her to live away from home under an assumed name and never to disclose her identity. It was hard, but there were two things that made it possible; first, her conviction that she was doing the right thing and eventually everything would turn for the best. That was the faith that sustained her, which is a rare and marvelous gift. Second, her love for the man she had married. She felt that so long as he lived everything would be all right with her and with her children.

Soon after her first wedding anniversary she sailed for England, where her father, Daniel H. Wells, was serving as president of the European Mission. In the mission home, at 42 Islington, Liverpool, her first child was born. During the twenty-two months she spent in England she took advantage of every opportunity to visit historic and interesting places. It was a never-ending thrill to walk the green lanes of England, to wander through its beautiful parks, to visit the birthplaces of such celebrities as Burns, Scott, Shakespeare, Byron, Gold-smith, and Thomas Moore. She reveled in the quaint shops of London and Liverpool and became an expert judge of linen, silverware, chinaware, and antiques. In associating with the missionaries and British Saints she found much pleasure.

She had the happy companionship of her father and enjoyed the benefits of his wisdom and counsel. To be with him was next to being at home. All the while she was away she received, regularly and promptly, comforting letters from her devoted husband.

Upon her return from England she continued for sometime to live on "the underground." On November 21, 1891, her only son, Daniel, was born. At about that time President Grant purchased a home at 61 First Avenue, Salt Lake City, Utah, for her, and thereafter she was known as Mrs. Grant. Words cannot describe the happy days this family spent in their first real home. To associate with her brothers and sisters, to call upon her friends and entertain them in her own home, and to enjoy the companionship of her husband seemed a full compensation for all she had passed through. The happy days on First Avenue were marred by the death of her little son, Daniel Wells Grant, who died from pneumonia when he was three and a half years old. He was an unusual child, both physically and mentally, and his death was a blow from which his mother never seemed to recover. In the panic of 1893, soon after the death of Daniel, the home at 61 First Avenue was sold.

October, 1903, shortly after President Grant's return from Japan, Emily was attending a general conference of the Church in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. They had sustained the General Authorities and were announcing changes in appointments when she heard the words, "Heber J. Grant has been called to preside over the European Mission to succeed Francis M. Lyman." She was stunned; she got up and went home. He had already been away two years. Dessie and Grace were adolescents. Emily was but seven, and Frances four. Another three years of separation seemed more than she could bear. However, shortly after the meeting adjourned, he came hurrying into the house all smiles. He was delighted beyond words with the new appointment. She threw her arms around his neck and cried as if her heart would break, "I just can't bear another long separation," she sobbed. "Well," said he, "it will be hard for you to leave your mother and Edna. You and the children are going with me."

Emily had always wanted to go back to England. They sailed from Boston on November 19, 1903, on the S. S. Republic. President Grant took Emily, her four daughters, and Florence and Edith. Emily Grant and her daughters spent three years sight-seeing and studying. They went from one end of the British Isles to the other, and on the continent from Scandinavia to Italy. Florence and Edith stayed one year, and then they returned home. They were followed to Europe by Anna and Mary, together with Miss Kate Wells, who came to chaperone them. Traveling in those days was not expensive, and the Grants were never extravagant. Emily was the best traveler in the family. She was the first one up in the morning and the last one to go to bed at night. She was never too tired to go to an opera, concert, or play. They went to numerous operas, plays, concerts, and oratorios. They visited abbeys and cathedrals, art galleries and museums, parks and gardens, lakes, countrysides and seashore resorts. They saw the birthplaces of poets, writers and statesmen. They visited battlefields and famous monuments. Mrs. Grant seemed to be the youngest member of the party. People often took her for one of the daughters. She was thin, had a youthful figure, and a quick step, and she hadn't a gray hair. Her charm and gracefulness made her attractive. People loved to be with her. The elders and sisters who helped in the office were devoted to her. The Saints loved her, and she was fond of the British people as she had been during her stay eighteen years before. She never tired of praising them and their glorious country. Her cheerfulness, wit, and good judgment made her company sought after. She often said, "I wish these years could go on forever." President Grant was released at the end of three years, and the family arrived in Salt Lake City on December 24, 1906.

Upon their return the President and Mrs. Grant were better physically than they had ever been before. However, during the spring, Emily began to feel tired, then ill, and she couldn't imagine why. By August she was very ill. The following January they moved into the new house on the corner of B Street and Second Avenue, one of the finest in the city. But she was too ill to enjoy it. During her long and tedious illness she was brave, cheerful, and patient. She did not fear death. Her relatives and friends did everything they could for her recovery, hoping against hope, fasting and praying that the Lord would spare her life. But in spite of all that faith and medical science could do, she passed away on May 25, 1908.

Dessie relates: "We were young when she died. As we look back on her long illness, we realize that Father had not left a stone unturned to bring comfort and peace to her. His kindness and devotion to her were wonderful. We are proud to be their children. They taught us to love life, without fearing death; to be happy in the face of trials; to make our Heavenly Father our best friend. She has been gone many years, but she never seems far away. Her influence has guided our lives."

All of her daughters married. Dessie married Ashby Douglas Boyle, an attorney. Grace married Isaac Blair Evans, also an attorney. Emily married Axel A. Madsen, a real estate broker; she died July 21, 1929, following the birth of her youngest son. Frances Marian married Wallace Foster Bennett, businessman and United States Senator from Utah.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Encyclopedia Americana, Biography, Vol. 19, p. 75.
