Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. VI .

EARLY EXPERIENCES IN THE CHURCH

"HOWEVER enlightening an account may be of the birth, boyhood, and business achievements of this venerable leader, they are of minor significance in comparison with his career as a man of God, a loyal follower of the faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^1]

It requires only a few lines to name the promotions and ordinations in the Church that came to Heber J. Grant, but if the record of his service to the Church were to be expunged, as broad and varied as his other interests were, there would be only a shadowy fragment left. His major interest centered in the Church; to it he gave his first allegiance. All other things were relegated to a secondary place. His faith in it and his loyalty to its institutions and its doctrines could never be questioned by anyone familiar with the facts.

Here is the record: He was baptized June 22, 1864; ordained an elder at fifteen; a seventy at twenty; a high priest at twenty-four; president of the Tooele Stake of Zion at twenty-four; an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ at twenty-six; president of that quorum at sixty; President of the Church at sixty-two.

The records also show that he was made a member of the presidency of the Thirteenth Ward Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, June 10, 1875, which was the first organization effected in the Church by Junius F. Wells, under the direction of President Brigham Young. Twenty-two years later in 1897 he became a member of the general superintendency of that organization, and in November of that year manager of The Improvement Era of which he was the principal founder. In December, 1918, he became editor of that magazine.

He served as a ward teacher in the Thirteenth Ward with Hamilton G. Park and frequently referred to this experience. All his days he cherished the companionship of that humble, yet remarkable man, whose testimony he so much appreciated. This was one of the faith-building experiences of his boyhood days.

What an ideal combination it really is for a young man with little experience to accompany an older man with mature experience on a mission of such religious importance as ward teaching. Heber J. Grant, a priest, and Hamilton G. Park, a high priest, were companions in the work of the Lord. This is typical of the fine opportunities that are offered in the Church. Hamilton Park had the deepest respect for his young companion, the future President, and this love and respect were completely reciprocated on the part of the young man. No one ever heard Hamilton G. Park pray or bear his testimony who was not moved by his sincerity and his native eloquence.

Referring to Brother Park in particular and to other men and women who had impressed him as a child, President Grant had this to say: "I know that many times I have poured out the gratitude in my heart to Hamilton G. Park, who was the teacher of my Sunday School class in my boyhood and young manhood days. I shall never get over thanking this man for the wonderful impression he made upon me and for the remarkable testimonies he bore in our class telling of his experiences as a missionary, and the blessings and power of God that attended him while explaining the gospel in two missions in his native country, Scotland.

"I look forward with the keenest pleasure to meeting in the hereafter Hamilton G. Park, George Goddard, Bishop Nelson Empey, Bishop Edwin D. Woolley, Bishop Millen Atwood, and others who made an impression for good upon my mind as a boy. I shall be grateful throughout all the ages of eternity to those men for the impression they made upon me. We may think that the impressions we make may not be lasting, but I can assure you they are. I am sure that a testimony borne by a teacher to little children under the inspiration of the Living God is a difficult thing for them to forget.

"I shall be grateful always to Eliza R. Snow, second only to my mother for the many wonderful things that she told me as a little boy when I used to run errands or go up to the Lion House to deliver a message to 'Aunt Eliza,' as I always called her. She was sure to ask me to sit down a few minutes, and then she would talk to me. She told me scores and scores of faith-promoting instances in her life in Nauvoo when she was there as a girl with my mother and instances in the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith that have been invaluable to me. She inspired me with a determination to live a life that would be worthy of my mother and father.

"I remember vividly also the wonderful teachings to me of the late Erastus Snow. Seldom, if ever, did he come to the conference in April or October, or come here on some special mission that he did not visit my mother's home and inquire how we were getting along, inquiring of me, whether I was attending to my duties, what I was doing, and the company I was keeping. I shall never, while I live and when I go beyond the grave, get over being grateful for the wonderful testimonies and wonderful fatherly advice of that man to me." [^2]

These tributes, spoken in his later years, are not only an eloquent evidence of his nobility of character, but are examples of the far-reaching importance of dealing wisely with youth. This account should be a source of inspiration to all who work with young people. Who can measure what it means to plant in their souls a love for truth, to give direction to their lives?

The following is so typical of the quality of his faith and of his honesty with the Lord that it is an inspiration to record it. This is only one of many faith-promoting incidents of his youth.

"I remember as a young man I had $50.00 in my pocket on one occasion which I intended to deposit in the bank. When I went on Thursday morning to fast meeting—the fast meeting used to be held on Thursdays instead of Sundays—and the bishop made an appeal for a donation, I walked up and handed him the $50.00. He took five of it and put it in the drawer and gave the $45.00 back to me and said that was my full share.

"I said, 'Bishop Woolley, by what right do you rob me of putting the Lord in my debt? Didn't you preach here today that the Lord rewards fourfold? My mother is a widow, and she needs $200.00.'

"He said, 'My boy, do you believe that if I take this other $45.00, you will get your $200.00 quicker?'

"I said: 'Certainly.'

"Well, he took it.

"While walking from fast meeting to the place where I worked, an idea popped into my head. I sent a telegram to a man asking him how many bonds of a certain kind he would buy at a specified price within forty-eight hours and allow me to draw a draft on him through Wells Fargo's Bank. He was a man whom I did not know. I had never spoken to him in my life, but I had seen him a time or two on the streets of Salt Lake.

"He wired back that he wanted as many as I could get. My profit on that transaction was $218.50.

"The next day I walked down to the bishop and said: 'Bishop, I made $218.50 after paying that $50.00 donation the other day and so I owe $21.85 in tithing. I will have to dig up the difference between $21.85 and $18.50. The Lord did not quite give me the tithing in addition to a four to one increase.'

"Someone will say that it would have happened anyway. I do not think it would have happened. I do not think I would have had the idea. I do not think I would have sent the telegram.

"I feel in my heart that we grow financially, spiritually, and in every way, as Latter-day Saints, by doing our duty. When we are obedient to the commandments of the Lord and generous with our time and our means, we grow in the spirit and testimony of the gospel, and I do not believe that we are ever poorer financially. I am a firm believer that the Lord opens up the windows of heaven when we do our duty financially and pours out upon us blessings of a spiritual nature, which are of far greater value than temporal things. But I believe he also gives us blessings of a temporal nature." [^3]

From the day he was made president of the Tooele Stake of Zion to the end of his mortal life the upper-most thoughts in his mind were concerning the welfare and progress of the Church. It was the joy of his life to testify of the divine mission of the Redeemer of the world; of the glorious appearance of the Father and the Son to the boy prophet in the grove, of the restoration of the gospel of the Son of God, and of the divine mission of Joseph Smith.

Nothing else gave him so much satisfaction as to lift up his voice in declaration of these eternal truths. To do this was the very bread of life to Heber J. Grant.

In October, 1880, he was called by President John Taylor to succeed Francis M. Lyman as president of the Tooele Stake of Zion. Two years later, October 13, 1882, by special revelation, he was chosen to be an Apostle. He then lacked a month of being twenty-six years old.

Referring to this calling he said, that from October 1882until February 1883, he was in a most unhappy frame of mind. He felt that he was unworthy to be an Apostle and should resign. This troubled him greatly. While on the Navajo reservation in Arizona during a visit to one of the stakes, he was riding horseback alone pondering on this situation when he seemed to hear a discussion going on in a council in heaven about the vacancies that existed in the Quorum prior to his calling. In this council the Savior, the Prophet Joseph Smith, his father, Jedediah M. Grant, and others were present. They discussed whom they wanted chosen and decided that the way to remedy this situation was to send a special revelation to the President of the Church. "It was made known to me that the Prophet Joseph Smith and my father asked that I be called to that position.... It was also made clear to me that from that day on it depended upon me and me alone whether I made a success or failure of my life." That settled forever the question that troubled him.

In 1918, when he was President of the Council of the Twelve, he said: "I bear witness to you here today that I do not believe that any man on earth from that day, February 1883, until now, * * * has had sweeter joy, more perfect and exquisite happiness than I have had in lifting up my voice and testifying of the gospel at home and abroad, in every land and every clime where it has fallen to my lot to go." [^4]

Subsequently he received very great comfort from these words spoken to him by President Joseph F. Smith on his deathbed: "The Lord bless you, my boy, the Lord bless you; you have a great responsibility, always remember this is the Lord's work, and not man's. The Lord is greater than any man. He knows whom he wants to lead his Church and never makes any mistakes. The Lord bless you." [^5]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Improvement Era, Vol. 9, p. 691.
[^2] Ibid., Vol. 39, p. 396.
[^3] Conference Report, April 19, 1924, pp. 153-154.
[^4] Durham, op. cit., pp. 327-8.
[^5] 5. Idem
