Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. VII .

MISSION PRESIDENT

JAPANESE MISSION

ItalN 1901 President Grant was called by President Lorenzo Snow to go to Japan and open the mission there and dedicate that land for the preaching of the gospel. Accompanying him as associate missionaries were Louis B. Kelsch, Horace S. Ensign, and Alma O. Taylor. The four elders departed from Salt Lake City, July 24, 1901, traveled by rail to Vancouver, British Columbia, where they went aboard the SS Empress of India, and sailed from Vancouver July 29th.

On August 12, 1901, the President organized and presided over the Japanese Mission and remained its president until September 8, 1903, when he was released. Soon after arriving in Japan he published an address to "The Great and Progressive Nation of Japan," which tells in plain and positive terms the reason why these Latter-day Saint missionaries were there. The first paragraph of this address reads:

"In company with my associates, sent to you from the headquarters of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City, Utah, as an Apostle and a Minister of the Most High God I salute and invite you to consider the important message which we bear. We do not come to you for the purpose of trying to deprive you of any truth in which you believe, or any light which you have been privileged to enjoy. We bring to you greater light, more truth, and an advanced knowledge which we offer you freely. We recognize you as the children of our common Father, the Creator of the universe. The spirits of all men are the offspring of God, therefore, men and women of all races and kindreds and tribes, and tongues upon the face of the earth are brothers and sisters. It is then, in the spirit of fraternity that we approach you desiring your welfare here and hereafter. Our mission is one of duty. We have been commanded of God to proclaim his word and will to the world. It is by divine authority that we act and not in our name or for our personal ends. We plead with you to listen to our words."

The following is the closing paragraph:

"By this authority we turn the divine key, which opens the kingdom of heaven to the inhabitants of Japan. We say to them all, come to the light which has been shed forth from the Son of righteousness. We offer you blessings that are beyond price. They are not of man nor do they come by power of man, but they are from the power of heaven where the true and living God dwells and rules in majesty and power. That which your ancestors received which was good and which leads to do good was but the glimmering of the twilight. We bring you the truth in all its effulgence direct from the great luminary of the day. Turn to the light and to the truth, and walk in the one way that leads to his divine and eternal presence. Then shall your souls be filled with peace and love, and joy, and you shall learn how to unite with the great and pure of all nations, and assist in the establishment of the grand empire of righteousness on the earth and hereafter dwell with the just and the redeemed in the immediate presence of our living and eternal Father, and your joy and dominion shall be celestial and everlasting. Your servant for Christ's sake."

After dedicating that land and laboring faithfully for eight months, he returned home and attended the April conference, 1902. At this conference he gave the following report of their labors and the conditions of Japan as he understood them at that time:

"We had no desire to baptize people just to make a showing. We prayed earnestly every day for the guidance of the spirit of God. We fasted and prayed often. We had a delightful time. Time passed very pleasantly and did not hang heavy upon our hands. * * *

"I rejoice in the testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I rejoice in the increased testimony that my mission has given me. I never expected that it would be possible for a man of my temperament and disposition, who from a boy of fourteen years of age had been actively engaged in business, to forget it, and that I could content myself in a foreign land studying a language that put me to sleep nearly every time I tried it, and yet be happy, but I was. There was the sweet spirit of God with us. Many times in our little cottage meetings we shed tears of joy because of the outflow of the spirit of God. If I had the privilege of picking the Church over for three companions, I could not be better satisfied than with those that I have. I had my choice and I have not been disappointed." After the conference he returned to Japan taking with him his wife, Augusta, and their daughter Mary and several missionaries.

All of the original missionaries have been dead for some time. Elder Alma O. Taylor, the youngest of them, remained in Japan for five years or more, and he had this to say:

"President Grant himself at times wondered what he had accomplished in Japan. He often told publicly he did not learn the language, so he could not preach or teach except through untrained interpreters. His few converts made through such inadequate interpreters later drifted away. Concretely it all sums up to a small measure, but the writer, who stayed on in Japan long after President Grant came home, discovered through the years so many benefits of President Grant's policies and activities in the early months of his mission that he is convinced that President Grant was the right man, probably the only man, for the job.

"President Grant's assignment as an Apostle was to open the door for the preaching of the gospel in Japan. All of his official and personal acts connected with such openings were done with signal ability. Unconsciously he acted with inspired authority. The development of after-years proved that the Lord was not so far away as it sometimes seemed. In my opinion it is unreasonable to think that the Lord ever intended that the peculiar equipment with which President Grant was endowed should be stranded for long in a morass of verb conjugation and chopstick technique. As proved by the writer through the whole period of his stay in Japan, and as proved by the facts which came later to light, President Grant's first foreign mission, his assignment to Japan, was eminently successful.

"Before the Lord he was as humble as a child. The way ahead was dark and uncharted; divine inspiration was needed and diligently sought for by prayer and fasting, counsel, and work. It was a precious experience to be a comrade with an Apostle as he wrestled with the Lord, especially when the ways seemed so obscure. Comparing the absence of tangible encouragement, and the manifestation of the spirit, the experiences of the pioneer missionaries to Japan with the abundance of such blessings enjoyed by the first missionaries to England, Hawaii, and other countries, one can readily understand why the Japanese Mission tested to the utmost the fortitude and faith of its founders." [^1]

On September 8, 1903, President Grant, his wife Augusta, and their daughter Mary sailed from Yokohama aboard the SS Aki Mari homeward bound. The voyage was a pleasant but uneventful one, and they rejoiced greatly to be again in their mountain home. The President had already received his appointment to preside over the European Mission. There was a brief interval of four months between these missions which he spent at home. They were busy months in which he looked after his business affairs, carried on his Church work, and made preparation for his absence of another three years.

He became president of the European Mission January 1, 1904, and was released as president on December 5, 1906; so that mission covered three years lacking a few days. He often declared that this was one of the most delightful experiences of his life. His wife Emily and their four daughters, Dessie, Grace, Emily, and Frances accompanied him. Of this experience he said:

THE EUROPEAN MISSION

"When in Japan, feeling that I was not accomplishing anything, I went out into the woods and got down on my knees and told the Lord that whenever he was through with me there, where I was doing nothing, I would be very glad and thankful if he would call me home, and send me to Europe to preside over the European Mission. A few days after that a cable arrived, 'Come home on the first boat,' and I went home.

"Brother Joseph F. Smith said to me, 'Heber, I realize you have not accomplished anything in Japan; we sent you there for three years, and I want you to put in the other two years in England, if you are willing.'

"I said, 'I am perfectly willing.' Later I went in to bid him good-by, and said, 'I will see you in a little over a year.'

"He said, 'Oh, no I have decided to make it a year and a half.'

"I said, 'Multiply it by two, and do not say anything about it to me.' And he did, and I want the young people to know that in all my labors I got nearer to the Lord and accomplished more, and had more joy while in the mission field than ever before or since. 'Men are that they might have joy,' and the joy that I had in the mission field was superior to any I have ever experienced elsewhere. Get it into your hearts, young people, to prepare yourselves to go into the world where you can get on your knees and draw nearer to the Lord than in any other place." [^2]

His missionaries not only held him in great respect and admiration, but as they came to know him more intimately, their admiration ripened into affection. The Saints all over the mission were inspired by his impressive personality, the zeal and fervency of his words, and the power and penetration of his testimony. Wherever he went, he added to the dignity of the cause which he represented. Friends and foes alike held him in esteem and respect for his sincerity, his manly defense of his people and his religion. He was valiant in his testimony of the truth and discharged his duties as president with great energy and fidelity. More literature was printed, more tracts were distributed during his administration than that of any predecessor.

He dignified and popularized the Church. Wherever he went, people came out to listen to him. He carried high the banner of his faith. He never compromised his religion; he was a friend-maker, and left forever his impress upon that great mission.

Eugene Allen, his secretary, wrote:

"Throughout England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, Holland, Germany, Belgium, France, Switzerland, Austria, and the Scandinavian countries, his coming was always heralded with great joy by the Saints and elders. He always took with him some of the fine musicians and singers and at these meetings seemed at his best. He gave to his listeners messages of the gospel. At the mission home he was happy with the songs of the gospel always in his heart. He was playful in our hours of recreation and most loving and kind to his family."

When he went to Europe to preside, January 1904, he was in his forty-eighth year. Although he was frail and far from being robust in health, the climate agreed with him, the work was to his liking, and he had an opportunity to rest and recuperate. As a result, his health was improved and he was much stronger and better when he returned than he had been when he went away. This mission added years to his life. Mingling with the Saints and the young missionaries was a constant joy to him.

At this time there were abroad studying a number of young people from Utah, who distinguished themselves as singers and musicians. Prominent among these were Willard Andelin, Arvilla Clark, and the Tout family. He often took some of these singers with him when he visited on the continent or while traveling throughout the mission. This added attractiveness to his meetings and contributed to the spirit and popularity of the conferences. Nephi Anderson, later author of a number of popular books, was editor of the Millennial Star at that time. Eugene Allen of Provo became the mission secretary and served in that capacity during most of his mission. All the missionaries felt the vitalized influence of President Grant's leadership.

AN INTERVIEW WITH KING OSCAR OF SWEDEN, 1906

The President gave this graphic account of his visit with King Oscar of Sweden:

"It fell to my happy lot, with Brother Alex Nibley and some of my friends, to have the privilege of calling on King Oscar on the fourth of July, 1906. With characteristic American assurance, I presented myself at the king's palace and requested an interview. The man who came to the door looked at me as if he thought I were crazy, not being properly presented through the minister plenipotentiary. I wrote a letter of introduction to his majesty enclosing a letter from Governor Heber M. Wells of the State of Utah and told him that that day, July fourth, was the day the Americans celebrated and asked for an audience and added that I knew that I ought to be presented in proper order, that I had letters from Utah Senators and from our minister, but the day being the fourth of July, we hoped that he would waive all of the customary formalities necessary to see the king. And he very kindly consented, stepped out of the palace, and greeted us. After learning that only two or three in our party understood the Swedish language, he immediately changed to faultless English. He was a magnificent specimen of manhood, standing over six feet high. He made this remark to me. 'Mr. Grant, I have sent my personal representative, unknown to the people, to nearly every state in the union of the United States to find out how my former subjects are getting along, how they are prospering; and in no state in the union are the former subjects of Sweden and Norway more contented, more prosperous, and happier than in Utah. As long as I am king of Norway and Sweden, your people shall have religious liberty, notwithstanding all the priests and religious denominations are against you.'" [^3]

At that time the British press was hostile toward our people. It seemed impossible to get a favorable mention in any of the leading papers. The following incident is an indication of that attitude:

"While I was in the city of London, a gentleman there, to whom a very good friend of mine, Alexander G. Haws, had given me a letter, kindly invited a number of newspapermen to his home to meet me. I am very sorry that the newspapermen declined the honor, but I had the privilege of meeting with this man and his family and a few friends and conversing with them. One of his friends had been a member of the British legation in Constantinople and had spent a considerable part of his life there. He had traveled all over the Holy Land and was familiar with the people and their customs. Among other things he said, 'Mr. Grant, I was astonished beyond measure when I visited Canada to find there oriental patterns, woven in beads by the American Indian. They were the same patterns that were woven in rugs in the oriental countries. I have traveled extensively, and I have never seen those oriental patterns in any other part of the world except the Holy Land until I found them among the North American Indians. Their patterns have been handed down for hundreds of years, from generation to generation. They are kept in families and can be found nowhere else. How under heaven those Indians, who have no connection with the Holy Land, should have the same patterns is a mystery to me.'

"'Well, my friend, if I were to inform you that the forefathers of these American Indians came from the city of Jerusalem, that would explain it, wouldn't it?'

"He replied, 'Well, of course, it would.'

"I asked him if he had ever read the Book of Mormon, and he said, 'No.'

"'Well, it will be my pleasure to send you a copy from which you will note that the forefathers of the American Indians came from Jerusalem.'

"'Well,' he said, 'that explains the mystery. I am much obliged for the book.'" [^4]

The President returned home in December of 1906 and did not return to Great Britain until 1937, when he went over to participate in the centennial celebration of the introduction of the gospel in that land.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Vol. VI, p. 486.
[^2] Idem.
[^3] Durham, op. cit., p. 198.
[^4] Ibid., p. 199.
