Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. VIII .

PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH 1918 - 1945

PRESIDENT Joseph F. Smith died November 19, 1918, in the Bee Hive House, Salt Lake City, Utah. Owing to the prevalence of the flu epidemic no public funeral was held, but services were conducted at the graveside. This great leader, who presided over the Church for seventeen years, gave to it a distinguished administration, and his name will shine in its annals forever as one of its greatest defenders, advocates, and leaders.

On November 23, 1918, the day following his sixty-second birthday, at a meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve, Heber J. Grant was chosen President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by the unanimous approval of that body. For forty years he had served as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, and for nearly twenty-seven years he was sustained as prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church.

"KEEP THE COMMANDMENTS"

President Grant's administration covered a long and progressive period. In point of time it was only exceeded by that of President Brigham Young's. This was a significant period in the history of the Church. When the leadership was conferred upon him, the indebtedness of the Church had been paid, her financial credit was unquestioned, the membership of the Church was sufficiently large and so situated as to give security to it. It could never again be driven into the wilderness nor its members ever be denied the civil and political rights to which they are entitled. Those tragic days were gone and gone forever.

During his predecessor's administration the organization of the priesthood had been perfected, four temples had been dedicated in the mountains and three others were in the course of construction. The policies and doctrines of the Church were well-defined and thus President Grant's administration began under favorable circumstances. The adherents of the Church always believe that the men who preside over it are divinely chosen. When Heber J. Grant came to its leadership, he seemed preeminently fitted to make the contributions which the Church most needed at that time. His temperament, the pattern of his mind, his zeal for any cause he espoused, his loyalty to his people, and, above all else, his clear conception of the exalted mission and purpose of the Church divinely fitted him for the sacred responsibility which had now been placed upon him. This great movement was fully organized and under way, and what it needed at the moment was the stimulation of a dynamic leader with a clear objective and a specific message.

It is no disparagement to say that President Grant was not a poetic, highly imaginative person. He was neither a dreamer nor a doctrinaire. The rhapsodies of Isaiah would not make the same appeal to his practical mind that these words of St. James might:

What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him?

If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food,

And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?

Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. * * *

* * * know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?

(James 2:14-20.)

These were his sentiments. They express his conception of religion. In a notable address at the dedication of the Hawaiian Temple, 1919, he said, and frequently repeated it thereafter:

"It is not the miraculous testimony we may have, but it is the keeping of the commandments of God, and living the lives of absolute purity, not only in act, but in thought that will count with the Lord." [^1]

"Keep the Commandments" was his watchword, his slogan, the burden of all that he said. Commenting upon this, Brigham H. Roberts said:

"And is not this 'Keep the Commandments of God,' the one thing the world needs? Is not the world tired of mouthings on formal and fine-spun ethics, and philosophical moral systems that sever and divide a hair twixted north and the northwest side? In great spiritual and moral reforms and world movements have not men been moved thereto by terse and condensed thunderbolt utterance more than by quibbling refinements of thought and hesitating long-delayed deductions until the force of realities disappear? Of course, what is here contemplated is the keeping of the whole law of God, and the law of God wholly." [^2]

At a special conference held June 1, 1919, for the ratification of his nomination by the Apostles for the office of the President of the Church, President Grant said:

"I stand here today in all humility, acknowledging my own weakness, my own lack of wisdom and information, and my lack of ability to occupy the exalted position in which you have voted to sustain me. But as I said as a boy in Tooele, I say here today, that by and with the help of the Lord I shall do the best that I can to fulfil every obligation that shall rest upon me as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the full extent of my ability.

"I will ask no man to be more liberal with his means than I am with mine, in proportion to what he possesses, for the advancement of God's kingdom. I will ask no man to observe the Word of Wisdom any more closely than I will observe it. I will ask no man to be more conscientious and prompt in the payment of his tithes and his offerings than I will be. I will ask no man to be more ready and willing to come early and to go late, and to labor with full power of mind and body, than I will to labor always in humility. I hope and pray for the blessings of the Lord, acknowledging freely, frankly, that without the Lord's blessings it will be an impossibility for me to make a success of the high calling whereunto I have been called. But, like Nephi of old, I know that the Lord makes no requirements of the children of men save he will prepare a way for them, whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has required. With this knowledge in my heart I accept the great responsibility without fear of the consequences, knowing that God will sustain me as he has sustained all of my predecessors who have occupied this position; provided, always, that I shall labor in humility and in diligence, ever seeking for the guidance of his Holy Spirit; and this I shall endeavor to do." [^3]

He further stated:

"With the help of the Lord I shall endeavor, standing at the head of the priesthood of God upon the earth, to exercise the authority that has come to me in keeping with that wonderful revelation: 'No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;' . . . (D. C. 121:41.)

"God being my helper the priesthood that I hold, the position that I occupy, shall be exercised in accordance with these words that I have quoted to you. We can do nothing as recorded in that revelation, only as we exercise love and charity and kindness and love unfeigned. With the help of the Lord that is exactly how I shall administer, to the best of my ability, the priesthood of God that has come to me." [^4]

The whole Church is witness that he kept that pledge. What is the essence of true leadership? If you would have men do what they ought to do, do it first and let them follow your example. That was the practice of his life. He was a doer, a demonstrator.

His admonitions, exhortations, and appeals when reduced and analyzed, find their fulfilment in these three words, "Keep the commandments."

During his administration, which covered more than a quarter of a century, many events of major importance transpired. The membership of the Church increased from 500,000 to nearly a million. It was a period of prosperity, progress, and expansion. The Church grew in prestige and increased in popular favor. A new era had dawned, and a prominent factor in this change of attitude was the personality of the President. During those years his health was good, he found his place and enjoyed his work. He surrounded himself with wise and capable men, and the Church moved forward on all fronts. With courage and humility he faced every problem and gave the Church a brilliant administration. No compromises or involvements cast their shadow over those years. He was a great president.

Associated with him as counselors in the First Presidency were: Anthon H. Lund, Charles W. Penrose, Anthony W. Ivins, Charles W. Nibley, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay. Taken into the Quorum of the Twelve during his presidency were: Melvin J. Ballard, John A. Widtsoe, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Alonzo A. Hinckley, Albert E. Bowen, Harold B. Lee, Mark E. Petersen, Spencer W. Kimball, and Ezra T. Benson. Sylvester Q. Cannon was made an Apostle at large.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Vol. VI, p. 486.
[^2] Idem.
[^3] Durham, op. cit., p. 198.
[^4] Ibid., p. 199.
