Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. IX .

DEDICATION OF TEMPLES

AT THE time of President Joseph F. Smith's death three Latter-day Saint temples were near completion. Among the early events of President Grant's administration was the dedication of these temples.

The Hawaiian Temple being the first completed was dedicated November 27, 1919. In the company that went with President Grant to Hawaii were his First Counselor, Anthon H. Lund; Rudger Clawson, President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles; Elder Stephen L Richards of the membership of the Quorum, Charles W. Nibley, then Presiding Bishop of the Church; Arthur Winters, secretary of the President's office, and Sarah J. Cannon, wife of the late President George Q. Cannon, who was invited as a guest of honor since Elder Cannon was one of the group of elders who had visited the islands in 1850 and who had assisted in founding the mission.

The dedicatory prayer was read by President Grant at each of the five sessions held. The dedication was repeated five times in order that the 1,239 people in attendance at the conference, chiefly natives, might all participate in it.

This temple is located on what is known as the plantation of Laie, on a 6,500-acre tract of land about thirty-two miles north of Honolulu. This land was purchased for the Church in 1865. The building is of concrete construction, laced with steel and built to resist the march of time. It was erected at a cost of $256,000.00 and is one of the most attractive and beautiful places on the islands.

THE CANADIAN TEMPLE

The Canadian Temple was the second to be dedicated. It was erected on a high elevation in the center of Cardston on a plot of ground donated to the Church for this purpose by Charles Ora Card.

It is one hundred eighteen feet square and is supported on its four sides by a solid granite retaining wall 165 feet by 165 feet, the latter being some ten feet in height. Viewed from a distance, the outline gives the impression of a great pile of granite. The massive solidity of the structure is a witness in hewn stone of the permanence and solidity of the faith of the people who erected it. It cost approximately a million dollars and is generally regarded as one of the very finest buildings in Western Canada.

An invitation was extended to non-members of the Church in the vicinity to visit and pass through all parts of the temple previous to its dedication. This enhanced the good feeling that had prevailed among the people of the province of Alberta and the Latter-day Saints. It was dedicated, August 26, 1923.

The dedication was an occasion of great rejoicing. Many spiritual manifestations were experienced during the services. At the dedication Edward J. Wood was set apart as president of the temple. Through Brother Wood's kindness and human understanding he distinguished himself as a great temple president.

ARIZONA TEMPLE

The temple at Mesa, Arizona, was completed and dedicated three years from the time the site was chosen. So great were the crowds in attendance that four days were required for the dedication services, which took place on October 23, 1927. This temple, like the Hawaiian and Canadian temples, is devoid of spires and towers. It is colonial in appearance, though not of any one period. The twenty acres upon which it stands were purchased for $20,000.00. Passing this tract is the paved ocean-to-ocean highway, which is called the "Apache Trail." The cost of the building and the landscaping reached $800,000. It is provided with a modern heating and cooling system and a flood-lighting system which at night sheds a soft white glow on the beautiful structure and grounds. This building in all respects is a great credit to the people who built it.

The exterior dimensions including the annex are 128 feet north and south and 184 feet east and west. The foundation footings of the main building are from ten to twelve feet thick.

The city of Phoenix, the state capital of Arizona, which is but a short distance from Mesa, and all the surrounding country have experienced an almost phenomenal growth in the last few years. Arizona, and this section in particular, are fast becoming renowned as a winter resort. Consequently, many Latter-day Saints who go there for the winter as well as the inhabitants from as far south as the Colonies in Mexico are privileged to do temple work.

These temples are in far-flung places and are built for the accommodation of the Saints in these distant lands.

There is something of far-reaching significance behind this great plan of temple building. Latter-day Saints believe that a temple is a kind of halfway house between this world and the next, the only place on earth where ordinances can be performed here that will be valid there.

THE MAN OF TWO WORLDS

Temple work is directly connected with the mission of the great prophet Elijah, the man of two worlds. Elijah came to the Kirtland Temple in 1836 to restore the keys of the priesthood that would turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers. He was taken to heaven without tasting death and made competent to minister freely both in heaven and on earth. Through the sealing power which he conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, vicarious work for the dead was restored, making it possible for all the children of our Father, living and dead, sometime, somewhere to hear the gospel and accept it or reject it.

President Grant advocated and supported in the most practical way work for the dead. Although he did not frequently discourse upon that subject, the records show that he has done more for his kindred dead than has any other man. That was typical of him; that was the way he did things.
