Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. X .

UNVEILING OF MONUMENTS

IN ADDITION to the dedication of three temples, President Grant officiated at the unveiling of several monuments, the dedication of chapels, college buildings, schoolhouses, and seminaries.

MORMON BATTALION MONUMENT

The unveiling of the Mormon Battalion Monument took place May 30, 1927. This was an event of historic importance. The completion of this magnificent monument, erected on the State Capitol grounds in Salt Lake City overlooking the Salt Lake Valley, was the fulfilment of a long-cherished dream of the battalion's daughters, who through the years, kept the campfires of their fathers burning. As a result of their efforts the state legislature appropriated $100,000 toward the erection of this monument contingent upon the people of the state duplicating this amount by public subscription. After great effort and the overcoming of many obstacles the monument was finished and unveiled on Decoration Day 1927.

Triangular in form it rises to a height of thirty-nine feet. On three sides of it are four scenes in high relief: (1) the enlistment, (2) the march, (3) the discovery of gold in California, (4) the entrance of the detachment into Salt Lake Valley, July 29, 1847.

At the unveiling there were present upon the Capitol grounds thousands of people, among whom were many descendants of the battalion members and many others, including President Grant, his Counselors, a number of the Apostles and presidents of stakes. Governor George Dern received the completed monument from the state commission when it was unveiled. A disclosure of the contributions would show that Heber J. Grant was among the most liberal contributors to this monument.

THE WASHINGTON CHAPEL

The Washington, D. C., Chapel was dedicated on Sunday morning, November 5, 1933. Accompanying President Grant to these dedicatory services were A. W. Ivins, and J. Reuben Clark, Jr., his Counselors; Rudger Clawson, President of the Quorum of the Twelve; Henry H. Blood, governor of Utah; Don B. Colton, James H. Moyle, and many other members of the Church.

President Grant, through the courtesy of Senator William H. King, called on Franklin D. Roosevelt, president of the United States, and extended to him an invitation to attend the dedicatory services.

The Washington Chapel is one of the most expensive and among the most beautiful chapels ever erected by the Church. The building is surfaced with Utah bird's-eye marble on all sides. It is situated at the intersection of Sixteenth, Columbia Road, and Harvard Streets, North West. The capstone was set March 21, 1933, and unveiled ten days later. It is crowned with a ten-foot, two-inch figure of Moroni. This figure is covered with twenty-three carat gold leaf, and is 165 feet above the ground. The chapel has a seating capacity of 360. When the doors are opened separating the chapel from the recreation hall, it has a capacity of 700 seats.

At all the sessions of the dedication the building was crowded beyond its capacity. President Grant offered the dedicatory prayer, and during the day he preached to the people who thronged to hear him. In his generous way he praised the architects who had designed the building, the workmen who had erected it, and invoked the blessings of heaven upon all who had contributed to its erection.

THE DEDICATION OF THE CUMORAH MONUMENT

The President was seventy-nine years of age, and those were strenuous days for him. He had but recently returned from Hawaii where he had organized the Oahu Stake of Zion. He went from there back to New York and presided at the dedicatory services of the Hill Cumorah monument. This remarkable monument crowns the hill in Western New York from which were taken the plates of gold from which the Book of Mormon was translated. It is erected to Moroni and is the only monument ever erected to a man for something he did after he was dead. Moroni was a notable and chivalrous character, worthy of a monument for the deeds he did in the flesh, but this shaft does not commemorate those deeds. Moroni, a resurrected and glorified person, came to Joseph Smith direct from the presence of God, and revealed to him the whereabouts of a sacred record preserved on gold plates. For his ministrations as an angel the Latter-day Saints have crowned two other spires with his image. This monument is remarkable for another reason. It commemorates, in the manner of its coming forth, the appearance of the most marvelous book in the English language. The origin of the Book of Mormon puts it clearly in a class by itself. The appearance of the Angel Moroni to Joseph Smith and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon add the most comforting and glorious testimonies to the reality of the resurrection from the dead that have ever been given to mortal man. Think of it! This book is a material reality; it has weight and dimensions; it can be handled, lifted, and read. No one has ever been able to invalidate Joseph Smith's statement as to its origin. The existence of this book is proof positive of the visit of the Angel Moroni, and the visit of the angel proves the certainty of the resurrection.

Consider for a moment the character of the people who have erected this monument. They are not an emotional, fanatical group of zealots. On the contrary, they are recognized everywhere as a practical, thorough-going, realistic people, and this is a demonstration of their faith. Referring to this monument, Dr. Joseph F. Merrill said:

"Like a sentinel, this monument crowns the noble hill on which it is erected and stands there as an enduring challenge to all the world to examine this book. It proclaims the confidence of the Church in the genuineness of the book and in effect, the willingness of the Church to stand or to fall on the question of its genuineness." [^1]

The dedication of this monument was the occasion for nation-wide publicity. Many reporters and photographers were present, and through their established channels they told the story of the restoration of the gospel as they heard it at this gathering. The newspapers gave a fair and friendly account of the dedication. The old animosity had disappeared. A Rochester paper printed the history of the Church in instalments, giving a detailed account of the unveiling with many illustrations. Other papers featured a full page of Mormon pictures and stories. The dedicatory conference lasted for three days, July 21 to 24th, inclusive. Between four hundred and five hundred people attended the meetings on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, held in the Sacred Grove.

In the dedicatory prayer President Grant recited the evidences that had been uncovered confirming the genuineness and divinity of the Book of Mormon. He praised and thanked the Lord for the restoration of the Aaronic and Holy Melchizedek priesthoods and for the organization of the Church. He recited the persecutions and expulsions of the Saints from Missouri and Illinois and their establishment in the mountains, and rejoiced that they had become a great and mighty people in fulfilment of prophecy, and concluded with these words:

"We dedicate the hill itself and the grounds surrounding it and all the material that has been used in this monument, and we do humbly pray unto thee that it may be preserved from the elements and that it may stand as a testimony of God, of Jesus Christ, and of the dealings of Jesus Christ with the people that lived anciently upon this continent. These things we do in humility, in gratitude and thanksgiving to thee, and we do it by the authority of the priesthood of God and in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen."

WINTER QUARTERS MEMORIAL

The next important service of dedication at which the President officiated occurred Sunday, September 20, 1936, at Florence, Nebraska, when the Winter Quarters Memorial was unveiled and dedicated.

The advance company of the exiled Saints reached Winter Quarters from Nauvoo on June 14, 1846. Here a thousand log houses with the necessary mills, workshops, and other buildings were erected before January of 1847. In this city and its neighborhood were settled for a brief period most of the Saints, with their wagons and herds of cattle, horses, mules, and flocks of sheep, which they had brought with them from Nauvoo. Schools and churches were provided overnight, as it were, and a city appeared on the prairie. It seemed a miracle. During the winter and fall of 1846-7 hundreds of these weary, underfed refugees, reduced in physical resistance, were the easy prey of a scourging sickness. More than six hundred died in and about Winter Quarters, and most of them lie buried in the cemetery marked by this beautiful monument. All along the long trail from Nauvoo to Salt Lake City, a distance of 1500 miles, more than 6,000 emigrants were buried. In their memory and to their honor this monument was erected. They crossed prairies and deserts, toiled and suffered and laid down their lives, not to win land or gold, but to possess eternal truth. The trek of the Latter-day Saints over this road by ox team, handcart, and on foot, began in 1846 and ended with the advent of the railroad in 1869. About 80,000 undertook the journey; 6,000 died on the way. The story of their journey is filled with episodes of unsurpassed human heroism, courage, sacrifice, suffering, and sorrow, made endurable by the living fire of faith.

This monument was conceived and executed by Dr. Avard Fairbanks, dean of the School of Fine Arts, University of Utah, who is a descendant of one who lies buried in Winter Quarters. The figures on the monument represent a father and mother who have just laid away a beloved child in a prairie grave. They must continue the journey, perhaps to face more hardships, and leave behind this grave with its memories. Together they stand by the fresh grave, looking with unfaltering faith into eternity.

President Grant presided, delivered an address, and pronounced the dedicatory prayer at the Winter Quarters Monument. Participating in these exercises were the Honorable Dan Butler, mayor of Omaha; the Honorable R. Checkren, governor of Nebraska; and Carl R. Gray, president of the Union Pacific Railroad. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., delivered the main address.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Vol. VI, p. 545.
