Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XI .

CENTENNIAL CELEBRATIONS

AS THE Church neared the end of its first century, the days of its poverty, tribulation, and persecution were gone, but they were still green in the memories of many of its members who, with eager anticipation, looked forward to celebrating the one hundredth anniversary of its founding and some of the other great events preceding and connected with its organization.

During the April conference of 1920, the one hundredth anniversary of Joseph Smith's First Vision was celebrated by special services throughout the entire Church. Evan Stephens' cantata, The Vision, especially written for that occasion, was presented in the Salt Lake Tabernacle.

The Eastern States Mission celebrated the centennial anniversary of the revealed existence of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Conferences were held at the Joseph Smith Farm near Palmyra, New York, and at the Hill Cumorah, continuing through three days from and including September 21 to 23, 1923. President and Mrs. Grant honored the occasion by their presence as did a number of other Church officials. It was estimated that during this conference from 2,000 to 3,000 people were in attendance.

Three meetings were held each day, those held in the morning and afternoon alternated between the Hill Cumorah and the Sacred Grove. The evening meetings were held in a large assembly tent, set up near the Smith farm home. The last day of the celebration was on Sunday. The morning meeting was held in the Sacred Grove where the holy sacrament was administered to a large assembly of Saints and elders. It was an unusual meeting. The peace of heaven was shed upon the hearts of all present. The majesty of his holy calling rested in power upon the modern-day prophet as he testified that the Living God and his Son Jesus Christ had appeared in person to Joseph Smith in that grove. The afternoon sessions were held on the summit of Cumorah.

Four years later President Grant and some of the Eastern States missionaries with their mission president, Judge Henry H. Rolapp, and Charles H. Hart, president of the Canadian Mission, and other leading brethren and sisters of the Church, attended the one hundredth anniversary of the deliverance of the gold plates (of the Book of Mormon) to Joseph Smith for translation. Again meetings were held at the Hill Cumorah and in the Sacred Grove, and again there was great rejoicing in the celebration of the anniversary of such an important event in this new dispensation.

EARLY LANDMARKS

It might be interesting at this point to know how the Church came in possession of the Hill Cumorah and the tract of land surrounding it. The first purchase was the Inglis farm of ninety-six acres lying on both sides of the Canandaigua and Palmyra road running along the west edge and extending about one-third the distance up the Hill Cumorah. On February 27, 1928, the Church purchased from the heirs of Pliny T. Sexton what is known as the "Mormon Hill Farm." This brought into the possession of the Church the whole of the Hill Cumorah and the surrounding acreage. Included in the entire purchase were 283 acres.

Prior to this, September 27, 1927, the Church purchased from Joseph H. Manges what is known as the Peter Whitmer Farm, the old homestead of Whitmer's at Fayette, Seneca County, New York, where the Church was organized, April 6, 1830. On this farm is a substantial farmhouse which, if it is not the very house in which the Church was organized, is a house of about that period, and as such it is the object of great interest.

THE CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION OF THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH

About a year previous to this celebration a special committee was appointed to take under advisement the nature of the program. This committee consisted of George Albert Smith, chairman; David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, Melvin J. Ballard, members of the Quorum of the Twelve; Brigham H. Roberts, Rulon S. Wells, of the First Council of the Seventy; Sylvester Q. Cannon, Presiding Bishop of the Church, and LeRoi E. Snow, secretary.

The committee met at intervals and finally made its report which consisted of the following suggestions: (1) the convening of the regular annual conference, and in this case the centennial conference of the Church on April 6th which fell on Sunday; the forenoon meeting to be a priesthood meeting of the whole Church through representatives arranged as a general assembly of the priesthood, the several quorums to be placed in the order of their standing and to vote separately in supporting the representative officers of the priesthood of the Church and then to vote en masse, (2) the illumination of the Salt Lake Temple, (3) the publication of a comprehensive history of the Church, covering the first century, (4) the arrangement of a pageant, representing "God's Message of the Ages," to be given in the evening of the 6th of April in the tabernacle, (5) the continuation of the general conference of the Church this centennial year for four days. This program was approved and carried out to the joy of the tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints assembled in Salt Lake City and to the hundreds of thousands throughout the world who attended by radio.

After the vote to sustain the General Authorities of the Church came Israel's shout of joy, "Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna to God and the Lamb. Amen, Amen, and Amen." This was led by President Grant, three times repeated, and attended by the rhythmical waving of white handkerchiefs by the members of the great congregation. This was an impressive sight. The congregation's shout of "Hosanna," together with the Tabernacle Choir's rendition of Handel's glorious and joyous chorus "Hallelujah" from the Messiah, filled with unspeakable emotion all who heard it.

At the morning session of the last day President Grant delivered a blessing upon the world, one of the noblest and most inspired utterances that ever fell from his lips. These utterances were altogether worthy of God's mouthpiece upon the earth. He closed with these words:

"I bless you one and all, and all Israel, and every honest-hearted soul in all the world who is trying to do good, and I do it in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the world, and by the authority of the Living God and the priesthood that I hold. Amen."

The deep silence that pervaded the great assembly during the delivery of this official blessing of God upon the world was a most fitting accompaniment. There are times when nothing is so fitting or so eloquent as silence. This was one of the occasions.

Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Council of the Twelve read an original poem he had prepared for the occasion. This poem was worthy of the exalted title it bore, "A Lifted Ensign." Brigham H. Roberts, President of the First Council of the Seventy, reported the completion of five of the six-volume Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Century I.

The climax of this great celebration was "The Message of the Ages." A spacious stage was constructed in the west end of the tabernacle in front of the great organ. The following explanatory note accompanied the official text of the printed words of the pageant:

The MESSAGE OF THE AGES is a presentation of the outstanding features of the Lord's dealings with man in this world existence.

Be it known that the gospel planned in the councils of heaven was known to the ancients, preached by Christ in the Meridian of Time, and after a "Great Falling Away," that this same gospel was again revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith and restored in these last days, a century ago, and that through the martyrdom of the Prophet and faith and patience and heroic toil of his people, the Lord hath brought again Zion, and established her among the hills, and that by walking in his ways, the children of men may find peace and happiness and the "more abundant life."

The pageant is divided into a prologue and three periods, viz.:

THE ANCIENT DISPENSATIONS

THE MESSIANIC DISPENSATION

THE DISPENSATION OF THE FULNESS OF TIMES

The story is told in narrative, tableau, and processional, with organ, orchestral, and choral music. [^1]

THE MUSIC OF THE PAGEANT

"The unfolding theme of the ages with its introductions and interludes and climaxes was accompanied by appropriate music upon the great organ, supplemented by the McCune School of Music Orchestra, and vocal renditions of solos and choruses by the Tabernacle choir, under the general leadership of Anthony C. Lund, director, with Tracy Y. Cannon, organist for the pageant, and Frank W. Asper, conductor of the orchestra.

"The whole pageant was dedicated to Heber J. Grant, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

"Admission was free, but by tickets for reserved seats. The admission of non-Mormons was practically on the same terms as Church members, which brought thousands of non-Church members to witness and to appreciate and praise the pageant. It scored a great success. Features of it were filmed from the steps of the State Capitol to be used by the movie film companies securing them.

"The request for tickets was so overwhelming and widespread that one extension after another was made until it was decided to continue the presentation until the 5th of May. Planned for one week, it ran for thirty performances. More than 1500 men, women, and children were required for the cast.

"Century one of the history of the Church of the new dispensation came to its close with the evening's pageantry in a blaze of glory."

COMPARISON

Impressive is the comparison between the centennial celebration and what took place one hundred years prior, when on April 6th, 1830, in the obscure home of "Father Peter Whitmer," in Fayette, Seneca County, State of New York, United States of America, the Church was organized. Present at that meeting were six young men, and a few of their friends, both men and women. These six young men consisted of Joseph Smith, Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Samuel H. Smith, and David Whitmer. Three others had been baptized, but these six effected the organization by consenting to the organization being made, and accepted Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery as the first and second elders, respectively, of the Church. After which Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery ordained each other to the positions for which they had been chosen. The sacrament of the Lord's supper was administered to those who had been previously baptized and now confirmed members of the Church, and received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Some enjoyed the gift of prophecy and all rejoiced exceedingly.

"Four other persons were baptized after the organization was effected, two of them the father and mother of the Prophet.

"The origin of the Church was obscure, being known only in the immediate vicinity of the Whitmer farm home.

Here is a brief account of the centennial conference:

"April 6th 1930: The conference on the 6th day of April 1930 was held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, on Temple Square, Salt Lake City, Utah, capable of seating eight thousand people, and it was filled to capacity by representatives of the Priesthood of the Church alone. Thousands thronged the beautiful Temple Square grounds outside, unable to get into the Tabernacle, but heard the proceedings with the aid of loud-speakers on the grounds and in surrounding buildings; hundreds of thousands heard the proceedings of the conference in all parts of the intermountain west, for thousands of miles in extent; and by provision of a national radio hook-up for the next afternoon (April 7) seven to ten million heard the great 'Mormon' Tabernacle organ and choir render some of the hymns and anthems of the New Dispensation. And the press throughout the land—throughout the world, in every land carried telegraphic reports and editorial comments upon the proceedings of this day's conference." [^2]

It was estimated that the Church had 700,000 members in 1930.

AFTER ONE HUNDRED YEARS

The centennial celebration commemorating the introduction of the gospel to the British Isles was observed during the year 1937. Although the President was past eighty years of age, he went to this celebration and, before returning to the states, traveled for three months throughout the European Mission to the delight of thousands of members who had never before seen a President of the Church.

Heber C. Kimball, one of the first missionaries to carry the gospel to England, stated, "On Sunday the fourth day of June, 1837, the Prophet Joseph came to me while I was seated in front of the stand above the sacrament table on the Melchizedek side of the temple in Kirtland and whispered to me, 'The spirit of the Lord has whispered to me to let my servant Heber go to England to open the doors of salvation to that nation.'" [^3]

That was a memorable day in the life of Heber C. Kimball and also in the history of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. With humility and misgivings Elder Kimball responded, and on July 1, 1837, with Orson Hyde, Dr. Willard Richards, Joseph Fielding, John W. Goodson, Isaac Russell, and John Snyder, went aboard the sailing vessel Garrick. On July 20th they anchored in Liverpool, England. They remained in England for eight months.

After a brief time spent in the city of Liverpool, they were inspired to go to Preston, England, a manufacturing town on the river Ribble, which was about thirty miles in a northern direction from Liverpool. It was election day in Preston. The noble Queen Victoria had ascended the throne but a short time before these missionaries arrived in Great Britain, and she had called for a general election for members of Parliament. The town was at its gayest—bands were playing; flags were flying; men, women and children were parading. The streets were bedecked with colored streamers and ribbons bearing mottos and catch phrases, such as one would expect to see on an occasion of great public moment. Supporters of the candidates had apparently left nothing undone that would add to this day's festivities. Just as the coach carrying the missionaries reached its destination, a large banner was unfurled almost over their heads. In bold letters it bore the inscription: "TRUTH WILL PREVAIL." With joy in their hearts these missionaries of the truth caught the spirit of this favorable moment and cried aloud "Thanks be to God, truth will prevail."

The next day was Sunday, and at three o'clock in the afternoon the first gospel sermon delivered on English soil in this dispensation was preached in Vauxhall by Heber C. Kimball.

During the one hundred years from 1837 to 1937, 5,294 missionaries went to Great Britain. The recorded baptisms for the same period were 126,593. During those years the immigration, according to Church records, was 52,387. Many may have come to the United States as individuals or in smaller groups. The greatest number of converts for any decade was from 1850 to 1860. Not all of those who were baptized remained faithful to the Church. Many did not, but no one can estimate the value of the contribution made to the Church by those who received the gospel in that land. In addition to the thousands of stalwart men and women, honest-hearted, thorough-going people, a long line of illustrious leaders came from Europe: such men as George Q. Cannon, Charles W. Penrose, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund, Charles W. Nibley, James E. Talmage, John A. Widtsoe, Brigham H. Roberts, Karl G. Maeser, William Budge, and many others. Five of these men served as members of the First Presidency and several as presidents of the European Mission. They were among the most brilliant leaders with which this Church has been blessed.

President Grant and his associates left Salt Lake City, June 13, 1937, and returned Sunday, September 12, just three months from the day they left. In their visits to these missions and branches of the Church, they were accompanied by the presidents of the respective missions.

People by the hundreds came out to hear them. They were greatly impressed by the words and appearance of the President of the Church. On his return he said, "It melted my heart to find how anxious the people who are in those countries are to see the Authorities of the Church. Their hearts swelled with gratitude to see President Clark, myself, and others who were with us. I feel really and truly ashamed of myself that I have neglected so long returning to that part of the flock. They are just as much a part of this Church as we are, and the Lord helping us, they shall not be neglected in the future as they have been in the past. They are a part of the work of God. They are entitled to a visit every year by some of the leaders of the Church. We have taken care of our people here at home, and we have sadly neglected those fine people over there in those countries. Pardon me, but I do feel in my heart condemned that I did not take time to go back there sooner. If the Lord spares my life, I am not going to wait very long before going back again." [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Improvement Era, 1936, p. 768.
[^2] Conference Report, April 5, 1937, p. 98.
[^3] Evans, Richard L., Mormonism in Great Britain, p. 13.
[^4] Durham, op. cit., p. 238.
