Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XII .

OTHER MAJOR EVENTS

ADJUSTMENTS are necessary for survival in a fast-moving world, especially with a great organization like the Church. This does not imply changes in doctrines, in accepted standards of conduct, or in the fundamentals of organization.

The educational policy of the Church was changed during President Grant's time. It has always been the ideal of the Latter-day Saint leaders and Church members that education should include daily religious instruction as well as secular training.

To meet that demand the people developed a rather elaborate Church school system within the territory occupied by the Church during territorial days. The public lands usually granted to states for educational purposes were not available in Utah. The territorial period was extended for forty years. In the meantime, academies and seminaries were established by the Church. In all, nineteen academies, eight seminaries, and three schools for higher education, Brigham Young University at Provo, the Brigham Young College at Logan, and the L.D.S. College in Salt Lake City.

Prior to President Grant's time it had become apparent that the Church must retire from the large part it was taking in secular education in Utah and throughout the Church, and transfer that responsibility to the state where it legitimately belonged; but there was no abandonment on the part of the Church of its policy to provide religious instruction in connection with secular education.

As matters now stand this is the plan. The Primary organization, a Church auxiliary, meets one day each week for religious instruction and training of Latter-day Saint children of the elementary grades, from the kindergarten through the sixth.

Religious instruction is provided in the junior and senior high schools by seminaries, which have been established wherever the Church population will justify.

Institutes are seminaries on a university level. The Church has endeavored to erect suitable buildings adjacent to universities where the Latter-day Saint population warrants doing so. It employs men and women whose educational standing and teaching ability rank with the teachers in the university. During released hours daily religious instruction is given. This plan enables the Church to reach a far greater number of its young people and at far less expense. Brigham Young University has been retained as an institution of higher learning. This plan was completed during President Grant's administration. He was a loyal and liberal supporter of education.

TABERNACLE CHOIR BROADCASTS

The inauguration of the national broadcast of the Tabernacle Choir on Sunday morning took place during President Grant's administration. He was enthusiastic over it. To his farseeing mind it was an event of great significance. Probably no other agency employed by the Church has been more effective in creating good will and sending abroad the spirit of peace than this national broadcast of the great choir.

On October 17, 1948, the choir celebrated its one thousandth broadcast presentation. Following the regular broadcast on that morning a short program was presented in the Tabernacle, a feature of which was a brief address by President George Albert Smith extending the greetings and the thanks of the Church membership the world over for the service of the choir. President Smith related an experience which he had while on a mission in the South Sea Islands. He said that a great crowd of natives were all seated on the ground listening intently and with deep appreciation to the broadcast of the choir, though thousands and thousands of miles away.

Mayor Earl J. Glade, who was active in the initiation of this program and who could properly be called the father of the Tabernacle broadcasts, extended to the choir the thanks of the city of Salt Lake for the service, prestige, and advertising the choir had brought to the city. He referred to the smooth program operation of the one thousandth broadcast as compared with the first broadcast. Mayor Glade told how the announcer, Ted Kimball, stood on a ladder to speak into a single microphone which had to serve the speaker, the organ, and the entire choir. Then Kimball had to race over to the Beneficial Life Building with this single microphone to be used for other broadcasts.

In all the years since its beginning not a broadcast has ever been missed. The programs have reached the ends of the earth and have carried messages of inspiration and comfort to millions of eager listeners.

WELFARE PROGRAM

No other crisis has risen since the days of Nauvoo which has demonstrated more fully the faith of this people, the effectiveness of the Church organization, and the inspiration and courage of its leadership than the depression of 1935. A survey made at that time showed clearly what a dire situation confronted the Church.

The First Presidency faced the facts and provided the remedy. Among the several distressing disclosures of this survey the following may be mentioned:

Eighteen percent of the entire Church membership were receiving relief—a total of 88,460 persons. Of this number 80,247 received relief from the county, and 8,213 received relief from Church funds.

The First Presidency in a message of October, 1936, said:

"Our primary purpose was to set up as far as it might be possible a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evil of the dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift, and self-respect be once more enthroned among our people. The aim of the Church is to help people to help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle in the lives of the Church members.

"This is the essence of the Church security program. Not merely that men shall be fed and clothed. We know this is important, but that the eternal man should be built up by self-reliance, by creative activity, by honorable labor, by service. A generation raised in idleness cannot maintain its integrity. A generation that expects its government to perform miracles places mortgages upon the present and on the eternal future. A generation that lives by the efforts of others grows soft and strays from the principles and ideals that have built its heritage.

"From the beginning the long-range objective of the Welfare Plan was to build character in the members of the Church, both givers and receivers alike, thus rescuing all that is finest down deep inside of them and bringing to flower and fruitage the latent richness of the spirit which after all is the mission and purpose and reason for the being of the Church." [^1]

No other organization on earth could have carried out this plan and accomplished its purposes so well as did the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. An immediate and accurate survey was made all over the Church to discover all who were in need of anything, and then a budget was set up. The Church leaders knew therefore what was necessary to produce and then allocated to the various stakes the amount and kind they should produce to meet this budget. The stakes responded; that was the crux of it all. They raised wheat and made it into flour. They established dairies and creameries and converted the milk into dairy products. They raised beef, mutton, hogs, and processed and preserved the meat. They constructed and equipped sawmills, sawed lumber, and produced building blocks, operated coal mines, equipped canneries to preserve the food and products, made storage structures for vegetables; they equipped and operated clothing factories, manufactured, reclaimed, salvaged, and produced the commodities needed for human comfort. Thus they made provisions for the comfort and help of those requiring help and added materially to the total amount of available goods.

President Grant said:

"This is one of the greatest and most important things that this Church has ever undertaken to put over, and it will be put over because we have the ability and the faith to do it." [^2]

The aged President not only stepped forward as leader of the people in this great crisis, but he did as he had always done, led in individual contributions. He gave to the welfare plan 5,670 acres of land valued at $25,000. This was a magnificent gift on the part of the President. Some criticized him, saying that the farm wasn't productive, that he had been given credit for more than it was worth. This disturbed him. He went to Nephi were the farm is located prepared to redeem the farm and give them the money if they preferred it, but they preferred to keep the farm. It is known as Dog Valley Farm and is located southwest of Nephi in Juab County.

The Church rose magnificently to this great emergency, putting into operation a plan which at once attracted the attention and the favorable comment of the entire nation. Nothing else has ever brought to the Church so much favorable publicity as this program has. Effort was made at once to see that everybody was taken care of, and the independence and self-respect of the people re-established. This is a demonstration standing without a parallel in the nation. It has grown to be one of the great institutions of the Church. The history of its growth and development and service would fill a volume.

If one were called upon to name the most outstanding contribution that was made during President Grant's administration, one would in justice be forced to say: the Church welfare program. Members of the Church the world over have been its beneficiaries. In all the war-stricken countries where Saints are located, an earnest effort has been made to help them, to supply them with the necessities of life. The welfare program has developed a spirit of brotherhood which has permeated the entire Church. The priesthood has functioned more effectively as a result of it. Under this plan the needs of everybody were provided, but the basic principle remains throughout the entire program that those who are able must give service for what they get. No man shall live scot-free on another man's toil.

If all churches in this land were to care for their members in this way, it would remove a heavy and dangerous burden from the county, state, and nation, restore the independence and self-respect of the people, and would remove the creeping dangers of socialistic paternalism.

The dignity and welfare of the individual must be the first concern of the Church and the state. This is the end sought in the welfare program, and permeating all its activities is the Christian spirit.

RUSSIA'S WARFARE ON RELIGION

In view of the turmoil that vexes the world because of Soviet Russia's attitude toward democracies, it is interesting to recall a meeting which was held in Salt Lake City in 1930. This was an international protest of religious bodies in the United States against Soviet Russia's effort to destroy religion by a universal destruction of churches, synagogues, books, and records on the subject of religion. Practically all nations were aroused against Russia's warfare on religion.

This meeting was held March 24, 1930, in the great Tabernacle in Salt Lake City. The following ministers participated in the program: Rabbi Kirkstine, Bishop Arthur W. Moulton, Reverend Arthur C. Price, and Bishop Duane G. Hunt. President Grant presided and presented the speakers. The invocation was offered by President Charles W. Nibley, and the benediction was pronounced by President Anthony W. Ivins. Bishop Moulton said:

"If Russia closes her Churches, its government will perish. No government can take away from its people their birthright of freedom to worship as they please."

President Grant was the closing speaker. He read the eleventh article of our faith, setting forth the attitudes of the Latter-day Saints with reference to religious freedom.

We claim the privilege of worshipping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may.

He supplemented this with reference to the 84th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, and he concluded with these words:

"Reports are that Soviet Russia is not permitting this human right, and where that is the case we solemnly protest against any and all nations who have failed to do so."

In closing the great congregation sang "America."

Russia, through Communism, has become a menace to the peace of the world, and the shadows of war darken the horizon as a result of her behavior.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] accomplishment in education (Utah, 1st place) Conference Report, June 25, 1932.
[^2] ability to support education (Utah, 32nd place) Durham, op. cit., p. 56.
