Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XIII .

THREE GREAT THEMES

HEBER J. GRANT will go down in history for his advocacy and defense of several important tenets of the Church. Not only did he support one hundred per cent the Church and all that it stands for, but he also selected some particular doctrines to which he gave great emphasis. Among these were the Word of Wisdom, the encouragement of home industry, and the financial support of the Church. In his adherence to and advocacy of these practical things he revealed his understanding of the price that every member of the Church must pay for exaltation in the kingdom of God. "Faith without works is dead."

Up to the time of his death no other man matched him in his effort to promote and defend the Word of Wisdom. All his days he pleaded with the Latter-day Saints to subscribe to this law that they might reap the blessings predicated upon its observance. He fought for it with all the zeal of his great soul and stood to the day of his death its unrivaled champion.

There was no argument raised against it that he did not combat with all the power at his command. To his practical mind it seemed utterly inconsistent, if not suicidal, for this people to deliberately deny themselves the priceless blessings promised by the Lord to those who would observe this law. In his great zeal he was actuated by no motive other than the welfare of the people. His militant and aggressive defense of the Word of Wisdom was distasteful to some who did not subscribe to it. Those who did not observe it did not like to be told about it. He himself was a shining example of all that he pleaded for. He observed the Word of Wisdom. He was prospered; his days were multiplied; his efficiency was increased; and the blessings of heaven were showered upon him. Time vindicated Heber J. Grant in his valiant and steadfast advocacy of this divine plan for rational living.

He declared:

"I believe as firmly as I believe that I am standing here before you today, on three separate and distinct occasions in my life, I would have lost my life if I had not been an observer of the Word of Wisdom, but on account of the pure blood I had in my veins and the promise of God and the keeping of the commandments of God, my life has been spared.

"I have urged upon the people the observance of the Word of Wisdom and have been called a crank for so doing, and I am converted beyond the shadow of a doubt that no man or woman in the Church who does not observe the Word of Wisdom can grow and increase in a knowledge and testimony of the gospel as he or she could otherwise." [^1]

Early and late, in season and out of season, for more than sixty years he advocated the Word of Wisdom and fought vigorously for prohibition. The repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment by the voters of Utah was a profound disappointment to the President, but he accepted it in a spirit of tolerance. After the verdict was in, President Grant publicly declared in the Salt Lake Tabernacle:

"I feel to have charity at the present time for the Latter-day Saints who have voted for the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment notwithstanding the fact that they knew very well without my coming out and saying, I want you to do it, but I would have been mighty happy if they had voted the other way. * * *

"I believe men that have lived the gospel just as well as I have ever lived it, many of them were conscientious in voting for the repeal. * * *

"I do not feel harshness, but I am very grateful indeed that the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment will not make any difference to any true Latter-day Saint. No Latter-day Saint will patronize those things when the Lord has told us that it is his will that we let them alone. If our people are going to take license to follow after the things of the world and the people of the world and to do those things which the gospel of Jesus Christ teaches them not to do, they are not living their religion. So really a repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment will make no difference whatsoever to the true Latter-day Saint. * * *

"Never in the history of the Church have we needed so much as we do today the Word of Wisdom. No nation can ever prosper, this nation being no exception, that undertakes to pay part of its obligation, and to build up the nation by licensing the sale of liquor and allowing people to make billions upon billions of dollars by selling liquor. * * *

"I have never felt so humiliated in my life over anything as the state of Utah voting for the repeal of prohibition. I do not want to dictate to any man, but when the Lord gives a revelation and tells me what is for my financial benefit and the financial benefit of his people because of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last day, I do think that at least the Latter-day Saints should listen to what the Lord has said. * * *

"I have been requested time and time again, principally by anonymous letters, 'For heaven's sake, find a new subject, quit preaching so much on the Word of Wisdom.' Never in all my life have I fought and pleaded and been convinced that the Latter-day Saints need the Word of Wisdom so much as they need it today. Why? Because the whole United States has discarded prohibition. They have gone back to liquor. This they have done because the cry went up 'There is more drunkenness—there is more drinking of whiskey under prohibition than there was before.' Pardon me, but all of the advertisements of that kind were pure unadulterated falsehoods." [^2]

In the October conference 1933 he said:

"I have heard any number of Latter-day Saints say, 'The Word of Wisdom is not a commandment.' What does the Word of Wisdom say? It is the mind and the will of the Lord. It was given in consequence of the evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days. And a more damnable and evil design was never in the heart of any man than the advertisements that we see on billboards showing a beautiful woman with an engagement or wedding ring, the smoke of the cigaret making the ring. What is the purpose of these advertisements? To get money by selling cigarets to destroy the mind, and the body, and the intelligence of the boys and girls. I get 'hot under the collar,' as the saying is, every time I think of the millions upon millions and billions upon billions of cigarets that are consumed."

In the April conference of 1916 he said, "I hold in my hands a little pamphlet of which I have given away hundreds of copies. It is entitled 'The Case Against the Little White Slaver.' It is a book against the cigaret, published in a pamphlet form by Henry Ford. [^3]

"Some years ago we had on our Mutual Improvement course of reading a book entitled The Strength of Being Clean, by David Starr Jordan.

"President Joseph F. Smith remarked that it was one of the finest endorsements by a great educator of the inspiration of God to Joseph Smith in giving the Word of Wisdom that had ever been published by a non-Mormon. David Starr Jordan is not only a national but also an international character." [^4]

The world owes a debt of gratitude to those intrepid fighters who have gone fearlessly forth to battle against the adversaries of men's souls. Foremost among those gallant champions stands the stalwart and shining figure of Heber J. Grant. Time has vindicated his stand. It is gratifying to all his friends and his co-religionists to know what the record is after one hundred years. In the first place Latter-day Saints live longer than other people, and if they do not, they ought to, and there is nothing miraculous about it.

It is more gratifying to note, after one hundred years, what the verdict is, measured by the achievements of the Latter-day Saints in the fields of education and leadership. A careful examination of the record shows that the Lord has made good his promise to his people.

"The first of the recent non-governmental evidences here to be cited comes from a book titled Education—America's Magic, by Dr. Raymond M. Hughes, president Emeritus of Iowa State College, and William H. Lancelot, professor of vocational education at Iowa State College. From this book, published and copyrighted by Iowa State College Press at Ames, Iowa, in 1946, we quote by permission:

"The author's preface states that 'One of the purposes of this book is to determine the approximate position of each state in the educational procession of America.'

"In this work the relative performance of the states is measured by the following criteria:

Added to the weight of the foregoing, is that of a study made by Professor Edward L. Thorndike.

Dr. Thorndike, professor emeritus of Columbia University, undertook to determine the origins of America's men of achievement and men of science. This was done at the request of the Carnegie Foundation for Educational Advancement. He turned to the three standard compilations: Who's Who in America, Leaders in Education, and American Men of Science. All who had been found worthy of inclusion in these books were classified according to the place of their birth. The number of distinguished men in achievement or in science or in both in proportion to the population was determined for each state in the Union.

"In the number of men of achievement, Utah was the highest and led the nearest state, Massachusetts, by about twenty per cent. In the number of men of science, Utah was the highest and led the nearest state, Colorado, by about thirty percent. In science, certainly, and in achievement, probably success implies previous education. * * *

"At the close of the first century since the pioneers undertook to make the great deserts of the West their home, the Latter-day Saints present a picture of educational achievement second to none in America or in the world." [^6]

These compilations and conclusions by eminent men, who are in no way biased in favor of the Church, are most gratifying. Think of it, the education level of the adult population of Utah is the highest in the world. Latter-day Saints may be justified in feeling some symptoms of pride in this great achievement, and surely the observance of the Word of Wisdom imperfectly practiced as it is, has been a determining factor in this work.

The Word of Wisdom may not be the sole cause for the Latter-day Saints moving to the front of the world in education and achievement, but health and achievement go hand in hand, and the Word of Wisdom as a revealed law of rational living makes this dual contribution to it.

Heber J. Grant probably died ignorant of these facts, but no other man in the first hundred years of the Church, the hundred years that followed the declaration of the Word of Wisdom by the Prophet, was more valiant in its advocacy than he was; no one else made a more effective contribution to this end than he did.

The great objects for which men toil and sacrifice, struggle and hope, live and die, have been most effectively promoted through the observance of this great law of rational living. The Word of Wisdom is one of the great causes for which he fought nobly.

HOME INDUSTRY

This story, which he occasionally told, is a demonstration of his philosophy: "I heard Bishop Ferrell some years ago in the Assembly Hall tell a very good story of home manufacture. He said he believed in home manufacture because it benefited him as well as other people. He said that when he was coming down to conference he met at the depot a brother to whom he owed $5.00 for making some shoes for his children. He gave this brother the $5.00, and he turned around and handed the money to another brother whom he owed, and he handed it to another, and he handed it to another, and the fourth brother came up and handed it back to Bishop Ferrell saying, 'I owe you $6.00, here is $5.00 of it.' Bishop Ferrell put the money back into his pocket. That money paid five hundred per cent in debts and happened in about the same length of time that it takes to tell this story, but if the bishop had bought the imported goods, it would not have paid the five hundred per cent because it would have gone gone out of the country." [^7]

He said forty years ago, "I know that it is beneficial to any community to raise and manufacture the things which they use. I believe it is a disgrace to us as a people that we are importing chickens, turkeys and butter by the carloads. This community ought to produce all of these things, and it is a reflection on us that we bring them from abroad. I believe that no greater benefit or uplift can come to a people than the establishment of industries whereby the young can be employed." [^8]

He lived to see the fulfilment of many of the things for which he labored and toiled as a younger man. The millions of dollars which the poultry business has brought to Utah, the returns from the dairy business and from the sugar business have contributed financially to the prosperity of the community in a remarkable degree. Again he was vindicated. His record in fostering home industry was not matched by any other leader of his time. Behind all of this there was no selfish motive. The people, their interests, their well-being were the ends he sought in all of his endeavors. He may have made some mistakes in judgment, but there can be no criticism of his motives. He loved the land and the people that lived upon it.

He said, "Let us keep our own lands, which are really gold mines. The trouble with us is that we do not know their value. We do not know how much they will produce. We have not learned that by intense cultivation, by raising fruit and by being careful to see that we get rid of the worms and do our full duty by the soil, we can make it worth three and four times its present value." [^9]

He often said, "I want to assure you that the best place in the world to rear Latter-day Saints is on the soil." [^10]

"So far as farming is concerned I want to tell you that it is the splendid blood from the farms that keeps the cities from dying with their immoral weight. Fifty-two per cent of all the missionaries that have been sent out into the world by our Church as high as 2200 at a time at their own expense, or their families, come from the farms. * * *

"Please, every Latter-day Saint farmer, farm your land. If you do not, you will lose your inheritance. Someone else will get possession of it sooner or later. Do not buy anything which you are capable of producing yourself." [^11]

In the light of present conditions how sound that advice is. What a sense of security comes to the man who owns his farm and cultivates it. There is great satisfaction in farming when one does it intelligently and well. Land that people once regarded as valueless has come to have high value, and all who listened to the advice of the leaders of this people with respect to their land are fortunate today.

Land values in the intermountain west have gone to heights never dreamed of. One is now willing to pay more for a small city lot than he could have sold forty acres of land for a few years ago. It looks as if land will never be cheap again in Salt Lake Valley. All that Heber J. Grant had to say about land and its value has been completely verified. Those who listened to him will bless his memory forever. He was inspired of the Almighty.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT OF THE CHURCH

There is not a man living or dead who was more honest with the Lord, who was more conscientious in the payment of his tithes, who was more generous in his financial support of the Church than was Heber J. Grant. There were two reasons for this. First, he regarded tithing as the law of the Lord and had faith that if he observed this law he would receive the blessings promised to those who do so, and second, his loyalty to the Church led him to support it financially and every other way. He never made a dollar on which he did not pay tithing.

He used to tell how a president of a stake tried to persuade him not to pay tithing until he got out of debt, but to pay his debts first. He remarked, "Would not that have been a fine record for a man who now stands as President of the Church not to have paid tithing for thirty-two years?" At one time some of his friends pleaded with him to take bankruptcy, saying that he would never live long enough to pay his debts. Referring to that, he said, "If any man living is entitled to say 'keep out of debt,' that man's name is Heber J. Grant. Thank the Lord that I was able to pay all my debts without asking a dollar's discount from anyone."

He firmly believed that he never would have been able to do this had he not been absolutely honest with the Lord. Speaking before the general conference of April 1898 he said, "Men will say I owe my neighbor, and must pay him before I settle my tithing. Well, I know I owe many of my neighbors, and they try to collect from me, but I owe God an honest tithing. He has given me a testimony of Jesus and a hope of eternal life, and I intend to pay him first and my neighbors afterwards. It is our duty to settle with the Lord first, and I intend to do it with the help of my Heavenly Father. I want to say to you if you will be honest with the Lord in paying your tithing and keeping his commandments, he will not only bless you with the light of his holy spirit, but he will also bless you in dollars and cents. You will be able to pay your debts, and the Lord will pour out blessings upon you in great abundance." [^12]

The President was fond of telling the story of a Primary teacher who brought ten beautiful apples to her class explaining that everything we have in the world comes from the Lord, and she said, "'Children, if I give one of you these ten apples, will you give me back one? You who will, hold up your hand.' They all raised their hands. Then she said, 'That is what the Lord does for us, he gives us ten apples, but he requests that we return one to him to show our appreciation for that gift.'"

The President added this, "The greatest trouble with the majority of people is that when they get ten apples they eat nine of them and then cut the other apple in two, and give the Lord half of what is left. Some of them cut the apple in two and eat up one half of it and then hold up the other half and ask the Lord to take a bite." [^13]

Answering the argument, "I don't pay my tithing because I don't think it is expended right," he said, "Well, you know if someone else steals a calf, the Lord will never charge it up to your account. If the authorities of the ward or stake do not make proper use of the tithing, you will never have to account for it. But if you keep that which belongs to the Lord, you rob him. You may read in one of the ancient prophets that is what the Lord says in plain English."

He used to tell about one of his personal acquaintances who was a conscientious tithepayer to begin with. While his income was small, he paid one-tenth. When it reached $6,000, he paid $600 tithing, but when he made $10,000 or $20,000 a year, it never went an inch above $600. At that point, like grandfather's clock, 'It stopped short, never to go again.'" [^14]

Many times President Grant said: "I know in my heart that we grow financially, spiritually, and in every way as Latter-day Saints by doing our duty."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Relief Society Magazine, 24, p. 627.
[^2] Deseret News, October 5, 1889.
[^3] The Improvement Era, 3, p. 83.
[^4] Ibid., Vol. 42, p. 585.
[^6] Ibid., 43, p. 457.
[^7] Conference Report, April 1900, p. 24.
[^8] Ibid., 1922, p. 31.
[^9] Ibid., June 1919, pp. 2-3.
[^10] Ibid., October 1911, pp. 23-4.
[^11] The Improvement Era, Vol. 3, p. 195.
[^12] Conference Report, April 1909, p. 111.
[^13] Ibid., October 1900, p. 33.
[^14] Durham, op. cit., p. 323.
