Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XIV .

SPEAKER AND WRITER

HEBER J. GRANT did much public speaking in his day. He was probably more effective as a speaker than he was as a writer because of his impressive personality, his matchless voice, and because he did much speaking and little writing for publication.

Many people received personal letters which they highly treasure, written in the President's beautiful handwriting and in his warm friendly spirit. Almost up to the day of his death he carried on a large correspondence. It was his custom to use a dictaphone, and if he should awaken during the night or early in the morning, he would sit up in bed and dictate enough letters to keep a stenographer busy all day. Only on rare occasions, however, did he commit to writing articles or addresses. He was too busy with the affairs of the day to do much writing, even had he been disposed to do so.

No one ever slept through his sermons who came to listen to him speak. He had a clear, resonant voice that penetrated the remotest parts of the great Tabernacle before the days of amplifiers. His style was direct, concrete, and vigorous, with a wealth of illustrations. One always understood what he said. There was nothing obscure or ponderous about it. His discourses, in the main, were not expositions of doctrine but rather a call for service in the Church. His appeal was never lacking in the fervency that comes from a sincere conviction. One always knew that he believed what he said and that he practiced what he preached.

Mingled with a deep sincerity was a rare sense of humor. He had at his command illustrations, anecdotes, and examples which he used with telling effect. When he espoused any cause, he gave it his ardent support, whether it was home industry, prohibition, payment of tithing, or temple work. Heber J. Grant never did anything half-heartedly.

In his loftiest moods there was a passionate appeal about his speaking. There were times when he spoke beyond any natural ability with which he was endowed. In those inspired moments his soul was lighted up by the fire of the Holy Ghost, and his words burned with a flaming zeal for his cause. He was militant for righteousness, valiant in his testimony for the truth. The thing, however, that gave force and impact to his utterances, that carried conviction to the hearts of those who heard him was his life and character—the man behind his words, the demonstration in his own life of the things he preached. His spoken words, when reduced to cold type, lacked some of the fervor that they carried when he uttered them. He had a talent for epigrammatic and pungent expressions. His discourses and addresses abounded with them. Following are some examples selected almost at random: "I have given much advice to the Latter-day Saints in my time, and one of the principal items was never to criticize anyone but ourselves. I believe in fault-finding for breakfast, dinner, and supper, but only with our dear selves."

"Nothing destroys the individuality of a man or a woman or a child so much as the failure to be selfreliant." [^1]

"Hardships develop men, communities, and nations. Success and ease are the forerunners of decay and failure. * * *

"There is but one person who can curtail an individual's usefulness and that is himself." [^2]

"I have found nothing in the battle of life that has been of more value to me than to perform the duties of today to the best of my ability." [^3]

"We are the architects and builders of our lives, and if we fail to put our knowledge into actual practice and do the duties that devolve upon us, we are making a failure of life." (April 1939.)

"Never forget that the true way to be happy is to do something to add to others' happiness. Try to forget yourself, and joy here and hereafter will come to you."

"No nation can, as a nation, turn against the plan of life and salvation when it is offered to her people and continue to be prosperous."

"Let us all do the will of our Father in heaven today, and we shall then be prepared for the duties of tomorrow and also be prepared for the eternities to come."

"I may not have been a very good preacher of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ from the standpoint of doctrinal preaching, but I have endeavored to the best of my ability, since I was called as a boy, forty-two years ago, to preside over the Tooele Stake of Zion and forty years this coming October to be one of the Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, to preach the doctrine of James: 'I will show thee my faith by my works.'" (April, 1922 C. R.)

"Let our actions count; that is the thing of real value. The Doctrine and Covenants is full of splendid things with which we ought to be familiar, but you can read this book through and through and learn it by heart, and it won't do you a particle of good unless you put into practice the teachings. To read a book through without carrying out any of the things that are taught in the book is of no value. It is the things that we read and learn and then put into practice that count." [^4]

In bearing his testimony he was most powerful and convincing, as witness:

"There is nothing in all the world for which I am so grateful as an absolute knowledge that we, the Latter-day Saints, have the true gospel of Jesus Christ." (1940)

"The most glorious thing that ever happened in the history of the world since the Savior himself, is that God himself saw fit to visit the earth with his Beloved Son, our Redeemer and Savior, and to appear to the boy Joseph. It is the most wonderful and marvelous thing that ever happened, and no wonder that a good many people of the world cannot and do not believe it, but there are thousands, including those who have gone before, who have had a perfect individual testimony and knowledge that this vision was given to the boy Joseph Smith." [^5]

"The Church is . . . a marvelous work and a wonder. There is nothing like it in all the world because Jesus Christ manifested himself to the prophet and Oliver Cowdery and to others and because God in answer to prayers has given to people all over the wide world where the gospel has gone, an individual knowledge and testimony regarding the divinity of the work in which we are engaged." (October 1924 C. R.)

"God lives; Jesus is the Christ; Joseph Smith is a prophet of the Living God; we have the truth; and may those who know it, so live that those who know it not may investigate the plan of life and salvation and obtain eternal life, the greatest of all gifts of God to man." [^6]

"Here is the keynote, Latter-day Saints. Let us realize that God is mightier than all the earth. Let us realize that if we are faithful in keeping the commandments of God his promises will be fulfilled to the very letter. For he has said that not one jot or tittle shall fall to the ground unfulfilled. The trouble is, the adversary of men's souls blinds their minds. He throws dust, so to speak, in their eyes, and they are blinded with the things of this world. Men do not lay up treasures in heaven, where moth and rust corrupt not, where thieves do not break through and steal, but they set their hearts upon the things of this world, and the adversary obtains power over them.

"I say to you, Latter-day Saints, that the pearl of great price is life eternal. God has told us that the greatest of all the gifts he can bestow upon man is life eternal. We are laboring for that great gift, and it will be ours if we keep the commandments of God. But it will not profit us merely to make professions and to proclaim to the ends of the earth that this is the gospel, but it will profit us if we do the will of God." [^7]

The following is typical of another mood:

"I want to say that I have never heard and never expect to hear, to the day of my death, my favorite hymn, 'Come, Come, Ye Saints, no toil nor labor fear, but with joy wend your way,' but that I think of the death and burial of my little baby sister and the wolves digging up her body on the plains. I think of the death of my father's first wife, and of others that I know of who laid down their lives. I think of that wonderful journey of Brigham Young and his band of pioneers, those who followed him, and my heart goes out in gratitude beyond all the power with which God has given me to express it, that my father and my mother were among those who were true to God, and who made those sacrifices for the conviction of their hearts because of the knowledge that they had that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that Joseph Smith is his prophet." [^8]

The President made a strong appeal to young people because his life was a demonstration of the things he preached. The following admonition to youth is a good example of his style:

"'Dream, O youth; dream nobly and manfully, and your dreams shall be your prophets.'"

"If you have ambitions, dream of what you wish to accomplish and then put your shoulder to the wheel and work. Daydreams without work do not amount to anything; it is the actual work that counts. Faith without works is dead, so James tells us, as the body without the spirit is dead. There are any number of people who have faith, but they lack the works, and I believe in the people that have both faith and the works and are determined to do things.

"Unto those of you who have worthy determinations, the Lord will open the way before you whereby you can accomplish the labor. There is no passage in all the Book of Mormon that has made such a profound impression upon my very heart, soul, and being, as the statement of Nephi when he went up to Jerusalem with his brothers to secure the brass plates from Laban. When they made a failure and the brothers of Nephi wanted to go back to their father's tent in the wilderness, they had not accomplished the thing which the Lord required of them. And he announced to them that he knew the Lord made no requirements of men but that he prepared the way whereby the thing that was required might be accomplished. I am not quoting the exact language but the exact idea. I read the Book of Mormon as a young man and fell in love with Nephi more than any other character in profane or sacred history that I have ever read of, except the Savior of the world. No other individual has made such a strong impression upon me as did Nephi. He has been one of the guiding stars of my life." [^9]

In 1897 Heber J. Grant wrote this definition of success: "Not he who merely succeeds in making a fortune, and in so doing blunts the natural affections of the heart and chases therefrom the love of his fellows, can be said to be truly successful, but he who lives that those who know him best shall love him most; and that God, who knows not only his deeds, but also the inmost sentiments of his heart, shall love him; of such a one, only—notwithstanding he may die in poverty, can it be said indeed, and of truth, he should be crowned with a wealth of success." [^10]

"I assert with confidence that the law of success here and hereafter is to have a humble and prayerful heart and to work, work, work." [^11]

He said on another occasion:

"I do not believe that any man lives up to his ideal, but if we are striving to the best of our ability to improve day by day, then we are in line of duty. If we are seeking to remedy our own defects, if we are so living that we can ask God for knowledge and for intelligence, and above all for his spirit, then we may overcome our weaknesses. Then, I tell you, we are in the straight and narrow path of life eternal. Then we need have no fear. I am not afraid of any individual ever injuring me, but I am afraid that, perchance, I may fail to be as faithful and diligent as I ought to be, and I am afraid that I may fail to use all the talents God has given me in the way that I ought to use them." [^12]

He maintained that happiness is dependent upon service.

"The real secret of happiness in life and the way in which to prepare ourselves for the hereafter is service, and it is because we give service more than other people in the world, that we are happy. I am converted to the thought that the way to peace and happiness in life is by giving service. Service is the true key, I believe, to happiness because when we perform labors like missionary work, all the rest of our lives we can look back upon our accomplishments in the mission field. When we perform any acts of kindness, they give a feeling of satisfaction and pleasure to our hearts, while ordinary amusements pass away. I can't look back with any particular satisfaction upon having spent an evening just for the privilege of laughing long and loud. I realize that it requires a constant effort on the part of each and every one of us to make a success of our lives. It requires no effort at all to roll down the hill, but it does require an effort to climb the hill to the summit. It needs no effort to walk in the broad way that leads to destruction; but it needs an effort to keep in the straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal, and we are told that but few there are who find this path. The all-important thing for you and me is to discover whether we are walking in the straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal, and if we are not, wherein have we allowed the adversary to blind our minds and to cause us to depart from that path which will lead us back into the presence of God." [^13]

The dramatic story of the conversion of his brother, "B. F." which meant so much to the President is impressively told in his own words:

"The Book of Mormon has a very warm place in my heart because of one of its chapters. I had a wayward brother who took no interest whatever in the Church until he was between thirty-five and forty years of age. I received a letter from him telling me that on account of the failure of our placer mines in Oregon, where he had invested large sums of money—all that we had and all that we could borrow—that he had been tempted, because he had financially ruined me, to kill himself.

"He went out into the woods, intending to kill himself; but he got to thinking what a cowardly, dastardly act it would be for him to leave his wife and children destitute. So, instead of killing himself, he knelt down and prayed: 'O God, if there is a God.'

"He got up, weeping for joy, and he wrote me that he had become convinced of two things; that there is a God, and that there is a devil, one leading to life and the other to death. He sealed his letter and then the influence came over him: 'You have now ruined your brother, and now you are trying to make amends by telling him that you have commenced to pray.'

"He threw the letter into his trunk. He wrote me letters every day for about a week, all landing in his trunk, but finally he mailed one.

"He struggled with the influence: 'Your brother, when he gets that letter, will write and tell you to be baptized, and if you do so, you will be a hypocrite.

"After lying awake all one night, he went at five o'clock in the morning and got the letter. But he finally sent me another. When I got it, instead of writing him as the adversary impressed him that I would, I wrote him: 'Some day you will know the gospel is true. Don't think I want you to be baptized, if you feel that you would be a hypocrite.'

"I went out and bought him a Book of Mormon, went into my office, shut the door, and told the Lord I wanted to open the book to the chapter that would do a wayward and careless brother of mine the most good; and this is the chapter to which I opened [the thirty-sixth chapter of Alma]. Anyone who knows the contents of the book will admit that he cannot find another chapter comparable with the thirty-sixth chapter of Alma, nor more appropriate for sending to a wayward boy."

(President Grant here read the following paragraphs from that chapter.)

My son, give ear to my words; for I swear unto you, that inasmuch as ye shall keep the commandments of God ye shall prosper in the land.

And now, O my son Helaman, behold, thou art in thy youth, and therefore, I beseech of thee that thou wilt hear my words and learn of me; for I do know that whosoever shall put their trust in God shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions, and shall be lifted up at the last day. (1-3.)

He then said: "Let me say in passing that Alma knew, no better than I know, that those who put their trust in God shall be supported in all manner of afflictions and trials, because I have passed through trials and tribulations and have been supported by him. I was able to sit by the deathbed of my last living son, for whom I had great expectations, and see him die without my shedding a tear; and there was a most peaceful feeling in my heart when he passed away. So I know, as Alma of old knew, that those who trust in God shall be supported in their tribulation." Then he read the remainder of the chapter, emphasizing this paragraph:

But behold, my son, this is not all; for ye ought to know as I do know, that inasmuch as ye shall keep the commandments of God ye shall prosper in the land; and ye ought to know also, that inasmuch as ye will not keep the commandments of God ye shall be cut off from his presence. Now this is according to his word. (30.)

"I love that chapter. Why? Because, when that wayward brother of mine read it, he wrote: 'Heber, I do not know the gospel is true, but I pledge the Lord, if he ever gives me, as he gave Alma of old, a knowledge of the divinity of the gospel, that I will labor as Alma of old labored, to bring souls to a knowledge of the truth.' And, thank the Lord, he obtained that knowledge, and thank the Lord, he has kept his pledge.

"I know no man among all my acquaintances who has done a tithe of the reclamation work that he has done, and who has become more devoted, and who is doing more to reclaim the wayward and bring them to the knowledge of the gospel and right living. In a single winter he induced over six hundred careless boys to join the Mutual Improvement Association. He accomplished this by laboring, often until midnight; and not only until midnight, but occasionally until one or two o'clock in the morning." [^14]

One of the events leading to "B. F.'s" baptism was listening to a discourse delivered by his brother, Heber, in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. In the October conference, 1922, President Grant gave this graphic account of the circumstances:

"I remember what to me was the greatest of all the great incidents in my life, in this Tabernacle. I saw for the first time, in the audience, my brother who had been careless, indifferent, and wayward; who had evinced no interest in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

"As I saw him for the first time in this building, and as I realized that he was seeking God for light and knowledge regarding the divinity of this work, I bowed my head, and I prayed God that if I were requested to address the audience that the Lord would inspire me by the revelations of his Spirit, by that Holy Spirit in whom every true Latter-day Saint believes, that my brother would have to acknowledge to me that I had spoken beyond my natural ability, that I had been inspired of the Lord.

"I realize that if he made that confession, then I should be able to point out to him that God has given him a testimony of the divinity of this work.

"Brother Milton Bennion was sitting on the stand that day, and he had been asked to address the congregation. President Angus M. Cannon came to me and said, 'Before you entered the building, Brother Grant, I had invited Milton Bennion to speak, but he can come some other day.'

"I said, 'Let him speak.'

"Brother Cannon said, 'Well, I will ask him to speak briefly, and you will please follow him.'

"Brother Bennion told of his visit around the world; among other things, of visiting the sepulchre of Jesus.

"I took out of my pocket a book that I always carried, called a Ready Reference, and I laid it down on the stand in front of me when I stood up to speak. It was opened at the passages that tell of the vicarious work for the dead, of the announcement that Jesus went and preached to the spirits in prison, and proclaimed the gospel of Jesus Christ to them. I intended to read about the baptism for the dead, and I intended to preach upon the fact that the Savior of the world had not only brought the gospel to every soul upon the earth, but that it also reached back to all those who had died without a knowledge of it, or in their sins, that they would have the privilege of hearing it; that, as I understood and had read in the Doctrine and Covenants, Jesus came into the world to be crucified for the world and to die for the sins of the world and that he saved all except only those who denied the Son after the Father had revealed him—those who had lived and those who had died.

"I remember standing there feeling that this was perhaps the greatest of all the great themes that we as Latter-day Saints had to proclaim to the world. I laid the book down, opened at that page. I prayed for the inspiration of the Lord and the faith of the Latter-day Saints, and I never thought of the book from that minute until I sat down at the end of a thirty-minute address. I closed my remarks at twelve minutes after three o'clock, expecting that President George Q. Cannon would follow me. Brother Angus came to the upper stand and said, 'George, please occupy the balance of the time.'

"He said, 'No, I do not wish to speak.' Brother Angus refused to take 'No' for an answer.

"Brother Cannon said, finally: 'All right, go take your seat, and I will say something.' and he arose and said in substance:

"'There are times when the Lord Almighty inspires some speakers by the revelations of his Spirit, and he is so abundantly blessed by the inspiration of the Living God that it is a mistake for anybody else to speak following him, and one of those occasions has been today, and I desire that this meeting be dismissed without further remarks.' And he sat down.

"I devoted the thirty minutes of my speech almost exclusively to a testimony of my knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and to the wonderful and marvelous labors of the Prophet Joseph Smith bearing witness to the knowledge God had given me that Joseph was in very deed a prophet of the true and Living God.

"The next morning my brother came into my office and said, 'Heber, I was at a meeting yesterday and heard you preach.'

"I said, 'The first time you ever heard your brother preach, I guess?'

"'Oh, no,' he said, 'I have heard you many times.'

"He said, 'I generally come in late and go into the gallery. I often go out before the meeting is over. But you have never spoken as you did yesterday. You spoke beyond your natural ability. You were inspired of the Lord.' The identical words I had uttered the day before, in my prayer to the Lord!

"When I heard George Q. Cannon after I sat down, and before his brother spoke to him, say to himself, 'Thank God for the power of that testimony,' and the tears gushed from my eyes like rain, and I rested my elbows on my knees and put my hands over my face, so that the people by me would not see that I was weeping like a child. I knew when I heard those words of George Q. Cannon that God had heard and answered my prayer. I knew that my brother's heart was touched. The next day when he came and repeated my words, I said to him, 'Are you still praying for a testimony of the gospel?'

"He said, 'Yes, and I am going nearly wild.'

"I asked, 'What did I preach about yesterday?'

"He replied, 'You know what you preached about.'

"I said, 'Well, you tell me.'

"'You preached upon the divine mission of the prophet Joseph Smith.'

"I answered, 'And I was inspired beyond my natural ability; and I never spoke before—at any time you have heard me, as I spoke yesterday. Do you expect the Lord to get a club and knock you down? What more testimony do you want of the gospel of Jesus Christ than that a man speaks beyond his natural ability and under the inspiration of God, when he testifies of the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith?'

"The next Sabbath he applied to me for baptism." [^15]

"B. F." became a marvelous missionary. His words were permeated with a conviction that pierced the hearts of those who listened to him. If there were a spark of love for the truth in a wayward soul, he could fan it into a flame.

This excerpt from one of his sermons is typical of his convincing power as a speaker.

THE HOUR OF TEMPTATION

Every moment I was tempted to do wrong, a message would come from an unseen world saying: "Don't do it, don't do it; it is wrong; you know it is wrong." That voice would plead with me like a mother would plead with a wayward son.

Then the adversary of men's souls would say: "It is only a little thing. Others do it. It won't hurt you."

It is at this moment that a man's agency comes in. Father, mother, sister, friend, no human being can do for you what you can do for yourself in that hour of temptation. You must decide the issue then—you alone. Right there is fought the greatest battle that men ever fight in this mortal world.

President Grant related this incident:

"The bishop of Paragonah wrote to "B. F.," having known him at Milford when he used to profane, when he ran a saloon, asking him to please come down and preach at Paragonah. My brother went down, and he said to the bishop: 'I want you to send out to his ranch for McBride.'

"The bishop said: 'I won't do it. I would not have him in my meetinghouse, he would only come here, mingle with the boys on the outside before the meeting, wait until we had the first song, the prayer, and the second song and then he would come into the meeting, and the first thing he would be liable to do would be to call you a thief, a liar, or something of that kind.'

"My brother said: 'I want him here, I know him, and I know him well, and I would like to have him here.'

"The bishop said: 'You don't know him as well as I do; he is my son-in-law. We have tried to get my poor daughter to leave him, but she will not do it. When he is not drunk, he is very kind to her. I do not propose to have that kind of man around here.'

"Fred said: 'If you will not send for him, I will. I have come two hundred miles to preach at your request, and I will hire a boy and put him on a horse and send for him myself.'

"The bishop said: 'If you feel that way about it, I will send for him.'

"Fred said: 'I want him here. All I ask is that you save a seat for him on the front row.'

"He said McBride came, mingled with the boys on the outside, waited until they had had the two songs and prayer, then came in saying: 'Well, you damned old thief, you've turned preacher, have you?'

"Fred said: 'Yes, I have.'

"He said: 'Do you remember how when a man who had a very fast horse came to Milford, and you hired him to let a poor horse beat him, and how he cleaned up the people in the whole town?'

"Fred said: 'Yes, I remember many devilish and mean things you and I did together. I was just confessing my sins, but if you like to do it for me, it will save me the trouble. Only one can preach at a time.'

"McBride said: 'I haven't anything else I want to say.'

"Fred said: 'Come up here and take a seat; I have saved a seat for you.'

"After the services he asked Fred to go home with him, and he went out to his ranch and slept with him, or more properly speaking, he stayed awake with him all night long, and the next day he drove him over to Milford to get the train.

"When he was leaving, Fred said to the bishop of Paragonah, 'Bishop, when your son-in-law applies for baptism, will you please write me?'

"He said: 'Yes, I will send you a special delivery letter.' And he laughed at the idea.

"Some months later my brother handed me a letter from the bishop which read, 'Brother Grant, my wife, myself, and my daughter have not the language really to express our gratitude to you for what you did for our son-in-law when you spent the night with him. He has been a model husband, and we have no language to express our gratitude to you for the reformation you brought about in him.'" This is only one case out of many where "B. F." brought wayward indifferent men to active service in the Church.

This is the closing paragraph of President Grant's speech in the Tabernacle, January 1896, at which his brother "B. F." was present.

"I want to say to the Latter-day Saints that it behooves us, having received a testimony of the divinity of the work in which we are engaged, to so order our lives from day to day that glory shall be brought to the work of God by the good deeds that we perform, so letting our light shine that men, seeing our good deeds, shall glorify God. No people upon the face of the earth have ever been blessed as have been the Latter-day Saints; no people have ever had the many manifestations of the kindness and mercy and long-suffering of God as have been bestowed upon us, and I say we, above all men and women upon the earth should live Godlike and upright lives. That God may help us to do so is my prayer and desire, and I ask it in the name of Jesus, Amen." [^16]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Durham, op. cit., p. 241.
[^2] Ibid., p. 315.
[^3] The Improvement Era, July 1936, Vol. 39, p. 397.
[^4] Doc. and Cov., 134:1-2.
[^5] Ibid., Vol. 43, p. 393.
[^6] Ibid., 43, p. 457.
[^7] Conference Report, April 1900, p. 24.
[^8] Ibid., 1922, p. 31.
[^9] Ibid., June 1919, pp. 2-3.
[^10] Ibid., October 1911, pp. 23-4.
[^11] The Improvement Era, Vol. 3, p. 195.
[^12] Conference Report, April 1909, p. 111.
[^13] Ibid., October 1900, p. 33.
[^14] Durham, op. cit., p. 323.
[^15] 15. Conference Report, 1922, pp. 188-190.
[^16] 16. Deseret News, August 3, 1901.
