Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XV .

GUEST SPEAKER

HEBER J. GRANT traveled over a large part of the world. According to his own words he had borne his testimony in England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Germany, France, Belgium, Holland, Switzerland, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Czechoslovakia, Canada, Mexico, and in most of the states in the American Union, in far-off Japan, and in the Hawaiian Islands. Wherever stakes of Zion were established, he visited them; attended conferences; dedicated temples, chapels, schoolhouses, seminary buildings, and spoke in Church schools. In addition to all of this he was guest speaker before many important civic and religious gatherings, notably before the Chemurgic Congress which was held in Detroit, Michigan; the Knife and Fork Club in Kansas City, Missouri, and the Institute of Human Relations in Estes Park, Colorado.

He seemed equal to any occasion. He understood the language of businessmen and their manner of thinking, and they were delighted to hear a Church dignitary who could talk to them on their level. If it were a National Scout Jamboree or a nation-wide gathering of bankers or a congress of religious leaders, he was at home with them. He was always interesting; he always contributed to the occasion and won the friendship of his listeners. Everywhere he went, he was recognized as the champion of his faith and the spokesman of his people.

Referring to his visit to Kansas City, he said: "It would be of interest for you to know that some years ago I played a game of golf in Kansas City with a son of former Governor Crittenden. He handed me a pamphlet in which appeared the pictures of the founder of Kansas City Star, his wife, and the Presiding Bishop of the Mormon Church. Mr. Crittenden checked off a description of some of the property in that vicinity and jokingly remarked, 'Mr. Grant, you are playing on your own links, as the title stands in the name of the Presiding Bishop of the Mormon Church.' Subsequently I was asked to speak before the Chamber of Commerce in Kansas City, and I remarked that I owned, as President of the Church, nearly one-half of Kansas City, but I could not get possession of it because the law of adverse possession for a certain number of years gives one a title. Nearly all of the abstracts of titles of land in the eastern part of Kansas City show the title of the land to be in the name of Edward Partridge, the Presiding Bishop of the Mormon Church." [^1]

In December 1920 President Grant was invited to speak before the Knife and Fork Club of Kansas City, Missouri. Referring to this in a general conference of the Church, he said:

"I think that we as a people have very great cause to rejoice in the era of goodwill and fellowship that is existing today for us as a people, among those not of our faith, in comparison with the conditions that existed some years ago. I do not know of any single thing that has happened in my experience, during the long time that I have been one of the General Authorities of the Church, that has impressed me more profoundly with the change of sentiment towards the Latter-day Saints than the reception which was accorded to me December last when I went to Kansas City and delivered a speech upon 'The Accomplishments of Mormonism.' When I reflect upon the fact that in the leading hotel in that wonderful and progressive city—I was permitted to stand up within ten miles of Independence, the place from which the Latter-day Saints were expelled, by an exterminating order of the governor of the state, Governor Boggs, and to proclaim the accomplishments of the Latter-day Saints, to relate the prophecies of Joseph Smith, to give to those men that were assembled, over three hundred of the leading, influential businessmen of the city, the testimony of Josiah Quincy regarding the Prophet Joseph Smith; to repeat to them the great pioneer hymn, 'Come, Come, Ye Saints'; to relate the hardships, the drivings, and the persecutions of the Latter-day Saints and to have that body of representative men receive that address with approval, applaud it in many places, and to have many of them come to me after the meeting and shake hands and congratulate me upon the address, and to have some of the members of the board of directors of that great club, the Knife and Fork Club of Kansas City (which I have been informed is the second greatest dinner club in the United States, the Gridiron of Washington standing first), to have them say that they hoped for a return date so that they could hear more of our people, and then stop to reflect upon the fact that the Prophet and his followers, in the early days, were expelled from Missouri; that many of them were murdered; that all kinds of crimes were committed upon the people; that their property was confiscated; that we have never received anything for our property that belonged to us in that section; that today some of the valuable country that we traveled over there is the very property that our people owned (for when you follow up many abstracts of valuable property you will find the title centers in the bishop of the Mormon Church, and only because of lapse of time have people secured a proper title to these lands, and not because it was ever paid for). I say to stop and reflect that the drivings and the persecutions of the Latter-day Saints, of which no tongue can tell and no pen can paint the conditions; and then to realize that there is a feeling in that community now, among the people residing in the very place, from which President Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the Living God, and others were driven out, to be invited to go there and be asked to talk of the accomplishments of Mormonism and to have that talk received, with open arms, shows the most wonderful change of sentiment." [^2]

This great leader's attitude and personality were tremendous factors in that change of sentiment. One of the extraordinary and impressive occasions in speaking before audiences not of his faith occurred in Detroit, Michigan. Stringam A. Stevens, who was present, referring to it, said:

"No representative of the Church was ever accorded a greater ovation by an audience of non-members than that which was given to President Heber J. Grant following his address to more than 1200 of the country's leading scientists, industrial executives, and agriculture leaders at the Book-Cadillac Hotel in Detroit, Thursday evening, May 12, 1936. This occasion was the second Dearborn Conference of Agriculture. * * *" [^3]

These 1200 delegates were made up of the most distinguished scientists, industrialists, and agriculturists of America. President Grant was invited to speak on "Domestic Sugar Supply," a subject about which few men in America were so well-informed as was he. These thoughtful, earnest, eminent men came from all corners of the nation for a serious purpose—to help establish a rational order for the economic independence of America.

The Detroit News of May 12, 1936, commented as follows:

"Scientists Hear Prophet. Mormon leader here on their invitation. As men who believe they hold the key to the future of science, industry, and agriculture, gathered in high council here today, there came among them a prophet of another kind, one whom more than eight hundred thousand people look upon as privileged to hear the voice of the Almighty."

The Detroit Evening Times, May 13, 1936, said:

"The oldest delegate to the Second Dearborn conference of agriculturists, industrialists, and scientists, is also its most entertaining speaker. * * * He is Heber J. Grant, seventy-nine-year-old President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, commonly called the Mormon Church. He comes from Salt Lake City, Utah. * * * In a booming bass voice, standing straight as a ramrod, the bewhiskered old man then launched into a humorous semi-political speech which brought nearly one thousand people to their feet, cheering and whistling in the grand ballroom of the Book-Cadillac Hotel last night."

There were three notable incidents in this conference in which the President was conspicuous. At the pre-convention luncheon held in the Inn, the President and Henry Ford were given the first table. They began a conversation that continued throughout the luncheon period. Their picture was taken and widely publicized. These distinguished men were about the same age, and both were men of vision and high purpose. They talked together for more than an hour. The President's first speech was a hit. He was the last speaker of the evening. It seemed a dull and unpropitious hour, the atmosphere of the ballroom where the program was held was dense with tobacco smoke. The guests were drowsy and apathetic. It was a trying situation under which to speak. When the President was announced, the applause was feeble. He had to walk some distance to the speaker's platform. He looked worried, but from the moment he began to speak that vast audience recognized at once a new voice, a new message. They tried to interrupt him with their applause, but he went straight along to the end. When he finished, they arose en masse and almost shook the rafters with their demonstration.

One man in the audience said to his neighbor, "I have traveled five hundred miles to get here, and I would not have missed that speech for $500."

President Grant did not speak as a scientist, nor as an industrialist, nor as an agriculturist. He told who his people are and what they have done and why they were able to do it. He quoted from the Doctrine and Covenants, "We believe that governments are instituted of God for the benefit of man; and that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in making laws and administering them, for the good and safety of society.

"We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed, and held inviolate, as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life." [^4]

They liked that and showed that they did. The President said, "In my opinion Brigham Young was the greatest colonizer and pioneer that America has ever produced. He always gave full credit for his accomplishments, however, to the founder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Joseph Smith, Jr."

The President concluded with reference to the welfare program of the Church. As the last words were spoken, that assembly of great men, as if moved by a single impulse, arose to their feet and applauded long and enthusiastically. Scores of people crowded around the President to shake his hand. Throughout the audience could be heard such statements as, "That was worth coming from New York to hear," and "I'd go a thousand miles any day to hear that man talk."

From the time he made his first address until he left Detroit, he was the most outstanding and the most talked about personality of that remarkable conference.

On the second evening of the convention a great banquet was held in the Hotel Statler and a formal program planned, including music by the Chrysler-Plymouth male quartet and talks by two distinguished men. Mr. Gavin, a witty Irishman, was toastmaster. Shortly before the program began, without warning or previous notice, he leaned over and asked President Grant, who was sitting next to him in the place of honor, if he would respond with a few remarks. The President agreed, and Mr. Gavin later arose to introduce him with the explanation that many had not heard one of the convention's distinguished guests on the previous evening, and many who had had requested that he be presented again. This announcement was received with great demonstration, the audience arising and applauding vigorously. The President spoke for about ten minutes, beginning with some of his best stories, then he changed the mood to one of solemn thoughtfulness by telling of the monument that was being erected at Florence, Nebraska, in memory of the people who suffered persecution for their honest belief. He told of the exodus from Nauvoo and the bitter night when nine babies were born on the river ice, and when many Saints perished cruelly. Tense feeling hushed the guests as they listened to the dramatic story.

While in Detroit President Grant and his guests were entertained by Henry Ford at the Dearborn Inn; a Lincoln car and a chauffeur were always at the President's door. He was there for three days, and the chauffeur became attached to the President. He said, "I would like to go with him; he is such a wonderful man."

A letter written to President Grant under date of May 27, 1946, from Mr. Carl B. Fritche, managing director of the Chemurgic Council, contained the following paragraph:

"I am delighted that you had such a splendid time at the Dearborn Conference. Everyone agrees that you stole the show and added a fine flavor to it, which a meeting of that sort always needs."

At Estes Park, August 10, 1936, Dr. Frank Kingdom, president of New York University, introduced President Grant saying, "I, representing the majority groups in America, feel bad that a minority group of this kind should have been ignored, and it is in that spirit and with a deep appreciation of the fine leadership that President Grant has given to his own people that I am now presenting him to you this morning to tell you, from his own point of view, what this movement has experienced, what it means to the great section of the country in which it is so influential."

The written invitation to the President to speak before the institute said, "We should like you to tell the history and experiences of the early followers of Mormonism as they came from the East to the West. We hope you will include some of your personal reminiscences." This made a great appeal to the President as it was the major theme of his life, the one thing above all others about which he preferred to speak. He knew the persecutions and hardships of his people as no other person then living did. He had learned of them from the lips of those who had gone through it all, many of whom had died without recording their experiences.

For an hour and five minutes he told those people gathered at Estes Park the tragic and dramatic story of his own people, commencing with the organization of the Church in 1830.

With the following fearless and fervent testimony he concluded:

"I know that God lives. I have approached him in prayer time and time again, and my prayers have been answered beyond any question of a doubt. I know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world; that he came to the earth with a divinely appointed mission to die. 'As in Adam all died so in Christ shall they be made alive.' I know as I know that I live that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the true and Living God, and that his declaration that we should be driven from city to city, from county to county, state to state, and finally beyond the United States of America, to the Rocky Mountains, has been literally fulfilled."

In the President's relationship with the great men of the world he could be described by two lines from Kipling's poem "If."

If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue

Or walk with kings—nor lose the common touch.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Durham, op. cit., p. 361.
[^2] Ibid., p. 315.
[^3] The Improvement Era, July 1936, Vol. 39, p. 397.
[^4] Doc. and Cov., 134:1-2.
