Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XVI .

A PHILANTHROPIST

Man becomes great exactly in the degree in which he works for the welfare of his fellow men.

—Mahatma Gandhi

Giving, whether it be of time, labor, affection, advice, gifts or whatever, is one of life's greatest pleasures.

—Rebecca Russell

If there be any truer measure of a man than by what he does, it must be by what he gives.

—South

The dead carry with them to the grave only what they have given away.

PHILANTHROPY is good will toward men in action. It is doing something to promote the welfare of others without thought of reward or hope of compensation. In its noblest implications no other word in the English language is so descriptive of the character of this leader.

Heber J. Grant never did a sordid thing in his life. If a record were written of what he did for others, of what he gave to individuals and institutions, of the help rendered to those who were in need of help, of the ways he opened for young people to realize their ambitions, of the confidence and hope which he inspired in the hearts of the disconsolate, what a brilliant and revealing chapter it would be! Where is his equal in this respect?

There was a generosity about this great man of which most people knew nothing. Those of casual acquaintance and the public generally thought of Heber J. Grant as an aggressive, militant man, rigidly subscribing to the letter of the law, and sternly admonishing others if they failed to do likewise, a man with little sympathy for those who deviated from the upright. But the depths of his affections, the magnanimity of his soul, his profound sympathy for the poor and the unfortunate expressed themselves in a service unmatched for generosity.

The welfare of widows was always the object of his solicitude. Clearing their homes of mortgages, getting their children jobs, seeing that those who were sick had the proper medical attention, and helping them to finance themselves, were always his concern.

Nor was this philanthropy limited to widows or to his relatives or to his friends; it was extended to scores of people, many of whom he did not know. Joseph Anderson, the President's secretary, wrote this:

"President Grant was the most liberal and generous man with his personal means that I have ever known; in fact, I doubt if any have excelled him in this respect. He trusted me with his personal means, and with a record of his income and expenditures. He was a man who thoroughly enjoyed making money, but not for the purpose of accumulating it. His only desire was to have money that he might do good with it. On various occasions he would come to me and ask how much money was in his bank account. Knowing the purpose for which he wished this money, I hesitated at times to give it to him without reminding him of certain expenditures he would have to meet in the near future. Invariably he would ask me to draw a check for the amount he desired, perhaps for $1,000 or $1,500, telling me to make the check in favor of some widow whose name he would give explaining that he wished to pay off the mortgage on her home.

"I recall on one occasion before the Salt Lake Theatre was torn down, and at a time when the theatre was not making money, President Grant bought some theatre stock from the daughters of one of his deceased friends, giving them for the stock far more than the market price. A few years later when the theatre was sold, the returns to the stockholders was in excess of the amount that he had to pay these women for their stock. He gave them his check to make up the difference in the price even though the transaction making the purchase had been consummated several years previously.

"He was always scrupulously careful to see that no funds belonging to the Church were used for any other purpose than legitimate Church business."

His daughter Lucy said: "Father believed in missionary work and set aside thousands of dollars to be used for the purpose of sustaining missionaries. (He had no sons to send on missions.) His own kin were numbered among them, grandsons, nephews, and distant relatives, all came in for their share of help.

"He was devoted to temple work. Hundreds of dollars were spent monthly to pay people for taking names from his records. Research workers were hired and thousands of names were added to his records, and a great many people worked for him at different times for several years. He had a session at the temple which he attended once a week, and many of his family would go there. I recall one night when we did sealings for 1300.

"A man who had served on a mission with him died leaving a family of five children; the baby was but four months old. Father took this woman into his office where she worked for fifteen years at the same time caring for her children, working in Church capacities, and educating her children. He took a fatherly interest in this family assisting them all he could.

"Father had a cousin, who became a helpless invalid in her girlhood, and for the duration of most of her life he helped to maintain her and pay for many operations which she underwent for an infection of a bone in her hip.

"He was always interested in people who served him in the home. During his last illness, a woman who had a large family was doing day work. He learned about the circumstances of the family. One day on one of his rides into Davis County, he saw a 'For Sale' sign on a piece of land. He made inquiries about the land, bought it, and presented it to this sister and her husband, and for several years they farmed it and proudly brought to Father vegetables which they had raised on the land. Finally they moved to California, selling the land, which helped them finance themselves there.

"One night I was reading the paper and came to the story of a sister who was a widow who had two sons on missions; he said that was quite a burden for her, and immediately got in touch with the family and sent money to help the boys in their missions.

"One of our neighbors lost her husband; Father was among the first to call, and he pressed $100.00 into her hand. This generous act was repeated scores of times when death entered the homes of those he knew.

"One of our relatives had lived for many years in a rented home. Father decided she should have a home of her own. Her children were too young to help much, but he had plans drawn up for a home. It looked as if his work had been in vain because the woman's husband found it impossible to assume the expense. Father said she must have the home, so he talked it over and got the necessary money, and put this relative in her new home.

"For forty-one years it was my privilege to visit the various stakes of Zion. I think I can truthfully say that seldom did I go to any outlying stake that some one of the congregation did not tell me of Father's gifts. He helped widows, missionaries, people who had lost their loved ones, those who had been in accidents, or those whose people had been killed or injured in accident. While I was in Wyoming, one woman whose husband had been killed in a mine accident came to me and she told me that Father had written her a personal letter. He sent books to her, and to her children, about eight in number, and she told how that letter and those books, and his remembrance carried her through the ordeal which she otherwise could not have endured. * * *

"During those lean years which followed the panic of 1893, when to raise a nickel was harder than it had been to give $5.00, Father still helped those in distress. He knew the widow's lot; he had felt the pinch of poverty; he knew the bitterness and bondage of debt. Through all the dark hours of his life there was a shining and secure faith in God and his promises which sustained him. I know in those years the horror of financial obligation was borne into the souls of those of us who were old enough to see him under this great strain which made us feel that debt was like a huge dragon, into whose ugly mouth the very lifeblood of its victims was drawn. No wonder he was constantly crying unto the people everywhere to keep out of debt. One whose experiences have been such as his, knows the exquisite pain of honor when on the verge of being crushed, and of a good name when near being dragged into the dust."

Here are some additional examples of his generosity: When he presided over the European Mission, his daughter Lucy was in the habit of writing him a newsletter once a week. In one of these letters she mentioned that a sister, who helped in the Grant home, had been assessed $50.00 on the new chapel in her ward. This sister had not complained, but Lucy thought it was a high assessment for a widow with two small children to support. Soon a letter from her Father came to this widow with a check enclosed. She was to use $25.00 to help on her assessment, and when she told Lucy about it, tears were in her eyes. She was so grateful for the letter, but the check she wanted to return. However, she did not return it, but gave it to the ward, making her donation $75.00 instead of $50.00.

Years later, when Lucy visited this woman, who was then nearly ninety years old and almost blind, she went to her drawer and brought out this letter, yellow with age, for Lucy to read. As Lucy read it, the old lady's withered cheeks were moistened with tears of gratitude.

"An artist came to sell him a picture," his daughter related. "Father did not have space on his walls to hang a picture, but the artist needed the money, so Father told him he had always been very sorry he let him sell his last picture so cheap, so he gave him an extra $50.00 for the previous picture and suggested that the artist sell the picture he had to someone else."

She continued: "It was a few days before Christmas, and I was preparing some little gifts for a needy family. Father walked in, and I showed him the things, telling him about the family, as I had gathered the story from the mother, and I mentioned that I must get my temple clothes ready as I was lending them to the woman to use the next morning. The next day when she came to return my clothing, she told me that when she went to the temple gate, Father was there waiting. He had never seen her before, only knowing her by my description. He stopped her and handed her an envelope as he wished the family a happy Christmas. The envelope contained $20.00. * * *

"His power to forgive others was almost Christlike, to return good for evil. You'd hardly suspect it of him, but it was true. Many times he helped men in distress who had previously criticized him openly. He was lenient and tolerant toward those who neglected their Church and turned away from the faith of their fathers. He never seemed to bear malice. He was bitter in his denunciation of sin, but to the sinner, he was merciful."

A typist who worked in his office for many years, was able to use only one hand. That very handicap was a factor in his employing her. She had married and was living in a poor and very inexpensive place. One evening when he was out driving with some of his daughters, they pointed out the place where she lived. At the following Christmas time he suggested to each of his children, that rather than write a check to them for his Christmas gift, he would ask them in turn, to write a check to him, and he was going to add to their checks the equivalent of what he had usually given them. This amount he was going to pay on this girl's house. On the following Christmas day the President called at her home and gave them a turkey for their Christmas dinner and presented them with a check for several hundred dollars to pay on their house."

Lucy related: "The Salt Lake Temple was nearing completion, and as a project for all Sunday School and Primary children, it was suggested that they forget their Christmas presents and give the money to the temple. Our family was enthusiastic about the idea, so we immediately told Father that we wanted the equivalent of our Christmas gifts in money to pay on the temple. Father gave each of us $100.00, which, of course, was far in excess of the usual Christmas check, and how proudly little Heber handed his to the bishop! Some years later, just a week or so before his passing, the bishop was in, and Heber felt under his pillow for his purse and handed the bishop $8.00 which he had saved to add to other gifts for the temple." [^1]

Almost the last time the President was able to attend a meeting of the directors of one of the banks over which he presided, he asked the cashier if there were any widows owing obligations to the bank which they could not meet. At first the cashier thought not, but finally said, "There is one woman who is having great difficulty in paying the mortgage on her home, and it looks as if she might lose it." Then the great-hearted and generous President asked how much the obligation was. He was informed that the amount was several hundred dollars. He directed the cashier to pay the mortgage, to cancel it, and send it to the widow and charge it to his account. He did not know her personally.

Not long before the President's death, a group of people were raising money for some civic purpose, and one of the solicitors discovered that Heber J. Grant's name was on his list. He had never met him, and he had grave reservations about calling on him. However, he called at the President's home. He was ready to go out for a ride, but he invited the man to sit with him on his porch for a few minutes. When the solicitor had explained the nature of the visit, the President said, "Do you have that widow's name on your list?" pointing to the one that lived across the street; and "Do you have so and so's name on your list?"

In both cases he responded, "Yes."

"Well," he said, "how much are you asking from them?"

He told him, and the President gave him his check including his own contribution and the contributions of the other people about whom he had inquired.

This solicitor who had met the President for the first time, was so fascinated with what he did and the way in which he did it that he said, "He won my confidence and my everlasting esteem. You can't help feeling that he is a wonderful man."

During the depression President Grant went to Chicago and underwent an important surgical operation. His doctor charged him $2,500 for the operation—a high fee considering the times and conditions. The President offered no protest but mentioned the fact that his holdings had greatly depreciated as a result of the depression. The doctor, accordingly reduced his fee $1,000 leaving an account of $1,500 which was promptly paid, and the matter was satisfactorily closed. In 1936 when financial conditions had improved, the President sent the doctor $1,000. This was a new kind of ethics in the surgeon's experience, and it reveals the rare sense of fairness that actuated the President in all his dealings.

The following story is another illustration of his helpfulness:

A young Swedish girl had been left an orphan when she was very young, and she and her sister had been reared by their grandparents. While she was still a small child, she had an infection in her eyes which resulted in almost total blindness. Her grandparents were wealthy people and provided a governess who had read to her and taught her so that she was well-educated. She became converted to the Latter-day Saint faith, and her grandparents immediately turned against her. They told her how ungrateful she was and that unless she renounced this "infamous" faith she would have to leave their home. She had such a strong testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel that she chose to leave. She had nothing to look forward to except poverty and drudgery, but she chose this rather than renounce her faith. She felt that the Lord would take care of her.

Soon after she left her home, a returned Swedish missionary who knew her heard of her plight and sent her the money to emigrate to America, telling her that if she cared to come to Utah, he would marry her in spite of the ailment in her eyes, and that he would try to make her happy. She felt that this was a direct answer to her prayers and was thrilled beyond all words. She immediately made preparations to leave, and when her grandparents found that she was going to America, they provided her with a lovely trousseau and wished her well, but they told her they never wanted to hear from her again unless she would leave the Church and come back to them as a member of their faith.

When she reached New York, she was held for a while by the immigration officers and then returned to Liverpool. The Mormon elder was disappointed. He again sent money for her emigration, supplied her with more affidavits as to his willingness to care for her and told her to try to get through to Boston. Again she was unsuccessful, and again he sent money and told her to try Canada, but that this was the last time. If she was not successful, he knew that she would not hold it against him if he put her entirely out of his life and tried to find another wife. She was not only unsuccessful in landing in Canada but was kept for such a long time at the port of entry that all of the lovely things her grandparents had given her for her trousseau became moth-eaten and had to be thrown into the ocean. She had to return again to Liverpool.

When President Grant, then president of the European Mission, heard her story, his heart was deeply touched. He was reminded of the time when his own mother had been forced by her grandparents, who had reared her, to choose between them and Mormonism. She, too, had been turned out of a lovely home. He and Sister Grant talked the matter over and could see no way that they could help the girl because of her blindness, but they finally decided to let her stay at the mission home and help with the housework and earn her room and board. She was perfectly delighted with this suggestion and was most diligent in her duties and was often heard singing as she cleaned. It wasn't very long until she was given charge of President Grant's two young daughters when he and Sister Grant visited the various missions. She had a wonderful disposition, was immaculately clean, and knew how to do all the nice little things that are done in better homes. She learned the language rapidly and well, and it was a joy to be with her. She felt that her Heavenly Father had blessed her abundantly, and she would be happy the rest of her life if she could only stay in the mission home.

One day, not long before President Grant and his family were returning to America, Sister Grant found her crying, and asking what the trouble was, she received the answer that she didn't feel she could stand to have the Grant family go home where she would never see them again. Soon after this President Grant told her they would bring her with them if they could, but that she must not be disappointed if she had to return. He made the necessary arrangements to bring her through as the children's nursemaid, proving that she had been such for nearly three years and that she was in his employ. He guaranteed that he would be responsible for her the rest of her life. She was permitted to enter the United States and came to Salt Lake with President Grant and his family and lived at their home only a few months.

One day her missionary friend came to President Grant and said that he loved this girl dearly and was willing to make any sacrifices he would have to make in order to have her for his wife. They were married in the Salt Lake Temple. She became the mother of four children, two sons and two daughters, and has lived a happy, successful life. Her oldest son, Grant, has fulfilled a mission in Sweden.

One day in 1905 when President and Sister Grant were sitting in front of the Sistine Madonna in the Art Gallery in Dresden, Germany, he remarked: "Isn't it wonderful to be able to see all these masterpieces in the original? I remember the coloring your sister Kate made of this picture for one of the state fairs, and I think it took the first prize. I wish Kate could be with us."

Soon after this, he decided to send for Kate Wells to come to Europe for a three months' visit. She had worked hard all her life and hadn't had many opportunities for travel. She thoroughly enjoyed every minute of her trip and could never be grateful enough to President Grant for his generosity.

When President Grant was in Paris in 1904, a young artist was there studying. He told the President that it would be impossible to stay longer because of lack of funds. President Grant asked him how much he would need to continue his studies. He said, "With what I have now, I could manage with another ten dollars a month." The President said, "You shall have it just as long as you need it." This made it possible for the young artist to finish his studies and to become a fine artist. As a result of his training he secured a position in one of our best universities.

The story of President Grant's temple work would make an interesting book. From January 1936 to May 1945, nine and one-half years, he paid in cash for genealogical research and temple work more than $20,000. Most of this money was paid to people who needed work. He always paid a little more for his temple work than the regular price.

On the occasion of his 82nd birthday, when Mr. Moffat, in behalf of those present, presented him with a copper chest containing one thousand silver dollars, he said: "Nothing has pleased you more throughout your life than to extend help to the needy. This will give you increased opportunity and power to express your generosity." This mandate the President carried out. He donated both the chest and dollars to the Primary Association to aid in the erection of a children's hospital. The hospital board had these dollars made into paper weights and sold each one for one hundred dollars or more, netting the Primary more than $117,000. The copper box, in the shape of a Bee Hive, which contained the silver dollars, has been given a place in the hall of the hospital, together with a book containing the names of those who have purchased the silver dollar paper weights. This was one of his last benefactions.

We had the opportunity of examining the ledger record of his gifts and gratuities for three years. During those years he must have given away the equivalent of all he received. Every entry bespeaks his sympathetic and generous heart. Here are some items selected at random: Paid a mortgage for a struggling friend, funeral expenses for a widow's husband, mortgage on a widow's home, taxes on a widow's home, interest on mortgage for a young man who worked for him, mortgage on a widow's home, funeral expenses for a friend's wife, hearing device for a deaf person, check to a widow, another check to a widow, payment on land which he gave to a woman who worked for him, check to a friend for missionary work. Regular monthly allowances were paid to a number of unfortunate people.

These beneficent acts continued until the last. Here is an extract from a letter he wrote to a widow a few days before his death:

"Will you please tell me how much you are owing on your home and let me join with you fifty-fifty in paying it off at once instead of paying it by the month."

And here is another:

"I am very happy indeed that I have been able to be of some assistance to you. Is your home paid for? If not, please let me know how much still remains."

The President had great affection for Joseph Everett, an artist, who served as a missionary with him in Great Britain. Everett was a draftsman for the Union Pacific Railroad, and when that company moved its main offices from Salt Lake to Omaha, Everett remained in Salt Lake and was out of regular employment. The President immediately began to work out some plan to help his friend. In the beginning he employed him on a regular salary. Later, when Everett began teaching art, he was employed by the President for one day a week. Through this plan the artist was given financial security. During this employment he painted for the President. These paintings, numbering more than 200, President Grant gave away. In this way he helped this lovable and ever grateful friend to devote his time and talents to the thing he loved most. For the first time in his life Joseph Everett was able to give all his time to the art which he loved, and he produced many beautiful paintings, which won for him a place of honor among the great artists of Utah.

If one were overtaken with sorrow or death in his family, the President sent messages of comfort or some token of affection, which the recipient treasured forever. All day long he was doing things for others, things that were practical and helpful. He contributed to every worthy cause that came to his attention. The list of his benefactions will never be revealed, but surely the Father of us all, who loves cheerful givers, must hold Heber J. Grant very high in his divine affections.

In all of this no mention is made of the books, paintings, letters, and tokens which he so generously gave to thousands of people. At the time of the dedication of the Grant Library at the Brigham Young University in Provo he estimated that he had given away in number as many books as were in the library at that time, which was more than one hundred thousand. Many of the books which he gave away were small ones with some impressive and inspiring message, such as The Power of Truth by William George Jordan, and The Strength of Being Clean, by David Starr Jordan, and others. Many of his friends have a shelf in their libraries on which all the books that he has given them are placed, and they are and should be a prized part of any library.

He was not a wealthy man in the sense in which the world uses that term, but he was willing to help others. To share with others less fortunate than himself was a part of his daily life. No one close to him ever met with reverses that he did not want to share them. Few of his friends ever had a piece of good fortune come without receiving the President's congratulations and good wishes. His name will shine forever among the nobility of his time. No mind was more eager to bless, no heart more tender, and no hand more generous than the mind, the heart, and the hand of President Grant.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Useful Quotations, p. 207.
