Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XVII .

HIS FRIENDSHIPS

"'I NEVER pretended to make friends,' said Napoleon. * * * On a lonely little island he fretted away the last years of his life—alone." [^1]

"To love and be loved is the greatest happiness in existence." [^2]

President Grant's friends were legion. Wherever he went the warmth and glow of his generous heart kindled a feeling of kinship in the hearts of others. It was a joy to know him. One always received a lift as a result of meeting him.

He frequently quoted something to this effect, "Judge a man by the company he keeps, not by his relatives. He chooses his company, but his relatives are thrust upon him." There were two classes of men whom he particularly admired: Those who had fought their way to recognition by overcoming obstacles—he appreciated what that meant; and those who had made a contribution to the good of the world. This second test to him seemed final. He had great admiration for men who were tolerant, especially if they were friendly to his people and his religion. No man could long remain a friend to Heber J. Grant and at the same time be actively antagonistic to his Church. Strangers liked his fairness, his affable and democratic way, above all his generosity and tolerance.

The President was a keen judge of men, always generous in his appraisal of others' achievements, commending where commendation was merited. Among those whose association he enjoyed were men of various creeds and denominations. However, all knew who he was and where he stood on matters of religion, and they admired him for that stand.

John F. Fitzpatrick, publisher of the Salt Lake Tribune and Salt Lake Telegram, a consistent Catholic, was an ardent admirer of President Grant. On many occasions Mr. Fitzpatrick showed his affections for his Mormon friend. He never allowed the President's anniversary to pass without sending some appropriate token of his friendship, and after the President's death, he sent flowers to Mrs. Grant on all important anniversaries. The Grant family hold Mr. Fitzpatrick in the highest esteem and President Grant had a real admiration for him.

The great industrialist, Henry Ford, was a warm friend and admirer of President Grant. They enjoyed visiting together. Mr. Ford showed him every consideration.

The poet and writer, Edgar A. Guest, another distinguished citizen of Detroit, was a long-time friend of the President's. Mr. Guest had in his backyard in Detroit a private golf course where they played golf together. President Grant distributed many copies of some of Mr. Guest's writings.

Among the most impressive and extraordinary of all his friends and admirers was the late Vice President Charles G. Dawes of Chicago. These two men were very different but highly congenial. The general had a most wholesome respect for President Grant and a very high regard for the Latter-day Saint people. The President admired General Dawes for his courage, patriotism, and rugged individuality.

Carl Gray, president of the Union Pacific Railroad, was another man for whom the President had a warm place in his heart.

His relations with Fred W. Shibley were a little different. Back in 1921, during the confusion and upheaval of the post-war finances, Mr. Shibley came to Salt Lake City from New York. He was vice-president of the Banker's Trust Company. The Utah-Idaho Sugar Company was in financial distress at the time because of a sudden slump in the price of sugar. Mr. Shibley came here as a representative of the creditors of that company. Efforts were made before he came to Utah and after he arrived to discredit the Church, its leaders and its people, in his mind. One man said, "Those Mormons are a bright lot; they are just getting rich at the expense of their followers by gathering the tithing for their own benefit." Mr. Shibley was not an easy man to deceive. He soon realized that the fellows who were trying to "stuff" him were not telling the truth. In proof of this President Grant used to quote Mr. Shibley as follows: "Yesterday morning the President of the Church invited me to come and have breakfast with him. He had invited me to dinner, but I had a previous engagement; the next day I had another engagement; the following day I had to leave for New York; so he said, come up and take breakfast at eight o'clock in the morning. I agreed. There was no hired girl there. His daughter came in from the next house where she lived and fried the pancakes. Oh, I had a practical illustration of the way he was grafting the Church, living in a modest house that any ordinary man with a salary of $350.00 a month could support."

As a result of Mr. Shibley's visit to Utah a plan was developed under which the banks, in cooperation with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, effected an extension of credit for the sugar company, which gave it time to dispose of its surplus sugar and pay its indebtedness to the banks. That was the purpose of his visit. The fairness, understanding, and courage of Mr. Shibley won the President's everlasting gratitude and friendship.

Among all of Heber J. Grant's friends and admirers we must, however, give first place to Alexander G. Haws. Several references are made to him in this biography. The President frequently referred to him in these terms:

"The nearest and dearest friend I ever had in the world outside of my own people was the late Alexander Gilhirst Haws. He came to my mother's home as an unmarried man when I was a child, and he resided with us for six months. Years later he returned with his bride, and his first child was born in our home. He was a loyal friend not only to me but also to our people. He was here when Senator Reed Smoot was striving to maintain his seat in the Senate of the United States, and he called on the Senator (that was in the city of Washington) and asked if he could do anything for him. The Senator said, 'What can I do for you, sir?' He said, 'Nothing, I have come to ask you if I can do anything for you? Have you the votes of the Senators from California for you to keep your seat?' 'No,' the Senator replied. 'I will go right out and fix it. They are my personal friends. They are members of the Bohemian Club.' He and one other man, Rafael Wheel, were the only survivors of the organizers of that club. He succeeded in getting these men to pledge themselves to vote for the Senator first, last and all the time, notwithstanding they had received petitions from California bearing thousands of names against the Senator's retaining his seat. 'Then,' he said, 'I remember fighting with so-and-so in the (Bloody Seventh) as it was called in Illinois, which lost more men in proportion to its numbers than any other regiment. He was one of my fellow officers, and I got his vote.' Then he spoke of other votes he had secured. He said, 'I would like to stay here all summer, if my business did not call me away, and fight that this man shall keep his seat. A more un-American, damnable idea never entered into the mind of men, than to deprive an honorable man of his seat in the United States Senate, because he is an Apostle of the Church that is looked upon with contempt.' He said, 'I have done this little work for the Senator for three reasons: (I was in England presiding over the European Mission at the time I received this letter.) First, because it was right, and I like always to be on the right side. (By the way he was one of John Brown's men in early days.) And I always try to get my numerals right; you ought to come third in place of second. Third, because it is mighty good Republican politics.'" [^3]

Daniel C. Jackling came to Utah before the turn of the century and soon sprang into world renown as a mining engineer as a result of his developing the new milling processes which he used here.

The Salt Lake Tribune (November 23, 1937) commenting editorially said: "The election of D. C. Jackling as president of the American Institute of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers is a merited recognition of one of the most conspicuous figures in the mining world. * * * He has been awarded medals for distinguished service in civil capacities during World War I, and for notable achievements in the development and operation of mining properties scattered from Alaska through Utah, Arizona, to Chili in South America."

The following letters show the warm friendship which existed between these two men:

Salt Lake City, Utah

November 15, 1941

My dear Mr. Jackling:

I am slowly improving, still I am forced because of my health to neglect many things which deserve my personal attention. This accounts for the tardy acknowledgment of your wonderful letter of July 11. Seldom have I been more impressed with a letter than with yours. Your understanding and your interpretation of the character and service of the immortal Lincoln I share fully. This cements a little firmer the friendship that has so long existed between us. The whole spirit of your letter adds to my appreciation of your character and your great achievements. There is no doubt in my mind but that Abraham Lincoln was inspired from on High, that he was raised up of the Almighty to do the great work which he did, for no man preached more eloquently or practiced more perfectly the precepts of the Master than did Lincoln. He trusted implicitly in the goodness and guidance of the Almighty. Lincoln was divinely fitted for the gigantic task assigned to him and was sustained and directed by the hand of Providence in the performance of that task.

Your expressions of faith in and your humble reverence for an overruling Providence who gives divine direction to the affairs of men shows a profound religious conviction and faith in God which we both share. I believe, as you modestly intimated, that the Almighty inspired you when you recognized in Bingham more than forty years ago the new order of mineral industry which has spread throughout the world and has now come to represent the production of about two-thirds of the copper of the earth. You are right, the human mind of itself cannot and does not deserve credit for such revolutionary discoveries.

I am grateful for the testimony which I have of the existence and personality of God, for my knowledge of his goodness and power and mercy, for the assurance which I have of his forgiveness of our sins and mistakes and his great love for mankind. I hope you share this with me.

For your kind sentiments and reassurances of your personal friendship I am deeply grateful. Your attitude toward our people and our religion has always been one of the most friendly and sympathetic character. I greatly appreciate that. I remember with much pleasure your delightful visit with me this past summer, and I am looking forward to more visits with you. Your great ability, your splendid achievements command my admiration. Your faith in God and your friendship win my confidence and affection. I thank you most cordially for your letter and remain

With the best of good wishes,

Sincerely yours,

Heber J. Grant

San Francisco, Calif.

November 19, 1941

Mr. Heber J. Grant, President

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah

My dear President Grant:

The first occasion for this writing is to convey to you my very earnest congratulations and well wishes for the forthcoming 85th anniversary of your birth on next Saturday. I realize that mine is only a small voice in a multitude of those who will acclaim this happy event—some orally, of which I wish I could be one; some in written phrase, as I do, and many more in silent thankfulness to the Almighty that you are spared to continue your wonderful life of leadership, sacred in the service of God and magnificent in its influence in furtherance of the inherent human rights and the exercise of these in civilized progress. I will continue to hope, and would pray if I could, that I may have many future opportunities of renewing my heartfelt felicitations upon recurring anniversaries of your long and marvelously useful life.

My second purpose is to endeavor at least to thank you for your letter of November 15th, which impresses me as constituting the highest commendation that ever came to me from either the voice or pen of man. I am doubly grateful for your kind and comforting expressions, realizing that they represent exactions of your time and strength which might have been devoted to a subject more worthy. I am thankful, however, that you found it in your heart and spirit to bestow upon me those gracious words of approval which I consider and shall ever reverence as a spiritual blessing.

With kindest regards now and always to you, your family, and the exemplary and righteous causes you represent, I am,

Very sincerely yours,

D. C. Jackling

BRIGHAM YOUNG

His love for and his loyalty to his predecessors in office and to his associates in the Church was a little different. So intense was his loyalty to his religion that anyone who was steadfast in his allegiance to the Church was his friend.

From the time he was a boy of six until he was twenty-one years of age he was a frequent visitor at President Young's home. "I remember saying to the vice president of a great bank with assets of hundreds of million dollars, that the day would come when Brigham Young would be acknowledged as one of the greatest pioneers and colonizers that ever lived. The banker replied 'Why say the day will come, no man who knows anything about the accomplishments of Brigham Young but would say the day has come.'" [^4]

It is interesting in this connection to note that on June 1, 1950, the 149th anniversary of Brigham Young's birth there was unveiled in the Rotunda in the nation's Capitol a marble statue of him, by his nationally renowned grandson, Mahonri M. Young. The speakers on this historic occasion were George Albert Smith, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; Alben W. Barkley, Vice President of the United States; Elbert D. Thomas, senior Senator from Utah; J. Bracken Lee, Governor of Utah, and Carl Hayden, Senator from Arizona. This statute was given a place of honor in the Hall of Fame.

That great leader and empire builder took a fatherly interest in the orphan boy who was the son of his beloved counselor Jeddie Grant. Heber was always as welcome in President Young's home as were his own children, and he learned to love Brigham Young with the affection which boys have for their own earthly parents. He paid this tribute to his predecessors, including President Brigham Young:

"It has fallen to my lot, although a very weak humble instrument in the hands of the Lord, to succeed the wonderful men who have presided over this Church—the Prophet Joseph Smith, than whom no greater man I believe has ever graced the earth; that marvelous pioneer, Brigham Young; that mighty champion of liberty, John Taylor; that exceptional converter of men to the gospel of Jesus Christ, Wilford Woodruff; Lorenzo Snow, an extraordinary man at eighty-five years of age, who in three years lifted the Church from the slough of financial despondency to a place of financial honor; and that man beloved by all who knew him, one of the outstanding men of all the world, Joseph F. Smith, the greatest preacher of righteousness I have ever known." [^5]

President Grant knew most of the leading bankers, insurance men, sugar producers, and industrialists of the United States, and they welcomed a visit from him and sought his opinion on important questions of the day. They regarded him as a great religious leader. He was a friend-maker, an ambassador for his people and a servant of God. Many distinguished men were proud to be numbered among his friends.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Useful Quotations, p. 207.
[^2] Sidney Smith.
[^3] Durham, op. cit., pp. 219-22.
[^4] Conference Report, April 1932, pp. 10-11.
[^5] Ibid., April, 1930.
