Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XVIII .

HIS BIRTHDAYS

THE venerable leader lived past his eighty-eighth milestone. From his childhood his birthdays were observed with expressions of affection in keeping with the customs of those pioneer days. His fond mother never allowed one to pass without the assurance of her love shown in the wisest and happiest way.

As his family grew older, his anniversaries were looked forward to with ever-increasing interest and delight. In his later years they took on an importance which reached well beyond his family circle. These occasions afforded his friends and admirers, nation-wide, an opportunity to felicitate him, to show the great esteem in which they held him and to express the love and admiration which they had for him. His home and his office on these occasions were banked with most gorgeous bouquets and floral pieces. Committees and delegations representing organizations and institutions called on him; personal visits, long-distance calls, letters, telegrams, cablegrams, messages, remembrances, gifts, and tokens almost engulfed him.

Commenting on his seventy-fifth birthday, he said, "People think that when a man gets to be seventy-five all he can talk about is himself, that he has no thoughts of the future." Then he quoted this poem:

Age is a quality of mind:

If your dreams you've left behind,

If hope is cold:

If you no longer look ahead,

If your ambitions' fires are dead—

Then you are old.

But if from life you take the best,

And if in life you keep the zest,

If love you hold;

No matter how the years go by,

No matter how the birthdays fly—

You are not old.

The climax of these occasions was the celebration of his eighty-second birthday, November 22, 1938. It began on Tuesday the 22nd with a band concert given in the Church office building by the Brigham Young University band and was followed in the evening by a family dinner in the Lion House Social Center. At this dinner eighty of his direct descendants were present. His grandchildren and his great-grandchildren regaled him with a program of musical and dramatic numbers depicting the major events of his life. The observance of this anniversary, however, reached its peak in a great banquet given by five hundred leading men of the state of Utah in the Lafayette Ballroom of the Hotel Utah, Wednesday evening, November 23. This was the twentieth anniversary of his presidency of the Church. The occasion seemed to have a dual purpose. It was a token of respect and affection for the beloved President personally, and it was evidence that the old feelings of acrimony and bitterness against the Church and its leaders were of the past. This marked the passing of the animosity and persecutions which had been manifest from the very organization of the Church.

Just what part President Grant played in bringing about this change may not be accurately assessed, but the tendency to harmony seemed somehow to center about his remarkable personality. This was not a sudden change, but rather a gradual development of friendly relationships.

The changed attitude of the Salt Lake Tribune was a large factor in promoting amity and understanding among all the people. President Grant came to cherish the friendship and enjoy the confidence of Mr. A. N. McKay, many years the manager of the Salt Lake Tribune, who adopted a fair and friendly attitude toward the Mormon people. This attitude is still maintained under the management of John F. Fitzpatrick. The confidence and friendship of these men was altogether reciprocal.

The Salt Lake Tribune of November 24, 1938, referring to the birthday banquet, reported in part as follows:

"Tribute to Heber J. Grant, as religious leader, empire builder, business executive, and humanitarian, was paid by distinguished groups of citizens Wednesday night, November 23rd, in the Hotel Utah. The occasion was in honor of the eighty-second birthday anniversary of the beloved President of the L.D.S. Church, whose life's span has seen the development of Salt Lake City, from a frontier community to a metropolis of a vast empire.

"More than five hundred of his friends and business associates—some from out of the state—were seated in the Lafayette Ballroom for a birthday party, unique in the annals of the state.

"The proceedings from beginning to end were marked with dignity, and many expressions of esteem for the man who rose from the poverty of a pioneer home to a position of eminence in the nation, rang with sincerity and genuine admiration.

"One of the highlights came when President Grant received a tangible expression of the esteem in which he was held by those who honored him on this occasion. He received a chest of Utah copper made by Utah's craftsmen, and filled to the brim with one thousand of Utah's silver dollars. D. D. Moffat, vice-president and general manager of the Utah Copper Company, who made the presentation said: 'Nothing has pleased you more throughout your life than to extend help to the needy. This will give you increased opportunity and power to express your generosity.' Mr. Moffat said to President Grant the contents of this chest were his to command for any humanitarian purpose that he might devise, adding: 'We give you Utah silver to carry on your unselfish work.'

"Engraved on a plate attached to the chest were the dates—November 22, 1856, and November 22, 1938. Below is this inscription: 'Presented with love and esteem to President Heber J. Grant on his birthday anniversary by a group of friends and associates, Banquet, Hotel Utah, November 23, 1938.'"

From the time the program was opened by general chairman, John F. Fitzpatrick, the evening progressed smoothly and without discord. When the guests left, they were agreed it was an event which would live long in their memories.

The speakers at the banquet were, in their order: Mayor John M. Wallace, Governor Henry H. Blood, Frederick P. Champ, Logan businessman and chairman of the board of trustees at the U.S.A.C.; the Most Reverend Duane G. Hunt, Bishop of the Salt Lake Diocese of the Catholic Church; Lane W. Adams, a young businessman of Salt Lake, and J. Reuben Clark, Jr., First Counselor in the First Presidency of the Church.

Hundreds of telegrams congratulating President Grant were received. Mr. Gadsby explained that it would be possible to read but a few. Among the messages read were those from W. A. Harriman, chairman of the board of the Union Pacific Railroad; Charles G. Dawes, former vice president of the United States; D. C. Jackling, president of the Utah Copper Company; Louis C. Cates, president of the Phelps-Dodge Company; Ralph Budd, president of the Chicago-Burlington and Quincy Railroad; William Jeffers, president of the Union Pacific; and Ross Beason, of New York, formerly of Salt Lake.

Commenting editorially under date of November 25, 1938, the Salt Lake Tribune said:

"There stands a man! In this theme and this spirit five hundred friends and business associates paid sincere and earnest tribute to Heber J. Grant, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, at a testimonial dinner at the Hotel Utah, Wednesday evening. Seldom, if ever, has such a group assembled to honor a single living individual in Utah. In all of Utah's business and industrial history, there is no parallel for this demonstration of friendliness and fellowship. President Grant took deep pride in the kindly admiration and praise which were bestowed upon him. No greater homage could be paid a man for a life's work, rich in human service and righteous leadership. No one could arrive at his eighty-second milestone in such a setting and fail to glean satisfaction and contentment from a life's work symbolized in this fashion.

"There was something more than individual tribute in this bond of friendship. In all of Utah's history there is no signal of unity more poignant with peaceful understanding than this one. To attain such a goal is the work of generations devoted to all that is good in civilization. At this testimonial dinner tendered President Grant, honoring his eighty-second birthday, this spirit was manifest. It was significant of a unity of civic, business, and religious groups in a common cause—building a greater state and a nobler people. To be the medium for such an expression was pleasing to the venerable Church leader, loved and admired by all his associates without regard to religious ties.

"The significance of this gathering should be felt for years, end on end. More and more people will share the comradeship and the aspiration and the hopes which were manifest at this meeting.

"The copper chest of silver presented President Grant in grateful appreciation of his own benefactions with the wish that these benefactions may continue on indefinitely was a pleasing recognition of the generosity and humanitarian spirit of President Grant. It was a tangible spirit of the sincerity of the tribute paid by lip and tongue."

This editorial comment of the Salt Lake Tribune revealed the feeling behind the tribute. It was a spontaneous and genuine expression of fellowship for him and at the same time a signal of amity and understanding that prophesied a harmonious future in the efforts to build up this commonwealth.

Three years later, on his eighty-fifth birthday, one of the notable events was the presentation to him of a beautifully embellished copy of Gospel Standards, which is made up of selections from his sermons and writings collected by G. Homer Durham, and published by The Improvement Era. There have been sold more than 35,000 copies of this book. The fact that so many copies have been sold is high proof of its acceptance and appreciation by the members of the Church. Many thousands have read and studied it, and its readers have been inspired with a desire to do their duty, live their religion, and show their faith by their works.

This editorial appeared in the Deseret News November 22, 1944, on his eighty-eighth birthday:

PRESIDENT HEBER J. GRANT

"Fourscore and eight years have come and gone since the venerable President of the Church first saw the light of day in a home that stood on Main Street where Z.C.M.I. now stands. From the summit of eighty-eight years he looks across a colorful and wonderful career. Seasoned in judgment, secure in faith, serene and tranquil in spirit, he stands upon this eminence respected, honored, and loved by all who know him. He is a church man, a civic leader, a benevolent patron of art, of education, and of culture—and withal a great citizen. For twenty-six years he has presided over this people. His constant and unwavering devotion, his Christian example, his fervent testimony of the divine mission of the savior of the world have inspired the people to a steadfast adherence to the Church which under his leadership has moved steadily forward until today its membership exceeds 900,000.

"The President comes to this milestone, not in robust health, but free from pain and with a heart overflowing with gratitude to his associates, to the people whom he serves and to the benevolent Creator whom he worships.

"President Grant has traveled among many peoples and over much of the earth's surface, and wherever he has gone he has made friends for himself and his cause. He has lived long, abundantly and purposefully, devoting his great energies to exalted ends, giving to every righteous cause the influence of his great office and the support of his powerful personality. He is a man of affairs but singularly free from unhallowed ambitions. Selfishness, greed, and avarice find no place in his life. President Grant knows the joy of giving. His benefactions have extended in all directions—everywhere blessing individuals and helping institutions. One cannot come to know this venerable leader intimately without thinking less of money and more of people, less of the things of the world and more of the things of the spirit. He holds in his heart no greed for wealth, no ambition for worldly honor that would not be cheerfully surrendered in the interests of his Church. Running through his life, permeating his words, motivating his actions are a zeal for the truth, a love for the work of God and humanity. His life is an open book—a record of service to others. No analysis of his character would reveal a trace of hypocrisy. He is transparently frank, intrinsically honest, unselfishly devoted to his people, his country, and his God.

"Heber J. Grant has a brilliant and resourceful mind, clear and fast in action, a will that expresses itself in persistent and enlightened effort, dominated always by motives both generous and lofty. He made the dreams of his youth shining realities. His achievements as a young man will forever stir the hope and quicken the confidence of ambitious boys who are struggling against odds to win an honorable place in the world."
