Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XIX .

HIS SYMPATHIES

HEBER J. GRANT'S sympathies were no less profound and no less responsive than were his desires to give and to help. These virtues spring from the same depths and are inspired by the same generous motives. His sympathies were universal and worldwide. The desire to do for others was always present with him. His constant concern was the happiness of others.

In his later years, when his health was such that he could no longer travel among the Saints, it was his practice to take an automobile ride in the afternoon, but he never went alone. He had a long list of widows and old friends who shared this pleasure with him. One of his friends, a good man, had retired. The president called to see him; he found him despondent and lonely, but this visit brought sunshine into the man's life and filled him with renewed hope. Retired stake presidents and men who had given long and faithful service to the Church frequently received letters of commendation and appreciation for their service, letters which they cherished all their remaining days. These examples show how deep-seated his feelings and affections were. What a cloud of witnesses could testify to his encouraging and sympathetic help.

His wife, Lucy Stringham, after a protracted illness, died at the age of thirty-five. She spent several months in a hospital in California where she had gone in the vain hope that a change of climate might help her. His daughter, Lucy, has written: "During the years of my Mother's illness, which lasted over a long period of time, Father's attentions were so constant and so considerate as to be commented upon, not only by his family and intimate friends, but also by strangers who knew of this evidence of devotion. For six months I was with my mother while she was receiving treatment in California hospitals, and as often as was possible he was with us. Flowers came at frequent intervals; fruits, dainties, and clothes, everything he could send her was hers. Almost every day a letter reached her, and if, for some reason, it was delayed, even the nurses would notice it. I remember the Sister Superior saying to Mother that in all her years of nursing she had never had any man treat his wife as considerately as Mother was treated. She said she would never believe any of the bad stories which were told her of the Mormons." [^1]

Notwithstanding his fervent prayers in her behalf and his constant solicitude for her recovery, she gradually grew weaker and finally passed away. Referring to the time of her death, he said:

"We have assurance through the revelations that have been given by the Lord our God that the body and the spirit shall be eternally united and that there will come a time, through the blessing and mercy of God, when we will no more have sorrow but when we shall have conquered all of these things that are of a distressing character and shall stand up in the presence of the Living God, filled with joy and peace and satisfaction.

"I was thoroughly convinced in my own mind and in my own heart, when my first wife left me by death, that it was the will of the Lord that she should be called away. I bowed in humility at her death. The Lord saw fit upon that occasion to give to one of my little children a testimony that the death of her mother was the will of the Lord.

"About one hour before my wife died, I called my children into her room and told them that their mother was dying and for them to bid her good-bye. One of the little girls, about twelve years of age, said to me: 'Papa, I do not want my mamma to die. I have been with her in the hospital in San Francisco for six months; time and time again when mamma was in distress, you have administered to her, and she has been relieved of her pain and quietly gone to sleep. I want you to lay hands upon my mamma and heal her.'

"I told my little girl that we all had to die sometime, and that I felt assured in my heart that her mother's time had arrived. She and the rest of the children left the room.

"I then knelt down by the bed of my wife (who by this time had lost consciousness) and I told the Lord I acknowledged his hand in life, in death, in joy, in sorrow, in prosperity, or adversity. I thanked him for the knowledge I had that my wife belonged to me for all eternity, that through the power and authority of the priesthood here on the earth that I could and would have my wife forever if I were only faithful as she had been. But I told the Lord that I lacked the strength to have my wife die and to have it affect the faith of my little children in the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ; and I supplicated the Lord with all the strength that I possessed, that he would give to that little girl of mine a knowledge that it was his mind and his will that her mamma should die.

"Within an hour my wife passed away, and I called the children back into the room. My little boy, about five and one-half or six years of age, was weeping bitterly, and the little girl twelve years of age took him in her arms and said: 'Do not weep, Heber; since we went out of this room, the voice of the Lord from heaven has said to me, In the death of your mamma the will of the Lord shall be done.'" [^2]

Following his wife's death he took the three oldest of his little girls on a visit to New York, Chicago, Boston, Philadelphia, Hartford, Washington, and other places of interest so that they might forget the sorrow of their mother's death. While he was in Washington, the two oldest girls were stricken with diphtheria. In those days diphtheria was one of the most malignant and fatal of all diseases. He related that he had known cases in which six and seven or eight children of a family had died of that dreadful disease, and now two of his children were taken down with it, and they were nigh unto death.

He heard the doctor say to one of the nurses, "If you miss giving that child a stimulant every fifteen minutes, if you miss just one, she will die. She can't live an hour without this stimulant." President Grant stayed up all night to see that she did not miss giving the stimulant. The next morning, this child was no better, and he went into her bedroom and shed some bitter tears at the thought that probably he would have to take his little girl home in a coffin. While engaged in this prayer, the spirit suggested to him that the power of the priesthood was here on earth and to send for the elders.

George Q. Cannon was in Washington at the time and also Bishop Hiram B. Clawson, the father of Elder Rudger Clawson of the Council of the Twelve, and he sent for them to come and administer to the child. They responded. Brother Clawson anointed her and Brother Cannon sealed the anointing and in doing so he said:

"The adversary, the destroyer has decreed your death and made public announcement of this decree, but by the authority of the priesthood of God, which we hold as his servants, and in the name of Jesus Christ our Redeemer, we rebuke the decree of the destroyer and say you shall live."

From that hour she began to mend. When the children were sufficiently recovered to leave, the husband of the woman who kept the boardinghouse where they stayed said he could not keep from telling the President a joke on his wife. He said his wife believed in spiritualistic mediums and in communication through the mediums. He said, "When your little girls were taken sick in the house, she went to the medium who told her the following story: 'I see in your home two little girls, I see that the older one of the two girls has taken sick. I see she is very sick. I see now that the next little girl has taken sick. I see now that she is very sick. I see now that both of them are sick nigh unto death, and I see the elder of the two girls recover and I see the second little girl die.' Then she described the journey of that body in a coffin from Washington to Salt Lake City. She described the territory over which they passed to come to these far off mountains to the Salt Lake Valley. She described the burial ground on the hillside." All of this she had told her husband.

Then George Q. Cannon's statement, "The adversary has decreed your death and made public announcement of it, and we rebuke that decree," was made clear to President Grant. Instead of the little girl being buried as the spiritualistic medium said she would be, because the devil himself had inspired her to do so, the priesthood of God rebuked the decree of death, and she lived and became the mother of seven beautiful children.

The President's tenderness and consideration for his children, especially in times of sickness, were beautiful examples of parental affection.

His wife had been dead about two years when his son, Heber, died. Referring to his death, the President said:

"I had been blessed with only two sons. One of them died at five years of age and the other at seven.

"My last son died of a hip disease. I had built great hopes that he would live to spread the gospel at home and abroad and be an honor to me. About an hour before he died I had a dream that his mother, who was dead, came for him, and that she brought with her a messenger, and she told this messenger to take the boy while I was asleep. In the dream I thought I awoke, and I seized my son and fought for him and finally succeeded in getting him away from the messenger who had come to take him, and in so doing I dreamed that I stumbled and fell upon him.

"I dreamed that I fell upon his sore hip, and the terrible cries and anguish of the child drove me nearly wild. I could not stand it, and I jumped up and ran out of the house so as not to hear his distress. I dreamed that after running out of the house I met Brother Joseph E. Taylor and told him of these things.

"He said: 'Well, Heber, do you know what I would do if my wife came for one of her children—I would not struggle for that child; I would not oppose her taking that child away. If a mother who had been faithful had passed beyond the veil, she would know of the suffering and the anguish her child may have to suffer. She should know whether that child might go through life as a cripple and whether it would be better or wiser for that child to be relieved from the torture of life. And when you stop to think, Brother Grant, that the mother of that boy went down into the shadow of death to give him life, she is the one who ought to have the right to take him or leave him.'

"I said, 'I believe you are right, Brother Taylor, and if she comes again, she shall have the boy without any protest on my part.'

"After coming to that conclusion, I was waked by my brother, B. F. Grant, who was staying that night with us. He came into the room and told me that the child was dying. I went in the front room and sat down. There was a vacant chair between me and my wife who is now living, and I felt the presence of that boy's deceased mother sitting in that chair. I did not tell anybody what I felt, but I turned to my wife and said, 'Do you feel anything strange?'

"'Yes, I feel assured that Heber's mother is sitting between us, waiting to take him away.'

"Now, I am naturally, I believe, a sympathetic man. I was raised as an only child with all the affection that a mother could lavish upon a boy. I believe that I am naturally affectionate and sympathetic and that I shed tears for my friends—tears of joy for their success and tears of sorrow for their misfortunes. But I sat by the deathbed of my little boy and saw him die, without shedding a tear. My living wife, my brother, and I upon that occasion experienced a sweet, peaceful, and heavenly influence in my home, as great as I have ever experienced in my life. And no person can tell me that every other Latter-day Saint that has a knowledge of the gospel in his heart and soul, can really mourn for his loved ones; only in the loss of their society here in this life.

"I never think of my wives and my dear mother, my two boys, my daughter, my departed friends, and my beloved associates as being in the graveyard. I think only of the joy they have in meeting with father and mother and loved ones who have been true and faithful to the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. My mind reaches out to the wonderful joy and satisfaction and happiness that they are having, and it robs the grave of its sting." [^3]

The quality of faith to which he referred and which sustained him in the sad hour of death is the most comforting influence that ever solaced the aching heart. No doubt the questions which the thoughtful people of the world would rather have answered than any others are: What is death? What lies beyond the grave? Where do we go from here? The President had the answers, and all who share his faith are inspired and comforted by the glorious assurance that on the other side death is a joyful homecoming. That knowledge lifts the veil of darkness that shrouds death and banishes the shadows of doubt and despair forever from the grave. What a boon such a faith really is.

Augusta Grant's diary records:

"Little Heby has been sick a whole year. He is such a dear, patient, little fellow and so brave. He has been on his cot for several months without being able to move, a weight hung on his little lame leg, and just lying there so patiently and looking so pathetic, and always saying, 'I'm better.' He has been in grandma's room all winter and she has given her entire time to him. Once when I went into his room, he was so weary he said, 'I'm not happy.' I bathed his feet and hands and brushed his hair and fixed his pillow and kissed him, and he smiled like the dear child he is and said, 'Now I am happy.' Our little Heby died on the 27th of February and our hearts are very, very sad. We miss the dear little face and sweet voice of the patient little invalid. Everything that could be thought of has been done for him, and surely the fasting, faith, and prayers offered for him could have availed if it had not been the will of the Lord that he should be taken. It was hard for Heber to give him up, but he feels that it was the will of the Lord to bear it bravely. We all feel consolation in the thought that he is free from all pain and suffering and happy with his mother, but we find our house is very lonely without our dear little boy." [^4]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Improvement Era, Vol. 39, p. 682.
[^2] Ibid., 43, p. 350.
[^3] Ibid., Vol. 49, p. 178.
[^4] Ibid., Vol. 49, p. 178
