Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XX .

LAST RITES

THE first indication of the President's failing health came five years before his death. He was making an official visit to the stakes in Southern California, and Sunday morning, February 4, 1940, as he stepped out of his car, he fell but insisted upon entering the chapel where he took his place on the stand. He did not speak in the morning session but returned in the afternoon and spoke for thirty-five to forty minutes with his usual vigor. Next morning, however, as he attempted to get out of bed, he fell to the floor with another attack. He was taken immediately to the hospital. His speech was somewhat affected, and his left side helpless. It was a stroke. His recovery was remarkable. Although his sickness left him slightly impaired physically, in all other respects he was able to resume his normal activities. The last year his physical energies began to fail. He came to the office often when he had to be carried in a wheel chair to sign his letters until Friday, May 11, 1945, when he was so weak that he could not turn in his bed unaided. This was the beginning of the end. Death came gradually and peacefully and on the evening of Monday, May 14, he passed away in his vineclad cottage, not far from the place where he was born.

At three-thirty Thursday the casket was taken to the Church Office Building where he had spent most of his waking hours for the last twenty-six years. The casket stood between two pillars in the foyer facing west. Palms were banked on each wall. In front of the casket were fifteen baskets of flowers; at the head and foot were large wreaths. Near the head of the casket was the American flag on a stand. At five o'clock the building opened to the public. For hours thousands had been standing in line on the streets. During the three hours the building was opened to the public, five thousand people passed his bier. Funeral services were held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle the following day at noon. The speakers were George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, and J. Reuben Clark, Jr. Music was furnished by the Tabernacle choir. It was estimated that 12,000 people were in the building. The Assembly Hall was filled, and there were thousands on the grounds listening to the loud speaker. Memorial services were held the following Sunday all over the Church. He lived eighty-eight years, five months, and twenty-two days, and his mortal remains were laid to rest in the Salt Lake City Cemetery, May 18, 1945.

Thus came to a close one of the most illustrious careers in the history of the Church. Heber J. Grant was a friend of youth and a benefactor of the aged; strong where most men are weak; great in his sincerity and in his purity of purpose; magnificent in his loyalty to his family, his friends, his country, and his Creator. "Follow me," was the essence of his leadership. His philanthropies placed him in a class by himself. His faith was steadfast and beautiful and always manifested in deeds. He had a great and forgiving heart free from sordidness and greed, and a will that brooked no failure.

His name will shine forever in the annals of his people as a distinguished citizen, as a businessman, as a humanitarian, as a patron of art and education, as a leader of men and a servant of God.
