Bryant S. Hinckley, Heber J. Grant: Highlights in the Life of a Great Leader ( 1951)

. XXI .

"HE WAS OF THE GREAT ONES OF THE EARTH"

HEBER J. GRANT'S career was fast moving and colorful. The intermountain commonwealth was in its infancy when he was born. Through most of the eighty-eight years that made up his life's span, he was identified with its growth and active in its development. The years from 1856 to 1945 were eventful years in this Church—years of poverty and persecution, followed by years of prosperity and plenty. From his boyhood his interests were identified with its interests; its well-being was his constant concern. He developed early in life and did a man's work while yet a boy, but his greatest work was done after he was sixty years of age. It was a long preparation, but subsequent events and achievements justified it. During the more than twenty-six years that he was President, he gave the Church a great administration, and the responsibility of that high office developed the greatness and splendor of his character. President Grant was no ordinary man. He belonged in the category of the great. I have spoken of his friendship, his human kindness, his understanding heart, his transparent frankness, his rugged honesty, his faith, his power to persist, his brilliant achievements, the application of his religion to daily life, his integrity, his love of music, of nature, and of all things of beauty. These virtues were finely integrated in his character. If one were called upon to select the characteristics that were dominant in his life, the list would include his loyalty, his magnanimity, his continuity of purpose. Loyalty, that fundamental and shining virtue in all worth-while lives, permeated all that he said and did. It manifested itself in a steadfast, thorough-going devotion to any cause he espoused, to any friend or institution with which he was associated. His magnanimity was magnificent, he seemed to be devoid of self-seeking. His entire life was adorned with deeds of generosity. No one matched him in this respect. His joy in giving knew no bounds. He shared the good things and the joy of life with others.

It was heartwarming to know him. Forty years ago I received a letter written in his free and graceful handwriting, enclosing a copy of the following poem:

TO MY SON

Do you know that your soul is of my soul such a part,

That you seem to be fiber and core of my heart?

None other can pain me as you, dear, can do;

None other can please me or praise me as you.

Remember the world will be quick with its blame,

If shadow or stain ever darken your name.

"Like mother, like son," is a saying so true,

The World will judge largely of mother by you.

Be yours, then the task, if task it should be,

To force the proud world to do homage to me.

Be sure it will say when its verdict you've won,

She reaped as she sowed, Lo! This is her son.

-Margaret Johnstone Graflin

In this letter he said:

"I was not very well-acquainted with your mother but knew and loved your father. I looked upon him as one of the loyal and true men of this dispensation. Permit me to assure you that you have, in my judgment, been one of the splendid sons of the Church, who have 'forced the proud world to pay homage to your mother.' * * *

"I happened to be at home this morning without an appointment and have been writing to my brothers, sending them copies of the poem 'To My Son.' In sending this poem to my brothers I thought of many of my dear friends to whom I would like to send a copy, but I cannot go very far as the list is too long and the time is too short.

"You have my love and my confidence as your father had. Our fathers gave their best as did our mothers for the gospel of Jesus Christ, and my earnest prayers are that we may do the same. If we can live worthy of them, there is nothing in this life or in the life to come which is of real value which will not be ours.

"With love and blessings and hoping you and yours may have peace, prosperity, and happiness in this life and an eternity of joy in the life to come I am affectionately your brother, Heber J. Grant."

This letter, now yellow with age, is greatly treasured. The tributes paid to my father and my mother and the appeal, in which he joined, to emulate the examples of our parents and the unsolicited expression of confidence in me have been an inspiration during all the years since he wrote it. These are the things that live.

The hand that penned those words is cold in death, and the heart that inspired them beats no more, but the words will linger with me as long as memory lasts. The motive that lies behind this simple deed, though hard to define, is one of the things that made Heber J. Grant great.

Here are the words of a few of the distinguished ones who appraised his worth when he was gone, but the humble and the poor whom he served most and who loved him best are not heard. Could they stand up and speak, what a cloud of witnesses would testify in his behalf!

When he had finished his career, this is what some men said of him.

President George Albert Smith said at his funeral:

"He was a giant among men, radiating hope, courage, and peace among hundreds and thousands of our Father's children. He was always interested in the development of the youth. Notwithstanding his ability along many other lines, his major anxiety in life was the development of the sons and daughters of the living God."

The Idaho Free Press said: [^1]

"He seemed to combine two unrelated mental capacities: to think and feel as the religious prophets of old must have thought and felt, to be aflame with an evangelistic fervor one does not often see in this materialistic age, and also to be able to think as a present-day man of practical affairs does.

"His patriarchal appearance and powerful voice added to the impressiveness of his public utterances. His oratory was not the studied polished variety. His strong moral integrity, his remarkable industry and ingenuity coupled with his striking appearance and magnetic personality have carved for him a prominent niche in the communal life of the West."

The Utah Farmer commented editorially as follows: [^2]

"On May 18, 1945, the portals of the tomb closed over all that was mortal of Heber J. Grant. This marked the end of a long and wonderful career—eighty-eight years of purposeful, triumphant living. He was a most extraordinary man; distinguished as a church leader, a citizen, an industrial pioneer, a patron of art, a promoter of education, a companion of the great, and a friend of the poor. He was practical; his religion always registered in rugged honesty, in justice mellowed with mercy, in deeds of helpfulness and service to others. In his younger days he was thin, tall, and bearded, with strong but refined features and a complexion that was almost transparent—withal, an impressive personality. And he was no less impressive mentally, for he had a resourceful and vigorous mind, fast in action, clear in decisions. While he was serenely sure of himself, at the same time he was one of the most friendly, approachable and democratic of men. The humblest were at ease in his presence and the renowned were deferential, but both were happy with him.

Heber J. Grant was intensely loyal to his friends and his convictions, unwavering in his devotion to his country, steadfast in his faith and untiring in his zeal for the truth. His magnanimity and generosity of soul were princely. To know him at close range was to discover a tenderness of heart and a nobility of soul unknown to the public. We are well within the truth when we say that no other man of his means was more generous to the widow and the orphan, to those overtaken with misfortune or sorrow, than he was. Now he is gone. The realization that he has passed away brings a sense of loneliness, for we loved him, and will cherish his memory forever."

From an editorial in the Salt Lake Tribune by Noble Warrum, a long-time friend of the President's, came the following: [^3]

"Tall, slender, bearded, gray, and grave, of striking appearance and patriarchal bearing, President Grant might have stepped forth from an illustrated page of the Old Testament. Had he lived in those far-distant days he would have seemed, and no doubt felt, at ease and at home in the tents of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

"He would have taken high rank among the potentates and prophets of olden times as a shrewd and sagacious director of temporal affairs, a rigid disciplinarian in spiritual matters, a methodical chronicler of passing events, an indulgent but observant father to his people and a valiant crusader against the mockers of Jehovah and his commandments.

"Modern minded, well-groomed, and up-to-date he will be remembered, yet it would have required no great stretch of imagination to picture him leading the children of Israel through the wilderness, counseling with the tribesmen of Canaan about their flocks and herds, hurling anathemas at idolators from the foot of Sinai, driving the chariot of Jehu toward Jezreel, swinging the sword of Gideon against the Midianites, smiting the walls of Jericho in righteous wrath, or marching at the head of a triumphant legion singing 'Hosannas to the Highest.'

"President Grant was a devoted son of the state and a tireless, efficient worker for the religious organization he served long and well in almost every capacity, in this and other states, on this and other continents. Thoroughly grounded in the history and teachings of his Church, conversant with its social material, and ecclesiastical relations and ramifications, he was especially fitted to develop the plans and purposes of his predecessors. * * *

"Amazingly frank and outspoken, a stranger to subterfuge and secrecy, he would have failed as a diplomat; but these very qualities won for him the lasting affection of his people and the confidence of all who really knew him. He has left a record of work well done and of duties faithfully performed."

One of the best things ever said or written about Heber J. Grant was an editorial from the pen of President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., which appeared at that time in the Deseret News, a part of which follows:

"God fashioned him in heart and mind and body, in ability, in experience, and in wisdom, just as he has fashioned every man whom he has ever called to lead his people, even from Moses of old till now. No man ever comes to lead God's people whom he has not trained for his task.

"His was a simple faith. He met the test that Christ gave to his disciples, quibbling who should be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven: Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore, shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

"He so lived his life that it had no dark place across which he must draw a curtain. His life had nothing to embarrass, nothing to hide, nothing of which he must be ashamed.

"He was completely fearless. Sin and corruption could not be so highly placed as not to meet his rebuke.

"Truth was the sole guide of his life; error never led him down the wrong path.

"He was not a stranger to the Beatitudes. He loved the poor in spirit and to those who mourned, he gave comfort. He was meek; he hungered and thirsted for righteousness; he was merciful; he had a pure heart; he was a peacemaker; he saw persecution for righteousness' sake, men reviled him and said all manner of things against him falsely, even as suffered the prophets of old. And out of all these came his blessings.

"He had the 'pure and undefiled religion' of James; he 'visited the fatherless and the widows in their affliction and kept himself unspotted from the world.'

"He was loyal almost to a fault; he was generous beyond compare. He was blessed with a patience like unto Job. In his last years, as one affliction after another came to him, each carrying the message he understood, that each was but another step nearer to close of life, he uttered no complaint, found no fault, thanked God for the strength left in him, and worked on, every day grateful for what he had, declaring for years, as day followed day, that he was better today than yesterday, always knowing that God would leave him here till his work was finished, and then would call him home with a summons of which he had neither dread nor fear.

"He could persevere day after day in the chosen course and defy failure. With his faith and his work he moved mountains of obstruction to reach the end of the road he had made up his mind to tread.

"He was a true husband and father. He loved deeply and trustingly. To him his home was an earthly heaven, and he guarded it as holding his full earthly possessions that had value.

"To his friends he gave everything that true friendship asks—help, devotion, even sacrifice, and trust and confidence also. He denied no friend a needed succor, neither to the child of a friend. Blessed was that soul who called him friend.

"Under the responsibility of his divine call to the leadership of modern Israel, he grew even as Moses grew after God spoke to him out of the burning bush. What little of dross clung to him from the trials, vicissitudes, and livelihood contests of early life, dropped from him like dried clods of earth as he moved out into the warmth and light of his high and exalted calling as God's representative on earth. Wisdom and inspiration and revelation came from God himself to guide him in his divinely appointed task. Without sham or pretense, without false pride or pomp or ceremony, with none of the worldly trappings of place and power, he moved into his sacred work with the humility and lowly mein that befits a faithful servant of the Most High.

"You—youth of the Church—walk in the paths he trod; they will lead you to eternal life. Seek out for yourselves the virtues of his way; they will bring you peace and happiness. Cling to the faith which supported him; it will sustain you always. Search out the treasures of knowledge that he knew, and great wisdom shall be your portion. Cherish his way of life, and you will abide in righteousness. God bless his memory to the comfort and succor of all who seek to serve God. He was of the great ones of the earth."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] May 16, 1945.
[^2] May 25, 1945.
[^3] Ibid., Vol. 49, p. 178.
