# Symbols, Names, and Titles for Deity

### Symbols, Names, and Titles for Deity
Donald W. Parry, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Guide to Scriptural Symbols ( 1990)
 
 

PART 2 SYMBOLS, NAMES, AND TITLES FOR DEITY

Symbols, Names, and Titles for Deity

"Names identify and describe. In biblical thought a name was an expression of the nature of its bearer. The Hebrew word for name is shem, meaning 'memorial.' To declare one's name was to reveal one's self. Nowhere is the importance of properly descriptive names more evident than in the names of Deity. When the Lord called Moses from the burning bush and commissioned him to bring his people out of Egypt, Moses' question was, 'When I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?' Knowing the importance of names, Moses could fully anticipate that his people would inquire by what name and in what authority he came. In response the Lord said, 'I AM THAT I AM,' that is, that Moses was to say that 'I AM' had sent him. Moses was further instructed that he was to say, 'The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.' (Ex. 3:13-15.) This instruction is clarified in JST, Ex. 6:2-3, which reads, 'God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord: And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, I am the Lord God Almighty, the Lord JEHOVAH. And was not my name known unto them?'

"Within the two passages just quoted, the personality of Moses' God is distinctly expressed. Jehovah is the English rendering of the Hebrew tetragram YHWH. It is derived from the verb 'to be,' which implies his eternal nature. I AM is the first person singular form of the verb 'to be.' In the name Jehovah, or I AM, God manifests himself as a personal living being who labors in behalf of Israel and who will fulfill the promises made to the fathers. All of this conveys the idea of an unchanging. ever-living God, who through all generations is true to his word. 'God's personal existence, the continuity of His dealings with man, the unchangeableness of His promises, and the whole revelation of His redeeming mercy, gather round the name Jehovah' (Girdlestone, p. 38).

"Thus, to declare the name of the Lord was to testify of the Lord, a concept lost to both Jews and Christians alike by false traditions and faulty Bible translations. 'For this cause,' the Lord told Moses, 'have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth' (Ex. 9:16)." (Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism, pp. 176-77.)

This section lists over two hundred symbols, names, and titles for the Lord that occur in holy writ. Each symbol, name, or title witnesses to the nature of God, each stands as a testimony and witness of him, and each affirms anew the standards to which those who would be in his image and likeness, those desiring salvation, must arrive. We must, in the full and complete sense, take his name upon us; that is, we must emulate his character and attributes. Thus, as his name is Righteous, we must be righteous; as his name is Holy, we must be holy; as his name is Merciful, we must be full of mercy, and so on. Further, we must embrace as part of our faith those troths of which his names testify. We must accept him as our Salvation, as our Redeemer. We must know him as our Sanctuary, Comforter, and Hope. We must bow to him as King of kings and Lord of lords. We must serve him as our Master and testify of him as God's Begotten in the flesh, that he, having laid down his life and taken it up again, might thus grant us the promise of immortality and the hope of eternal life.

Adam. 1) Abraham tells us that the name Adam means "first father" (Abr. 1:3). Adam, who was created in the image and likeness of God, was a living symbol of the nature of God. In a very real sense, to know Adam was to know God. As Adam was the father of the human family, so God is the Father of the eternal family. God gave spirit birth to all, Adam made physical birth possible to all. Both Adam and the Father had a "perfect" son who was also in their "express image" (D&C 107:43; Heb. 1:3). In the symbolic sense, Eve (meaning "life") was taken from Adam's side, reminding us that all life comes from God. As Adam gave a name to all things, so God has given purpose to all things.

2) Christ is referred to as the second Adam or the "last Adam," because through the Resurrection he was the firstborn into immortal life ( 1 Cor. 15:45; see also Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism, pp. 146-47). (See also part 1: Adam.) 

Advocate. Literally intercessor, helper, consoler, comforter. Christ, according to the law of advocacy or intercession, pleads the cause of the faithful Saints before the tribunals of eternity (D&C 29:5; 32:3; 62:1; 110:4; 1 Jn. 2:1). 

Almighty. Both the Father and the Son, being omnipotent, are designated by the name-titles Almighty (Gen. 49:25: D&C 121:33), Almighty God (Gen. 17:1; D&C 20:21), Lord Almighty (D&C 84:118; 2 6:18), and Lord God Almighty (Rev. 4:8; Cot. D&C 109:77). These designations attest that these holy Beings have absolute and universal power. A deep sense of reverence is implicit in the use of such name-titles.

Almighty God. See Almighty; Lord God Almighty.

Alpha and Omega. The first and last letters of the Greek alphabet are used as a name-title for Christ. Figuratively, they represent the timeless and eternal nature of the attributes of Deity (D&C 76:4; Rev. 1:8, 17). 

Amen. A term derived from a Hebrew word whose root suggests "so be it," "let it be done," "let it be granted." The word amen connotes the idea of that which has been unalterably confirmed (Num. 5:22), that which is sure, trustworthy, and faithful. In Rev. 3:14, Amen is used as a synonym for Christ, who affirms the divine purpose and who is the personification of truth.

Angel (Angel of His Presence). Literally "messenger of God." Jacob referred to Christ as "the Angel which redeemed me from all evil" (Gen. 48:16), and Abraham was spared death at the hands of the priests of Pharaoh by "the angel of his [the Almighty's] presence" (Abr. 1:15). In a revelation given to Joseph Smith, the "angel of his presence" is identified as the Savior (D&C 133:52-56). Christ is chief among all the messengers of his Father; he is the Messenger of Salvation, the "messenger of the covenant" (Mal. 3:1). 

Anointed. The names Messiah and Christ signify "Anointed One." The anointing of prophets, priests, and kings made of each a type for the Christ. (See also part 1: Anointing.) Where the word anointed appears in our Old Testament texts, it could properly have been translated to read "Christ." In Ps. 2, in which David, in his perplexity, asks why the heathen rage and people imagine a vain thing, he is recorded as having responded to his own query by saying, "The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed" (Ps. 2:2). In a far superior translation, Eusebius renders the verse thus: 

Why did the nations rage,

And the peoples imagine vain things?

The kings of the earth set themselves in array,

And the rulers were gathered together,

Against the Lord and against his Christ.

(Eusebius, The Ecclesiastical History and the

Martyrs of Palestine, 1:11 .)

Apostle. Literally "he that is sent." Paul refers to Christ as the great Apostle (Heb. 3:1). In the gospel of John, Christ is quoted well over a hundred times as announcing that he is sent of his Father, is come to do the will of the Father, and has no other work to do save that of the Father who sent him. (See also part 1: Apostle.)

Author. Christ is the author of salvation, having extended its blessings to all men through his atoning sacrifice (see Heb. 12:2). In the full and perfect sense, the Father is the author of the plan of salvation, a plan that was operative long before Christ was chosen in the Grand Council to be God's Son "after the manner of the flesh" and thus to become our Redeemer. Be it remembered that when the Father asked, "Whom shall I send?" our eldest brother responded, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2; Abr. 3:27). 

Baali. A Hebrew title meaning "my master" (Hosea 2:16). (See also Master.)

Beginning. The Revelator refers to Christ as the "beginning of the creation of God" (Rev. 3:14). Similarly, Paul calls him the "firstborn of every creature" (Col. 1:15). Such expressions could be interpreted to mean Christ's role as the Creator of a new system of things or of the new covenant which replaced the Mosaic system. Perhaps both meanings were intended. (See also Firstborn.) Christ is also referred to as the "beginning and the ending" (see Rev. 1:8). (See also Alpha and Omega.) Begotten of the Father. See Only Begotten.

Being. In referring to Deity as a Being (Mosiah 4:19), King Benjamin reminds us that God is not a conglomeration of laws -he is not a bodiless, partless, passionless spirit essence filling the immensity of space. God is an individual, a person, an exalted, resurrected, and glorified man (D&C 130:22). Joseph Smith explained: "If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,—I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man inform-like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another." (Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 345; italics in original.)

Beloved Son. Christ is the Beloved Son, a designation consistently used by the Father to introduce him (see Matt. 3:17; 17:5; Mark 1:11; Luke 3:22; D&C 93:15; 3 Ne. 11:7; 21:20: JS-H 1:17). The name signifies Christ's favored or preferential status among all the Father's spirit children. It also attests to his divine sonship. Christ is spoken of as the "Beloved and Chosen" (Moses 4:2), and as being "in the bosom of the Father" (D&C 76:25). 

Bishop. This title, meaning "overseer," emphasized Christ's right, or the right of those properly called in his name, to rule over the affairs of the Church (1 Pet. 2:25). (See also part 1: Bishop.)

Blessed. Paul appropriately refers to him from whom all blessings flow as "the blessed" (1 Tim. 6:15). The scriptures commonly use the verb bless in association with the word sanctify. For instance, in the sacramental prayers, the bread and wine (water) are "blessed and sanctified" (D&C 20:77, 79). Thus, these sacred symbols are consecrated, or hallowed, to the memory of Christ and his atoning sacrifice. In its root, bless means "to consecrate with blood."

Branch. A prophetic name used in reference to the promised Messiah by the prophets of ancient Israel. It was intended to point attention to the divine assurance that the Messiah would be an Israelite-a branch or descendant of David. Through Jeremiah, the Lord said: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." (Jer. 23:5-6; see also Jer. 33:15-17; Isa. 11:1-5; Zech. 3:8-10; 6:12) (See also part 1: Branch.)

Brazen Serpent. The brazen serpent Moses lifted up in the wilderness was a type for the crucifixion of Christ (Num. 21:6-9; John 3:14-15). As commentary on this story, Nephi said, "He [God] sent fiery flying serpents among them; and after they were bitten he prepared a way that they might be healed; and the labor which they had to perform was to look; and because of the simpleness of the way, or the easiness of it, there were many who perished" (1 Ne. 17:41; Num. 21:6-9; Hel. 8:15; John 3:14-15). (See also part 1: Serpent.)

Bread. A metaphor for the Word of God. Jesus spoke of himself as the "bread of God" and the "bread of life" (John 6:33, 48). As manna from heaven was to the physical salvation of Israel in the wilderness, so the acceptance of Jesus as the Christ is to our eternal salvation. The ordinance of the sacrament is the symbolic eating and drinking of the body of Christ (D&C 20:77, 79). To partake of the sacrament is to announce that we have accepted Christ as the staff, or source, of eternal life. It is also to renew our covenant to stand as a witness of him at all times and in all places, seeking to do as he would do and act as he would act. (See also part 1: Bread.)

Bridegroom. Christ is the Bridegroom (Matt. 9:15; Mark 2:19; Luke 5:34; John 3:29). The Church, meaning the Saints who have manifested their willingness to take upon themselves his name (D&C 20:77), is his bride in waiting. A frequent characteristic of Hebrew prophecy was to describe apostasy through the metaphor of adultery, and Israel's covenant with God as a marriage (Jer. 2:30-37; Ezek. 16; Hosea 1-3). "Though the term is used with various shades of meaning, 'to know God' in the purest scriptural sense is to have an intimate or covenant relationship with him. The Old Testament references to knowing God and to a man knowing his wife, meaning conceiving a child with her, both use the same Hebrew word (i.e., yada). As a man was to leave father and mother and cleave unto his wife and thus become one flesh with her, so he was to leave the things of the world and cleave unto his God and become one with him. As faithfulness in marriage was essential to the nurturing of love, so faithfulness in keeping gospel covenants was understood to be necessary in obtaining a knowledge of God. As love of spouse was strengthened in sacrifice and devotion, so the knowledge of God was obtained in living those covenants with exactness and honor." (Joseph Fielding McConkie, Prophets and Prophecy, pp. 171-72.) (See also part 1: Bridegroom; Bride.)

Bright and Morning Star. The star of Bethlehem was the sign of the Messiah, linked with the theme of a light being lifted up over the nations. Moses spoke of the coming of the Messiah as a "Star out of Jacob" (Num. 24:17). Job spoke of the righteous host of heaven prior to birth into mortality as the "morning stars" (Job 38:7) -a metaphor which helps explain the symbolism used by John the Revelator in describing Jesus as the "bright and morning star" (Rev. 22:16). In the galaxy of God's spirit offspring, Jesus is the brightest star. (See also Star of Jacob; Sun; part 1: Star.)

Brightness of His Glory. Christ is the manifestation of his Father. "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John 14:9) was Jesus' response to Philip's request to show the disciples the Father. Joseph Smith said that the Savior "exactly resembled" the Father in "features and likeness" (History of the Church, 4:536). Paul, teaching this same truth-that in all things the Son was like the Father-described him as being "the brightness of his [the Father's] glory, and the express image of his person" (Heb. 1:3). 

Captain. Presumably it was Jehovah who appeared to Joshua and introduced himself as the "captain of the Lord's host" (Josh. 5:15). With this title, Christ designates himself as the chief soldier or commanding officer in his own army, of which Joshua was the earthly head. Though the scriptures have not done so, it would not be inappropriate for us to give this same designation to Michael, or Adam, who stands at the head of the army of the Lord serving "under the... direction of the Holy One" (see Rev. 12:7-9; D&C 78:16). Paul referred to Christ as "the captain of their salvation" (Heb. 2:10), simply meaning that he is the agent of salvation to all who believe and obey the law of God.

Chief Cornerstone. The cornerstone is a long, well-squared stone resting upon the foundation of a building at the terminus of two walls. Its purpose requires that it be carefully chosen. It must be sound-in the case of sandstone, free from weakening cavities; and in the case of limestone, without any white streaks of spar that might lead to cleavage under pressure. As such, the chief cornerstone is a natural type. The Psalmist spoke of Christ as "the stone which the builders refused," which would ultimately become "the head stone of the corner" (Ps. 118:22). The analogy is descriptive of the Jewish rejection of Christ in the name of loyalty to the law of Moses and might also be applied to those today whose loyalty to the Bible blinds them to the greater light of Restoration scriptures about the Savior. Christ applied the prophecy to himself in his mortal ministry (see Matt. 21:42; Luke 20:17). 

The book of Isaiah contains this same imagery: "Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste" (Isa. 28:16). Christ is our "tried" and "sure foundation." Hence Paul's imagery of the Church being built "upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone" (Eph. 2:20). 

It is Lehi's son Jacob who gives us our most perfect commentary on these ancient texts. "I, Jacob, am led on by the Spirit unto prophesying; for I perceive by the workings of the Spirit which is in me, that by the stumbling of the Jews they will reject the stone upon which they might build and have safe foundation. But behold, according to the scriptures, this stone shall become the great, and the last, and the only sure foundation, upon which the Jews can build." (Jacob 4:15-16.) Then, as an explanation as to how Christ is to become the chief cornerstone, Jacob retells Zenos's allegory (see Jacob 5). (See also part 1: Cornerstone; Rock; Stone.)

Chosen One. Similar in meaning to "mine elect" as in Isa. 42:1 (see also Matt. 12:18), the epithet "Chosen" (Moses 4:2) has reference to our Eternal Father's choice of Christ from among all his spirit children to be our Savior.

Christ. Greek Christos, meaning "to anoint"; Hebrew Meshiah, meaning "anointed one." Jesus was the Savior's given name; Christ was a surname or title which attested that he was the Messiah or Anointed One for whom Israel had been waiting.

In Old Testament times, anointing was the principal and divinely appointed ceremony in the inauguration of prophets, priests, and kings. The anointing was a ritual consecration, or setting apart, to sacred purposes. It centered in the pouring of pure olive oil upon the head of the one being anointed as a symbolic representation of the Spirit of the Lord that was to be poured out upon the designated leader and, through him, upon the entire nation. All prophets, priests, and kings were intended to be living types or prophecies of what the Christ, the great Prophet, Priest, and King, would be. (See also part 1: Anointing.)

Christ Jesus. See Jesus Christ.

Christ of God. See Christ.

Commander. Isaiah described Christ as the "leader and commander to the people" (Isa. 55:4). (See also Captain; Lord of Hosts; Lord of Sabaoth.) 

Consolation of Israel. Christ is the "consolation of Israel" (Luke 2:25), for in and through him they have reason for hope. He alone can bring a lasting relief from distress and misery. (See also Hope of Israel.)

Cornerstone. See Chief Cornerstone.

Counselor. The Eternal Father designates himself as Man of Counsel; Christ, his Son, bears the name-title Counsellor (see Isa. 9:6-7). The name attests to their exalted position as the source of all knowledge, light, and truth.

Covenant. See Messenger of the Covenant.

Covert. Isaiah likened Christ to a "covert from the tempest" (Isa. 32:2), that is, a place of shelter and safety. (See also Refuge; part 1: Refuge.)

Creator. Both the Father and the Son bear the title Creator (Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 190; Moses 1:33). We are the spirit offspring of the Eternal Father; all other acts of creation are the labor of the son acting by the power and under the direction of the Father (Moses 1:32-33; John 1:1-3; Heb. 1:1-3; D&C 76:22-24). In the creation of the earth, it appears that the Son was assisted by many of the noble and great spirits destined to inhabit it (see Abr. 3:22-24). 

Creator of Israel. Only by the providence of Jehovah's hand did the nation of Israel exist anciently, and only by that providence will there be a restoration of that ancient kingdom in the last days (see Isa. 43:14-15; Acts 1:6). 

David. Only Moses was more prominent in the story of the Old Testament than David. As with Moses, the events of David's life constituted a remarkable type for the Messiah. Both were known as the son of Jesse, both were born in Bethlehem, both were good shepherds, both would have willingly laid down their life for their sheep, both were the "beloved" of God (that being the meaning of the name David), both were anointed of God, and both were to rule as Israel's king in the day of her triumph and glory.

David, having established for Israel the day of her greatness and glory, is a natural type for Christ during the millennial reign. Thus, the millennial kingdom is spoken of as the kingdom of David, and Christ is described as sitting on the throne of David. Jeremiah wrote of that day, saying: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." (Jer. 23:3-6.) In that future day, gathering Israel would serve "the Lord their God, and David their king," Jeremiah prophesied (Jer. 30:9). 

Through the pen of Ezekiel the Lord again described the millennial day: "David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them. And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever." (Ezek. 37:24-25.) 

Not only was David a type for Christ in the sense that Christ would reign on his throne forever, but also in the sense that through Christ would come the resurrection which, in spite of David's sins, would eventually redeem his soul from hell. "I will make an everlasting covenant with you," the Lord said, "even the sure mercies of David," which mercies are that the resurrection will pass even upon the wicked. "Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people" is the promise. (Isa. 55:3-4.) "In other words, if David, who committed adultery and on whose hands was found the blood of Uriah, will be resurrected, then all men should rest in the hope that they shall rise from the grave." (Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah, p. 452.) (See also Sort of David; part 1: David.)

Dayspring. Foreshadowing the birth of Christ, Zacharias, father of John, prophetically spoke of Christ as the "dayspring from on high" (Luke 1:78). The dayspring is the dawning of a new day. Such imagery depicts the birth of Christ as the beginning of a new day, the dawning of a new light, and the coming of the hope of Israel.

Daystar. Christ is the daystar from on high; he is the bright and shining light to those who sit in darkness. Peter spoke of the necessity of those in the Church to enjoy a "more sure word of prophecy... until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts" (2 Pet. 1:19)-that is, until the second coming of the Lord, or until the millennial day when Christ will reign personally on earth. Prior to that day when Christ will walk again among us, the faithful are entitled to the manifestation of his presence, and that of his Father. Joseph Smith explained, "The more sure word of prophecy means a man's knowing that he is sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy,through the power of the Holy Priesthood" (D&C 131:5). (See also part 1: Star.)

Deliverer. Christ is the Deliverer (2 Sam. 22:1 4; Ps. 18:1-3; 40:17; 70:5), a designation akin to Savior or Redeemer. By his protecting hand, Christ has preserved many from harm or injury. Such instances are but the symbolic representation of the greater or spiritual deliverance that is granted to all through his atoning sacrifice, whereby we are delivered from the bondage of death and the grave and whereby our deliverance from the bondage of sin is made possible (Isa. 59:20-21; Rom. 11:25-26). (See also Redeemer; Savior.)

Desire of all Nations. Christ is the desire of all nations. "For thus saith the Lord of hosts; Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come" (Hag. 2:6-7). Haggai's prophecy refers to the second coming of Christ. From Nephi's dream we learn that before Christ returns there will be righteous Saints numbered among all nations. It will be these Saints, numbered among the host of the wicked, who will devoutly desire the return of Christ. ( 1 Ne. 14:12-14.) 

The idea of Christ as the desire of all nations does not find expression in modern Bible translations.

Dew. Often dew is mentioned as a type for things that are transitory and passing (see Morm. 4:18; Hosea 6:4) however Hosea also uses it to represent the powers of Christ to bring a renewal of life (Hosea 14:4-5). The Psalmist uses it to describe the vivacity and vigor of Christ in his earthly ministry (Ps. 110:3). Joseph Smith twice uses it to represent the quiet and unobtrusive manner in which the truths of heaven are revealed to the souls of men (see D&C 121:45; 128:19). (See also part 1: Dew.)

Door; Door of the Sheep. Christ is the door, or the "door of the sheep" (John 10:7, 9). The doctrine conveyed here is that Christ is the "way, the truth, and the life" and that no one can approach the Father, either in this world or in the world to come, save by and through him (John 14:6). (See also part 1: Door; Sheep.)

Eagle. Moses, writing of Jehovah's great love for Jacob, refers to him as the apple of the Lord's eye. Describing the protective hand of providence as it rested upon this favored son, he wrote: "As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings: So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him" (Deut. 32:10-12). Anciently, and even into the mid-nineteenth century, it was thought that some birds carried their young upon their wings. While none of the imagery in this passage should be taken literally, it is still a beautiful and graphic way for Moses to have portrayed the majesty of God and his love for our ancient father. (See also part 1: Eagle.)

Elect. As the faithful of the house of Israel are referred to as the elect of God, so the chief citizen of that house is quite properly designated by that title. "Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles," wrote Isaiah (Isa. 42:1). Reference to Christ as "mine elect" serves to remind us of his exalted status in our first estate. (See also Chosen.)

Endless. Used as a noun and not as an adjective, Endless is one of the names of Deity and signifies his unending, eternal continuance as the supreme, exalted ruler of heaven and earth. "Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name," Jehovah told Moses, "for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?" (Moses 1:3; cf. 7:35.) "Endless is my name," the Lord announced anew to Joseph Smith. By combining the name Endless with other terms, the Lord has revealed significant truths: endless life is more than life without end; it is the kind and quality of life that God lives; and endless punishment is not punishment that never ceases, but rather the just and perfect punishment dispensed by God (see D&C 19:4-12). 

Ensign. Ensigns (flags, banners, or ornamental standards) are traditionally used to identify military units in their order of march and as rallying points on the field of battle. In their wilderness march, each of the tribes of Israel had their own ensigns in order that all might find their proper place of march or encampment. Since those of all dispensations must rally or gather to Christ and his gospel, it is natural that he, the messenger of salvation, and his standard bearers, the prophets, should be referred to as ensigns. (See Isa. 5:26; 11:10, 12; 18:3; 30:17; Zech. 9:16.) (See also part 1: Ensign.)

Eternal Father. "On very formal occasions, as in the revealed sacramental prayers, Deity is addressed as 'God, the Eternal Father.' (D&C 20:77-79.) This exalted and sacred name-title combines in one expression the concept of God as an Eternal, exalted Being and his position as the personal Father of the spirits of all men. In the sense in which Christ is called the Everlasting Father (Isa. 9:6), he is also the Eternal Father, for he is both Eternal and (in special ways) the Father." (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 236.)

Eternal God. "Both the Father and the Son carry the exalted name-title Eternal God. Both are exalted Beings and as such are Eternal; both are from everlasting to everlasting, with all that this phrase connotes; both are beyond finite comprehension in power, dominion, godly attributes, and eternal glory. (D&C 121:32.) By their eternal grace men have been created, redeemed, and placed as possible heirs of all things." (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, pp. 236-37.)

Eternal Head. This designation of Deity, like the names Eternal God and Eternal Father, emphasizes the endless duration of God's divine supremacy. God will never cease to be God, the Eternal Father will never cease to be the Eternal Father, and the Most High God (Alma 26:14) will never cease to reign as the Eternal Head (Hel. 13:38). Among the weeds of heresy that occasionally find expression in Latter-day Saint circles is the idea that God was elected by and serves at the pleasure of certain intelligences who will impeach him should he displease them. The idea is absolute nonsense; it is without so much as a shred of scriptural or prophetic justification, and is fully contrary to the intent and meaning of such name-titles of Deity as Eternal Father, Eternal God, Eternal Head, Eternal Judge, Eternal Life,

Everlasting Father, Everlasting God, and Everlasting Light. Eternal Judge. See Judge. Eternal King. See King. Eternal Life. See Life.

Everlasting Father. "One of Isaiah's great messianic prophecies names Christ as 'The everlasting Father' (Isa. 9:6), an expression having reference both to our Lord's everlasting godhood and to the special senses in which he stands as the Father. Since God the Father is both an everlasting Being and the Father of the spirits of men, he also may be properly called the Everlasting Father." (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 243.)

Everlasting God. "Both the Father and the Son are known by the sacred name-title Everlasting God. (Gen. 21:33; Isa. 9:6; 40:28; Jer. 10:10; Rom. 16:26; D&C 133:34.) Carrying as it does a connotation of eternal continuance and unending existence, this designation of Deity points up the sharp contrast between the living Gods and the false and temporary gods of the world." (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 243.) 

Express Image. Christ represents the Father in both a symbolic and a literal sense. To have heard the doctrine of one is to have heard the doctrine of the other. To have witnessed the actions of one in a given circumstance is to know precisely what the other would have done in the same situation. Thus Christ responded to Philip's request to see the Father, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John 14:9). Paul tells us that the Son was the "express image" of his Father (Heb. 1:3) Joseph Smith said they "exactly resembled each other in features and likeness" (History of the Church, 4:536).

Faithful Witness. See Witness.

Father. God is the Father of our spirits; he gave us spirit birth in the same manner as he did to the premortal Christ. Thus we find the resurrected Christ telling Mary, "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God" (John 20:17). Frequently in the scriptures Christ is also spoken of as the Father. Christ is the Father in four senses: 1) He is the creator, under the direction of the Father, of the earth and all that is upon it (see Heb. 1:2; D&C 93:9-10). 2) We are spiritually adopted by Christ through the making of sacred covenants with God. In such covenants we take upon ourselves the name of Christ and thus become his sons and daughters (see Mosiah 5:7-8). 3) Christ has been empowered of God to speak in the first person for him (John 5:43; 17:6; D&C 50:43). 4) As our redeemer from death and hell, Christ grants us a newness of life. He broke the bands of death for us, making the resurrection a reality to all men and extending the promise of eternal life to those who are obedient to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. (See 2 Ne. 9:7-13, 15; D&C 76:50-70.) 

Father of Heaven. Nephi refers to Christ as the "Father of heaven" in the context of his entering into a covenant with Abraham (see 1 Ne. 22:9). As Abraham was the father of the faithful, so Christ is the father of all who do the works of Abraham (see D&C 132:32), that is, all who make the same covenants that Abraham made and who, like Abraham, prove themselves willing to place their all upon God's altar.

Father of Heaven and of Earth. See Creator.

Fatted Calf. In the parable of the prodigal son, the fatted calf that was killed that all might rejoice may be seen as a symbolic representation of Christ and his atoning sacrifice. Having directed the calf to be killed, the father said of the son that was lost, "For this my son was dead, and is alive again" (Luke 15:23-34). The apparent analogy is that we are all prodigals, that we are all lost, and that if we will humble ourselves and return to the Father, seeking his mercy, we can live again through the death of Christ.

First and the Last. See Alpha and Omega.

First Begotten of the Dead. As the first to be resurrected-that is, as the first of this earth's inhabitants to come forth from the grave with body and spirit inseparably connected - Christ is referred to as "the first begotten of the dead" (see Rev. 1:5; Col. 1:18). 

Firstborn. Christ is the Firstborn, meaning that he was the first spirit child born to God the Father in the premortal existence (see D&C 93:21). John Taylor taught that it was Christ's premortal birthright as the firstborn, provided he was worthy, to be chosen as our Redeemer (see John Taylor, The Mediation and Atonement, pp. 136-37). In the nativity story, Luke tells us that Jesus was also Mary's "firstborn son" (Luke 2:6-7). Mary and Joseph subsequently became the parents of both sons and daughters (see Matt. 13:55). (See also part 1: Firstborn.)

Firstborn from the Dead. See Firstborn.

Gift of God. Jesus Christ is the gift of God (see John 4:10). "God so loved the world," testified the Apostle John, "that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16). Indeed, it is beyond the power of words born of a mortal tongue to measure the value of the Atonement. Appropriately, Paul re- ferred to Christ as the "unspeakable gift" (2 Cor. 9:15). Glory. Christ is "the Lord of glory" (1 Cor. 2:8). 

God. The Supreme and Absolute Being, he who is omnipotent, omnipresent, and omniscient, he who is Creator, Ruler, and Preserver of all things, is known to us as God. In him the fulness of all perfection is found; and "in him every good gift and every good principle dwell" (Lectures on Faith, 2:2). "There is a God in heaven," modern revelation attests, "who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them" (D&C 20:17). "He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever. And again,verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and their seasons; and their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and the earth, which comprehend the earth and all the planets." (D&C 88:41-43.) 

God Blessed. God is the source of all good things (see Rom. 9:5) this is attested to in such expressions as the following: godsend, meaning "a message sent from God"; Godspeed, meaning "God speed you in your journey" or "God prosper you"; good-bye, meaning "God be with you"; good day, meaning "may God be with you during the day"; good night, meaning "God give you a good night"; and so forth (see Eric Partridge, Origins: A Short Etymological Dictionary of Modern English, p. 259).

God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. "1. Christ is the God of our Fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (D&C 136:21-22; Ex. 3:1-16.) It was he who appeared to and covenanted with Abraham (Abr. 2:6-11), who was the one by whom salvation should come ( 1 Ne. 6:4), and who was destined in due course to come into the world and be crucified for the sins of the world. (1 Ne. 19:7-17.) 

"2. Since Abraham, who had the fulness of the gospel, wor-shiped both the Father and the Son, Peter and others have taken occasion, quite properly, to refer to the Father also as the God of our Fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

(Acts 3:13; 5:30; 22:14.)" (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 322.)

God of Heaven. See Father in Heaven.

God of Israel. This name is an expression of Christ's special love for the house of Israel into which he was born. Those who are truly of Israel are those with believing blood, those who have covenanted to take upon themselves the name of Christ (3 Ne. 21:6). Those who have suffered shame and persecution in his holy name are especially loved by him. Upon such he bestows the fulness of his mercy, love, and kindness (D&C 133:52-53). These are his chosen people, his anointed servants, those called to take the gospel of salvation to all the nations of the earth (Abr. 2:9, 11). 

God of Miracles. "For behold, I am God; and I am a God of miracles; and I will show unto the world that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and I work not among the children of men save it be according to their faith" (2 Ne. 27:23) True religion is always a religion of miracles; it is not earthbound, nor does it seek verification at the hands of mortal men.The principles and practices of true religion are always rooted in the powers of heaven.

God of Nature. Christ is the "God of nature" (1 Ne. 19:12), for it is in and through his almighty power that all things are created, upheld, governed, and controlled. The undeniable evidence of order throughout the universe has caused many who are without faith in the God of miracles to acknowledge nature as their god. In so doing they have chosen to pay homage to the law rather than the Lawgiver. Law is without body, parts. and passions; it is incapable of love, unaffected by faith, and without the power to exalt so much as a single soul.

God of the Whole Earth. As God is the Creator of all things, so he seeks the salvation of all things. His love is not constricted by the bounds of the nation of Israel. Indeed, the purpose for which he created a nation to be known as his chosen people was that there might be some expressly charged with the responsibility to declare his love and concern (i.e., the plan of salvation) among all the peoples of the earth. (See Isa. 54:5.) This name-title also distinguishes the God of heaven from the countless local gods ignorantly worshipped by so many in ancient times.

God of Truth. See Truth.

God Omnipotent. See Omnipotent.

God with Us. See Immanuel.

Good Master. See Master.

Good Shepherd. See Shepherd.

Governor. When Herod inquired of the chief priests and scribes where the king of the Jews would be born, they quoted the prophecy of Micah: "But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel" (Micah 5:2). In the King James Version of Matthew, the Micah text reads, "And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people" (Matt. 2:6). Thus ruler in the Micah text is rendered governor in the Matthean account. The Greek word being translated, governor, means "to lead, i.e., a. to go before; b. to be a leader; to rule, command; to have authority over" (Thayer, The New Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, p. 276a). Thus a number of modern translations have chosen to have the phrase "shall rule my people" rendered "shall be shepherd of my people." This shifts the meaning of the text from Christ's millennial rule when he will reign in power to that of his mortal ministry, which centered in his role of guiding, guarding, folding, and feeding the Lord's flock.

That Christ will indeed reign in power as a governor over the Lord's people there can be no doubt. "The government," Isaiah said, "shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this." (Isa. 6-7.) 

Gracious. Those who leave the world and come to Christ come to know that he is kind, benevolent, and full of divine grace. Of such Peter said, "Ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious" (1 Pet. 2:3). 

Great Creator. See Creator.

Great I Am. See I Am.

Great Mediator. See Mediator.

Great Physician. See Physician.

Great Shepherd. See Shepherd.

Guide. He who said "Come follow me" is our sure guide who marks the path all must follow to obtain salvation (see Ps. 48:14). "If we can find a saved being," Joseph Smith asserted, "we may ascertain without much difficulty what all others must be in order to be saved. We think that it will not be a matter of dispute, that two beings who are unlike each other cannot both be saved; for whatever constitutes the salvation of one will constitute the salvation of every creature which will be saved; and if we find one saved being in all existence, we may see what all others must be, or else not be saved. We ask, then, where is the prototype? or where is the saved being? We conclude... that it is Christ." (Lectures on Faith 7:9.)

Head. Regarded, with the heart, as the chief member of the body, the word head implies a preeminent and authoritative position. It is used symbolically of Jesus in several ways.

1) "The head of every man is Christ" (1 Cor. 11:3). "At the name of Jesus every knee should bow" (Philip. 2:10), and even among those who inherit the telestial kingdom, we are told that "every tongue shall confess to him who sits upon the throne forever and ever; for they shall be judged according to their works" (D&C 76:110-11). All must acknowledge Christ as the Creator, Preserver, Ruler, and Savior. "For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all things consist" (Col. 1:16-17). 

2) "The head of the body, the church" (Col. 1:18). In all things preeminence rests with Christ. We become members of his Church by taking upon ourselves his name, and we work out our salvation by becoming one with him. "Whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake .... therefore ye shall call whatsoever things ye do call, in my name; therefore if ye call upon the Father, for the church, if it be in my name the Father will hear you; and if it so be that the church is built upon my gospel then will the Father show forth his own works in it." (3 Ne. 27:7-10.) 

3. "The head of the corner" (Matt. 21:42). (See Chief Cornerstone.)

Heir of all things. The Son of God is a rightful heir of his divine Father, and through obedience he became equal with the Father in power, might, and dominion. Paul testified to those of his day that "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath al-pointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high" (Heb. l: 1-3).

Help. "Our soul waiteth for the Lord: he is our help and our shield" (Ps. 33:20; 40:17). 

Heritage. To Abraham's family, meaning those of the believing blood, has come a legacy of spiritual riches. Their inheritance is one of faith and spiritual power. To all such, God is their heritage (see Isa. 58:14). 

Highest. One of the name-titles given the Father to designate his exalted rank even in the Godhead is that of the Highest. Christ testified, saying, "My Father is greater than I" (John 14:28). Announcing the birth of the Messiah, Gabriel declared that the Christ "shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest" (Luke 1:32), or, as rendered in Today's English Version, "He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High God" (Luke 1:32). The revelation on the degrees of glory states that those who obtain the celestial kingdom will enjoy the glory of the sun, "even the glory of God, the highest of all" (D&C 76:70; italics added).

High Priest. By divine decree, the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood "administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God" (D&C 84:19). From the days of Moses to those of Christ it was the rightful duty of the high priest in the lesser priesthood to instruct the nation of Israel in the doctrine of sin and its expiation and to officiate in the making of national covenants. The high priest was the source through which spiritual life was communicated to the Lord's people. His annual entrance into the Holy of Holies on the Day of Atonement was a prophetic representation of Christ's ascension into heaven and his intercessory role with the Father. The daily work of the priests at the altar of the temple was symbolic of the efficacy of the blood of the Lamb of God who, through the willing sacrifice of his own life, would make the atonement that was infinite and eternal. Thus Christ, the perfect anti-type of all priesthood functions, and whom Paul properly calls the "great high priest," was both mediator and sacrifice. (Heb. 4:14; 3:1.) (See also part 1: High Priest.)

Holy. In this designation for Christ, Holy is being used as a noun rather than as an adjective. That which is holy is sacred rather than secular; it is that which has been "set apart," "consecrated," or "dedicated" to God. Obviously, the purpose of the name is to convey the concept of the supreme holiness and perfection embodied in the Son of Man of Holiness (see Moses 6:57). (See also Holy One.)

Holy Child Jesus. See Holy Servant.

Holy God. See God.

Holy Messiah. Christ is called by the name Holy Messiah, when the purpose is to bring to mind both his holy and perfected state and his position as Deliverer and King (see 2 Ne. 2:6, 8). (See Messiah.)

Holy One. The expression "the Holy One" or "the Holy One of God" is used several times in the New Testament to designate the Lord. We find it first on the lips of the demoniac who, recognizing Jesus of Nazareth, asked, "Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God." (Mark 1:24; Luke 4:34.) The next time the title is ascribed to him is when Peter, striving to find words to answer the Lord's question as to whom the Twelve would go if they intended to abandon him: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life.And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God." (John 6:68-69.) Peter would later testify against those who put Christ to death, saying that they had "disowned the Holy and Righteous One" (New American Standard Bible, Acts 3:14) and John wrote that the Saints had received "an anointing" from the "Holy One" ( 1 Jn. 2:20, 27). 

Holy One of Israel. "O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One. Remember that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate; for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name." (2 Ne. 9:41.) The appellation Holy One of Israel signifies that Christ, who is without sin, was chosen and consecrated of God, as was Israel, to be the servant of the Father and to be the source of salvation to all the nations of the earth.

Holy One of Jacob. See Holy One of Israel.

Holy Servant. Peter, as recorded in the King James Version, refers to Christ as the "holy child Jesus" (Acts 4:27, 30). This is a mistranslation, and is rendered "Holy Servant" in virtually all other translations. (See also Servant.)

Hope of Glory. As used in the scriptures, hope is the desire of faithful people to be saved in the kingdom of God (see Alma 5:10). Thus it becomes an appropriate appellation for him through whom hope and salvation are possible -the Lord Jesus Christ (see Col. 1:27). Lehi's son Jacob wrote, "For this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us" (Jacob 4:4). 

Horn of Salvation. The expression "an horn of salvation" in the song of Zacharias refers to the promised Messiah (Luke 1:69). Horn is frequently used in the scriptures as a symbol of power and strength. Since a horn in animals is used as a weapon of attack rather than of defense, it is held by some to be a symbol of aggressive strength. Thus "horn of salvation" implies "strength of salvation" or "power of salvation." (See also part 1: Horn.)

Husband. In scriptural imagery, Christ is the Bridegroom who claims his bride (the Church), celebrates their marriage supper, and then becomes the Husband of his wife. "As a Husbandhe shall deal intimately, with tenderness and compassion, toward the remnant of his people who have returned to enjoy millennial rest with him" (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 370). (See also part 1: Husband.)

I Am. To the religious leaders who disputed Christ's claim that he was the Son of God and proceeded from his Father came an astounding declaration: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am" (John 8:58). Thus he announced himself to the nation of the Jews as Jehovah, the very name he had used when he appeared before the likes of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses (see JST, Ex. 6:3). It is in the person of Jesus that all that Jehovah promised his covenant people finds realization:

"I am the bread of life" (John 6:35). 

"I am the light of the world" (John 8:12; 9:5). 

"I am the door of the sheep" (John 10:7). 

"I am the good shepherd" (John 10:11). 

"I am from above... I am not of this world" (John 8:23). 

"I am the resurrection, and the life" (John 11:25). 

"I am the way, the truth, and the life" (John 14:6). 

"I am the true vine" (John 15:1, 5). 

"I am the root and the offspring of David" (Rev. 22:16). 

To those of our dispensation, the Lord said: "Hearken and listen to the voice of him who is from all eternity to all eternity, the Great I AM, even Jesus Christ" (D&C 39:1). Thus the great doctrine of God's presence among his people, that marvelous assurance that "from eternity to eternity he is the same" (D&C 76:4) is proclaimed anew. That God who spoke to Abraham speaks to us; that God who covenanted with Isaac and Jacob covenants with us; that God who endowed Moses with power from on high and led the children of Israel through the wilderness will endow us with that same power and lead us to our land of promise. (See also Jehovah.)

Image of God. Paul referred to Christ as the "image of [God's] person," meaning that he was a revelation of his Father (Heb. 1:3). "If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also," Christ explained to his chosen disciples at the Last Supper, "and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him. Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us. Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father." (John 14:7-9.) This is simply to say that because the Son says and does that which the Father would say and do in the same situation, to have seen the one is to have seen the other.

In the case of the Father and the Son, they also share a perfect physical resemblance. Describing their appearance in an account of the First Vision, Joseph Smith said they "exactly resembled each other in features and likeness" (History of the Church, 4:536).

Immanuel. Literally "God is with us." Immanuel is a symbolic name given to the child whose birth was foretold by Isaiah as the sign to Ahaz and his court that God would deliver them from their enemies (Isa. 7:14; 8:8). Matthew applies the name to Jesus (Matt. 1:23). 

Ishi. A Hebrew title meaning "my husband" (Hosea 2:16). (See also Husband.)

JAH. "Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him" (Ps. 68:4). The name Jah is a contraction for Jehovah and means "the self-existent" or "eternal."

Jehovah. Jehovah is the covenant or proper name of the God of Israel. Considerable confusion shrouds the name because of the false traditions of the Jews. These traditions have found expression in the preservation of the texts of the Bible to the extent that the proper name of Deity has become a stumbling block to many Bible readers and a matter of contention between various religious sects.

Manifesting himself to Abraham, the Lord said, "My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee" (Abr. 2:8). This was followed by the making of what we know as the Abrahamic covenant, which includes the promise that Abraham's seed would have claim upon the priesthood and were to assume the responsibility to declare the gospel of salvation among all the nations of the earth-and this in the name of the Lord Jehovah (see Abr. 2:6-11). 

The following verses in the book of Exodus have been the source of confusion: "And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord: and I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them" (Ex. 6:2-3). Thus the text states that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did not know the Lord by the sacred name Jehovah. Yet we know that the name Jehovah was in use even long before the days of Abraham. For instance, Gen. 2:4, which reads "Lord God," should have been rendered "Jehovah Elohim." Similarly, Abraham expressly addressed the Lord by the name Adoni (Lord) Jehovah (Gen. 15:2), and God reveals himself to Abraham by that name, saying, "I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees" (Gen. 15:7). It will also be remembered that Abraham named the place where he was called upon to offer Isaac as a sacrifice "Jehovah-jireh" (Gen. 22:14). For a Latter-day Saint, however, the matter is simply resolved. Joseph Smith corrected the Exodus text in his inspired translation of the Bible. There the text simply reads: "And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob. I am the Lord God Almighty; the Lord JEHOVAH. And was not my name known unto them?" (JST, Ex. 6:3). 

The pronunciation of this name by which God was known to the Hebrews has been lost, the Jews themselves scrupulously avoiding every mention of it. The Jewish tradition, which had its origin in reverence, degenerated into a superstition. The commandment against blaspheming the name of the Lord was incorrectly rendered to state that anyone, be he stranger or native, that named the name of the Lord, be put to death (LXX, Lev. 24:16; see also the New English Bible, which states that "whosoever utters the Name of the Lord shall be put to death").

That proper reverence was due the holy name is beyond question. From a revelation given to Joseph Smith we learn that anciently the Priesthood was known as "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood." (D&C 107:3-4.) It is the excessive reverence which the Jews entertained for the sacred name which has resulted in a loss of clarity and understanding in the Bible text. Forbidden to pronounce the name, they would, in reading, substitute either Adonai, meaning "Lord," or Elohim, meaning "God," according to the vowel points by which it was accompanied. In the King James Version, the Jewish custom has been followed, and the name is generally denoted by "LORD" or GOD" printed in a capital letter followed by small capitals.

Most scholars believe that the name Jehovah (this is the An-glicized form of the name Yahweh) is derived from an old form of the Hebrew verb meaning "to be" or "to become." The word stresses existence, with the meaning being that expressed in Ex. 3:14: "I AM." This has been understood to emphasize the unchanging nature of God, particularly his changeless commitment to the faithful.

But the name suggests more, especially in the context of its introduction to Israel. This came as Moses, standing before the burning bush, hesitated to accept God's commission. "Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" He was then assured that God would be with him. Again he asked, "Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?" The divine response was "I AM THAT I AM," and God said, "Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you." Moses was further instructed to say that "the Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations." (Ex. 3:11-15.) 

Shortly thereafter, God revealed to Moses that he had been known to the ancient fathers by the name Jehovah and that by that name he had delivered them, entered into covenants with them, and granted them a land of promise. Thus the name Jehovah becomes God's affirmation that he is an ever-present God rather than the God of history or of the prophetic future. Jehovah is his personal name, a name reaching beyond the appellations of Lord and God, for it is a manifestation of his nature and his involvement with his covenant people.

Jesus. Jesus is the Greek equivalent for the Hebrew name Joshua, which means "Jehovah is salvation." Moses' successor, Joshua, is represented in the New Testament by the name Jesus (Acts 7:45; Heb. 4:8). Both Mary and Joseph were commanded by the angel of the Lord to name the Christ child Jesus (Luke 1:31; Matt. 1:21). Thus it is the personal name by which the Lord is known in the Gospels and the Acts, but generally in the Epistles it appears in combination with "Christ" or other appellatives.

"JE-This first syllable Je, or Jeho, or Jah-Jehovah-this name of God, speaks of the divine authority that Jesus came as the great I AM. The syllable tells us of His eternal Godhead, of His covenant relations, and of His mighty powers and condescending love. All the virtues dimly seen in the Jehovah of old became manifest in Him who came from heaven.

"SUS-This other syllable is associated with the name Oshea, Hosea, or Houshaia, meaning 'help,' which was the name of one of the spies sent out by Moses, but which he changed to Jehosua, signifying 'Jehovah our Saviour,' or 'Deliverer,' or 'The help of Jehovah' (Num. 13:16) .... Thus in this second part of [the name] Jesus, we are assured of pardon and peace, of deliverance from sin and hell." (Herbert Lockyer, All the Divine Names and Titles in the Bible, p. 174.)

Jesus Christ. The personal name given the Son of God for the purpose of his mortal ministry was Jesus. Christ, the Savior's surname, is the Greek equivalent of the Hebrew Messiah, which means "anointed." Thus, to anoint a prophet, priest, or king was to make of him a type of what the Christ would be as Israel's Prophet, Priest, and King. By force of usage, the name or title Christ is also used as a personal name for the Savior. (See also Jesus.)

Judge. Christ is Judge of the living and the dead (see Acts 10:42). To him the Father "hath committed all judgment" (John 5:22). Having redeemed us from death with the cost of his own blood, and from sin with the price of his own suffering, Christ is rightfully our judge, having bought us with a price (1 Cor. 6:20). It is his right to command obedience and to punish its counterpart.

His judgment is administered with perfect justice (Isa. 9:7) and "with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth" (Isa. 11:4). "As I hear, I judge," he said, "and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me" (John 5:30). In the coming day of judgment, when he judges whose judgment is just, perfect justice will be administered to all men. "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" (Gen. 

18:25; Ps. 94:1-2). (See also part 1: Judges.)

Judge of Israel. See Judge.

Just One. The word just comes from the Latin jus, which means "law" or "right." The Just One or Righteous One is a common description of Christ in the New Testament (Acts 22:14; 1 Jn. 2:1; 1 Pet. 3:18). Christ's righteousness in his judicial reign means that in covenant faithfulness he saves his people. The "justified" are those who have rightful claim upon the promise of salvation, having kept their covenants with exactness and honor. Thus Christ is the Just One, signifying that perfect justice, equity, judgment, impartiality, and righteousness are embodied in his person. (See also Righteous.)

Keeper of the Gate. "The keeper of the gate," Jacob testified, "is the Holy One of Israel; and he employeth no servant there." Further, there is no other way one can enter the heavenly kingdom, "for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name" (2 Ne. 9:41). 

The gate symbolized entrance into a new life, the passage from one state or world to another. "Whoso cometh in at the gate and climbeth up by me," Christ said, "shall never fall" (Moses 7:53). Anciently, kings sat in judgment at gates, "probably as sacred places of divine power" (Cooper, An Illustrated Encyclopaedia of Traditional Symbols, p. 73). (See also Door of the Sheep; part 1: Gate.)

King. "I am Messiah, the King of Zion," the premortal Christ proclaimed to Enoch (Moses 7:53). Millenniums later, David, exulting that Mount Zion was "the joy of the whole earth," acclaimed it also as "the city of the great King, ... the city of the Lord of hosts .... the city of our God." (Ps. 48:1-8.) "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem," wrote Zachariah. "Behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation;... he shall speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth." (Zech. 9:9-10.) Heralding Christ's birth, Gabriel declared: "He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end" (Luke 1:33). 

Christ is Israel's King, the Church his earthly kingdom. The meridian Saints regarded themselves as the vassals of their divinely anointed King. Under his regal sway they had been delivered from the power of darkness (Col. 1:13) and would yet enjoy a complete triumph over all that is ungodly and unjust, for their king is destined to "reign in righteousness" (Isa. 32:1 ). To those of faith, Christ is the Ruler, Lawgiver, and Sovereign in whom all power rests. (See also part 1: King.)

King of Glory. This name-title for Christ signifies both his status as King and the transcendent glory that attends him. Only those who are clean and pure, those worthy to enter the temple, those able to stand on holy ground, can endure the glory of God. Declaring these truths, the Psalmist asked, "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?" And in response he declares: "He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Selah. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in." (Ps. 24:3-7.) 

King of Heaven. Christ and God are our Kings and will so role and reign throughout the endless eternities. To the extent that the heavenly order finds expression on our mortal earth, it is representative of the divine monarchy. Indeed, salvation consists in our being ordained both priests and kings, priestesses and queens, that we too might rule endless creations in like manner. "And to him who overcometh, and keepeth my commandments unto the end, will I give power over many king-. doms; and he shall rule them with the word of God; and they shall be in his hands as the vessels of clay in the hands of a potter; and he shall govern them by faith, with equity and justice, even as I received of my Father." (JST, Rev. 2:26-27; Rev. 1:5-6.) 

King of Israel. See King.

King of Kings. When Christ, the suffering servant, he who descended below all things, returns in glory and power to rule and reign, he will come as "KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS" (Rev. 19:16). His power will be supreme; he will have complete dominion over all the earth. Those who rule will do so at his pleasure and in his name. Though the title King of kings embraces all such things, it reaches far beyond them. All who gain exaltation are ordained kings and queens, priests and priestesses, in which positions they shall exercise power and authority in the Lord's eternal kingdoms throughout an endless eternity.

King of the Jews. "Though rejected and crucified by them, Christ was and is the King of the Jews. Messianic prophecies had foretold the glorious reign of a great King, the King of Israel. (Zech. 9:9-10.) The Jews were looking forward to a temporal reign in which all nations of the earth would go up from year to year 'to worship the King, the Lord of hosts,' in Jerusalem (Zech. 14:16-21), an event which in reality is to occur during the Millennium when Christ, the King, reigns personally on earth. (A off 1:10.) 

"Accordingly, when our Lord came ministering among the Jews and proclaiming his divine Sonship, the great query in the minds of the people was whether this was the promised King. He was believed to be of the lineage of David. (Matt. 1:1-16; Luke 3:23-38.) On one occasion the people sought to make him king by force. (John 6:15.) On another the multitudes hailed him publicly as the King of Israel. (Matt. 21:1-11; Luke 19:28-40; John 12:12-16.) Pilate asked him: 'Art thou the King of the Jews?' to which query he received an affirmative answer, with the qualifying explanation: 'My kingdom is not of this world' (John 18:33-37; Luke 23:1-4), a doctrine that our Lord had also taught previously. (Luke 22:24-30.) Then Pilate, when the Jews chanted, 'We have no king but Caesar,' ordered the crucifixion and the placing of a writing above our Lord's head reading: 'JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.' (John 19:14-22.) 

"At the Second Coming the Jews shall be converted, recognize him whom they crucified, and 'lament because they persecuted their king.' (D&C 45:51-53; Zech. 12:10-14; 13:6.)" (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 424.)

King of Zion. In the Millennium, after the return of Enoch's city, Christ will reign personally on earth as "the King of Zion" (Moses 7:53, 63-64; Rev. 20:4). To those attempting to establish a modern day Zion the Lord said, "Verily I say unto you that in time ye shall have no king nor ruler, for I will be your king and watch over you. Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me, and you shall be a free people, and ye shall have no laws but my laws when I come, for I am your lawgiver, and what can stay my hand?" (D&C 38:21-22; 45:59.) 

Lamb. The ordinance of animal sacrifice was first taught to Adam in the Garden of Eden. From that moment through the long millennia until Christ became the "great and last sacri-rice," many millions of sheep were sacrificed in the Israelite communities. Each of these sacrifices became "a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father" (Moses 5:7; D&C 138:13). The sacrifice of the lamb was a prophecy of and a type for the atoning sacrifice of Christ.

In six ways the sacrifical lamb was a type for Jesus Christ. 1) No bones of the lamb were to be broken (Ps. 34:20; Ex. 12:46; John 19:36). 2) The lamb must be perfect (Mal. 1:7-14; 3 Ne. 12:48). 3) The lamb must be without blemish (Ex. 12:5; Heb. 7:26-27; 1 Pet. 2:22). 4) The flesh of the lamb was to be eaten (Ex. 12:8; John 6:53-55). 5) The lamb must be the firstborn (Ex. 13:2; D&C 93:21). 6) The lamb must be a male (Ex. 12:5; Matt. 1:21). 

Above all, as the blood of the lamb saved the ancient Israelites from temporal death during the first Passover, even so will Christ, "our passover" (1 Cor. 5:7), save those of righteous Israel from spiritual death (Heb. 9:20-22). (See also part 1: Lamb.)

Lawgiver. Jesus Christ is "our lawgiver" (Isa. 33:22; D&C 45:59). The Lord has stated: "Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me, and you shall be a free people, and ye shall have no laws but my laws when I come, for I am your lawgiver" (D&C 38:22) "I am the law" (3 Ne. 15:9). 

Leader. Speaking messianically, Isaiah referred to Christ as the leader and commander of the people (Isa. 55:4). As a leader (or a shepherd), Jesus directs his sheep to the green pastures and leads them "beside the still waters" (Ps. 23:2). He "calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out" (John 10:3). According to the Book of Mormon, he "shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them" ( 1 Ne. 21:10). 

As the "captain of [our] salvation" (Heb. 2:10), the Lord states, "I will lead you along" (D&C 78:18) more specifically, the injunction is "Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand" (D&C 112:10; see also Abr. l: 18).

Christ is not the leader of individuals alone, but he directs and leads the nation of Israel as well. In D&C 38:33, the Lord states, "For Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will."

Life. Jesus is "the life" of the world (John 1:4) in three principal ways:

1) The scriptures often describe Jesus Christ as "the light and the life of the world" (D&C 12:9; 10:70; 34:2; 39:2; 45:7; 3 Ne. 11:11; 9:18). It is this "light of Christ" which is "given to every man" (Moro. 7:15-18) which provides life to all things. Jesus is "the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things" (D&C 88:13). This "light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space" (D&C 88:12). In this way the Lord "giveth life unto the world" (John 6:33). He is the "Word of life" (1 Jn. 1:1) and the "Prince of life" (Acts 3:15) and "in him was the life of men" (D&C 93:9). 

2) Through the Atonement, Christ made eternal life available to those who are obedient to the commandments. The Apostle John wrote, "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life" (John 3:36). Elsewhere John wrote that "eternal life" is in the Son and that "he that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life" ( 1 Jn. 5:11-12). Accordingly, Jesus tells his listeners, "I give unto them [those souls who are righteous] eternal life" (John 10:28). Paul's epistle to the Romans includes this concise and relevant statement: "The wages of sin is death [spiritual death]; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord" (Rom. 6:23). 

3) Through the Atonement, the Lord made it possible for the resurrection to come about, partly because he was given power from the Father "to have life in himself' (John 5:26). Thus Jesus said unto Martha, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live" (John 11:25). 

In sum, we see that Jesus is life, that he has life, and that he gives both physical and spiritual life through his atonement.

Light. Jesus is "the light of the sun .... the light of the moon .... the light of the stars," (D&C 88:7-9) and "the light of the world" (John 8:12). He is the "true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" (John 1:9; D&C 93:2; Moro. 7:16-19). During the great millennial day, mankind will "need no candle, neither light of the sun," for the Lord will be their light (Rev. 22:5; Isa. 60:19). 

With words which are to be had only through revelation, in a declaration not understood by the greatest of the world's scholars, scientists, and intellectuals, the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith his role as the light: "And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who en-lighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings; ... the light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne" (D&C 88:11-13). (See also part 1: Light.)

Lion. Since the lion was the emblem of the tribe of Judah (Gen. 49:8-12), and since Jesus Christ "sprang out of Juda" (Heb. 7:14), we find John the Revelator referring to Jesus as the "Lion of the tribe of Juda" (Rev. 5:5). At first glance it may seem peculiar to refer to the Lord as a lion, but the scriptures make it evident that this majestic animal has many characteristics that are similar in nature to those of Christ. For instance, a lion is valiant (2 Sam. 17:10) and fearless (Nahum 2:11). He is noted for his fierceness (Job 10:16; 28:8) and, as the king of beasts, his majesty (Prov. 30:29-30). The lion is superior in strength to all other beasts (Prov. 30:30) and to man (Judg. 14:18). Christ, the King of kings, has all of these characteristics. Also, a lion is known to hide in "secret places" (Ps. 17:12; Lam. 3:10), as does the Lord, meaning that God's dwelling place is unknown to man. (See also part 1: Lion.)

Living God. Jesus Christ is an active God-not the God of history but the God of the present. He is not an unknown god whom his saints "ignorantly worship" (Acts 17:23). Neither is he a golden idol formed by a "smith with the tongs," or a wooden statue carved by "the carpenter [who] stretcheth out his rule" (Isa. 44:12-13). Rather he is "the true and living God" (1 Ne. 17:30; D&C 20:19; Alma 7:6; 11:27) with "a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's" (D&C 130:22). We learn that the Father also is a "living God," for Nephi refers to Jesus Christ as the "Son of the living God" (2 Ne. 31:16). 

Living Stone. Jesus is referred to as a stone and a rock. However, unlike the dead, lifeless stones known to be found upon the hillsides and on the valley floors, he is the "living stone" (1 Pet. 2:4). (See also Rock; Stone.)

Lord. The title Lord is the most frequently used name for Jesus Christ in holy writ. In the Bible, this English word is regularly employed by the King James translators in place of three Hebrew words and four Greek words. Thus, in the Old Testament record, "Lord" replaces Adonnay at least 300 times, Yahweh on at least 5,300 occasions, and Yah approximately 50 times. In the New Testament record, this divine title was used once in place of rabboni, five times for despotes, once for megistanes, and some 700 times for kyrios.

It is helpful to see the New Testament uses of the title Lord with the name-titles accompanying them:

Lord (1 Cor. 12:3) 

Lord Almighty (2 Cor. 6:18) 

Lord and Christ (Acts 2:36) 

My Lord and my God (John 20:28) 

Lord and Master (John 13:13-14) 

Lord and Saviour (2 Pet. 3:2) 

Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ (2 Pet. 1:11) 

Lord Christ (Col. 3:24) 

Lord from heaven (1 Cor. 15:47) 

Lord God Almighty (Rev. 11:17) 

Lord God omnipotent (Rev. 19:6) 

Lord Jesus (Acts 1:21) 

Lord Jesus Christ (Acts 11:17) 

Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour (Titus 1:4) 

Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father (2 Jn. 1:3) 

Lord of all (Acts 10:36) 

Lord of glory ( 1 Cor. 2:8) 

Lord of the harvest (Matt. 9:38) 

Lord of lords (Rev. 17:14) 

Lord of peace (2 Thes. 3:16) 

Lord of the Sabbath (Luke 6:5) 

Lord of the dead and living (Rom. 14:9) 

Lord thy God (Matt. 4:7) 

Lord God. The English title Lord God (D&C 109:77; 121:4; Moses 3:4; 2 Ne. 1:5), a translation from the Hebrew Yahweh Elohim (literally "Jehovah Gods"), is a superlative appellation denoting the plurality of Deity's attributes. He is the most merciful, the most loving, the most just, the most righteous, the most truthful of all beings -just to name a few of his attributes. Under this title, Jesus has been called "the Lord God of Abraham" (Gen. 28:13), "the Lord God of Israel" (Ex. 32:27), "the Lord God of Elijah" (2 Kgs. 2:14), the "Lord God of our fathers" (2 Chr. 20:6), "the Lord God of hosts" (1 Kgs. 19:10), and "Lord God Almighty" (Rev. 4:8; 11:17). 

Lord God Almighty. In a vocative statement not unlike other poetic scripture, Jacob referred to Jesus Christ as the "Lord God Almighty." He stated: "Holy, holy are thy judgments, O Lord God Almighty-but I know my guilt" (2 Ne. 9:46). The word Almighty suggests the supreme power and might of the Lord. (See also Almighty.)

Lord God of Hosts. See Lord of Hosts; Lord of Sabaoth. Lord God Omnipotent. King Benjamin referred to Jesus Christ as the "Lord Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:5, 17-18; 5:2) and the "Lord God Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:21; 5:15). The word omnipotent denotes "all power" or "unlimited power" and is an apt description of Deity, for he has "all power" (D&C 19:3), "almighty power" (D&C 19:14), and "all power, both in heaven and on earth" (D&C 93:17). Jeremiah described God's omnipotence in this manner: "Ah Lord God! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee." (Jer. 32:17.) 

Lord Jehovah. Although the name Jehovah is found more than 5,300 times in the Hebrew scriptures, it is translated as such only four times in the King James Version of the Bible (Ex. 6:3; Ps. 83:18; Isa. 12:2; 26:4). In all other instances, the translators employed the title Lord. In Isa. 12:2, however this divine name is combined with the title Lord, and is thus read "Lord JEHOVAH." Here the King James translators apparently chose to use the name Jehovah rather than have the verse read

"Lord Lord." (See also Jehovah.)

Lord Jesus. See Jesus.

Lord Jesus Christ. See Jesus Christ.

Lord of All. Luke called Jesus the "Lord of all" (Acts 10:36). Paul's epistle to the Romans explained: "For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord [is] over all" (Rom. 10:12). Indeed, Jesus Christ is the "Lord both of the dead and living" (Rom. 14:9). Nephi summarized Christ's role as Lord of all in these words: "And he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile" (2 Ne. 26:33). 

Lord of Glory. Jesus Christ, while yet an innocent child and sinless youth, did not receive of a fulness of glory from the Father. "He received not of the fulness at first," testified John, "but continued from grace to grace" (D&C 93:13), or "glory to glory," as Paul describes this process (see 2 Cor, 3:18). However, after Jesus was baptized, "he received a fulness of the glory of the Father" (D&C 93:6-20). From this point on, and forevermore, Jesus is referred to as "the Lord of glory" (James 2:1; 1 Cor. 2:8). 

 D&C 84:102 records that during the millennial reign of the King of kings, people will sing:

Glory, and honor,

and power, and might,

be ascribed to our God;

for he is full of mercy,

justice, grace and truth,

and peace,

Forever and ever, Amen.

Lord of Hosts. The title Lord of Hosts is found 267 times in the Old Testament, more than 50 times in the Book of Mormon, 12 times in the Doctrine and Covenants, and once in the Pearl of Great Price-but never in the New Testament. This title is also found as "Lord God of hosts" (Hosea 12:5) and "God of hosts" (Amos 3:13). 

Jesus is the Lord God of Hosts in the sense that he is the God of the host of Israel, the Lord of the host of the righteous, and the King who leads his armies in righteous battle against the wicked. (See also Lord of Sabaoth.)

Lord of Lords. Jesus Christ is the "Lord of lords" (Rev. 17:14), a title which is descriptive of his supremacy, lordship, majesty, royalty, and kingship. Clearly, this phrase has reference to Christ's lordship over other deities and gods. It has nothing to do with the lords of the world, such as barons, wealthy landowners, ecclesiastical governors, presidents, kings, and the like. The scriptures reflect the supremacy of Jesus. Moses, a king himself (Deut. 33:4-5), wrote, "For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible" (Deut. 10:17). The Apostle Paul wrote to Timothy that "our Lord Jesus Christ... is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto;... to whom be honour and power everlasting" (1 Tim. 6:14-16). At the final return of the Lord, when Jesus comes to the earth in all his glorious power, he will be riding a mighty "white horse," wearing "many crowns" upon his head, and "clothed with a vesture dipped in blood." "On his vesture and on his thigh" will be written the titles "KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS." (Rev. 19:11-16.) 

Lord of Sabaoth. The titles Lord of Sabaoth and Lord of Hosts have identical meanings-sabaoth is a Hebrew word translated as "hosts" or "armies" (for "Lord of Sabaoth" used in the context of war, see D&C 87:7). Jesus is the "Lord of Sabaoth" (Rom. 9:29; James 5:4; D&C 88:2) in four ways.

1) He is the God of the "heavenly host" the myriad of angelic and heavenly beings which exist in the celestial worlds (see Luke 2:13; 2 Kgs. 6:17). 

2) He is the Creator and Lord of all celestial and terrestrial spheres, such as "the sun, and the moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven" (Deut. 4:19). Perhaps this is what the Prophet Joseph Smith was referring to when he wrote of the "Lord of Sabaoth, which is by interpretation, the creator of the first day, the beginning and the end" (D&C 95:7). 

3) All those of the tribe of Levi were called the "host" (Num. 4:3), and their sanctuary service and duties was referred to as "warfare." Thus, all the Levites who entered into the temple were "to war the warfare, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation" (Hebrew translation of Num. 4:23-similarly with the same phraseology in Num. 4:30, 35, 39, 43; 8:24; Dan. 8:11, 13). Jehovah was the Lord of Hosts, referring to the Levite hosts.

4) God is the Lord of Sabaoth, meaning he is the Deity of the hosts or armies of Israel. In connection with this, the writer of the book of 1 Samuel quoted David as saying to Goliath, the Philistine giant, "Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the armies of Israel" (1 Sam. 17:45). (See also part 1 : Army.)

Lord of Sabbath. The English term "Sabbath" is a transliteration from the Hebrew shabbat. Both words are names for the religious day of the week of two major religions: the Christian Sabbath is the first day of the week, and the Jewish shabbat is the seventh day of the week. The Hebrew denominative verb of the same root, shabat, means "to cease from one's labor" or "to rest." Thus the Sabbath is the day for people to cease from their temporal labors and the tasks which are performed on the other six days of the week, and also the day to worship and revere covenants. Jesus is the Lord of the Sabbath (see Mark 2:23-28) because he created this holy day; he himself used this day to rest from the labors of creation (Gen. 2:2-3) he became the firstfruits of the resurrection on the Sabbath; and he is the Author of all rules and regulations which are to be observed on this holy day (D&C 59:2-20; Ex. 20:8-11). (See also part 1: Sabbath.)

Lord of the Vineyard. Symbolically, the house of Israel is compared to a vineyard. Isaiah wrote, "For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel" (Isa. 5:7). And Jesus Christ, as the God of Israel, is the "lord of the vineyard" (see Matt. 20:1-16; see also Jacob 6:1-11), meaning he is the Lord of the house of Israel. (For the Father as the Lord of the Vineyard, see

 Matt. 21:33-46.) (See also Vine; part 1: Vine; Vineyard.) Lord Omnipotent. See Lord God Omnipotent. Lord Our Righteousness. See Righteousness.

Lord's Christ. Jesus is "the Lord's Christ" (Luke 2:26), or, as a word-for-word translation from the Greek reads, Jesus is the "Christ of the Lord." The English title Lord (Greek Kyrios) refers to both God the Father and to the Son. In this particular instance the title Lord refers to God the Father. Thus, this phrase could be read "Christ (anointed one) of the Father," meaning that Jesus is the Father's Anointed One. In a related passage, the Psalmist stated, "Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows" (Ps. 45:6-7; see also Isa. 60:1). (See also Christ; Messiah.) 

Maker. Christ is referred to as the "Maker" (D&C 30:2; Hosea 8:14; see also Jer. 51:15; D&C 117:6), a title which describes his role as the creator of "all things... that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him" (Col. 1:16). 

Man. Though Jehovah was a god in the heavens, he condescended to live as a man upon the earth ( 1 Ne. 11:16-26; 2 Ne. 4:26). He was the "man approved of God" (Acts 2:22), "the one man" (Rom. 5:15), "a man of war" (Ex. 15:3), and "a man of sorrows" (Isa. 53:1-12; Luke 22:44; John 19:30). Paul noted that Adam was the "first man," but the "second man is the Lord from heaven" (1 Cor. 15:47). He is the personage whom the Nephites witnessed when they "cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven" (3 Ne. 11:8). 

How was Jesus a man?

1) He was perceived as being a man by his contemporaries. Many made such exclamations as: "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did;... this is indeed the Christ" (John 4:29, 42) and "What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?" (Mark 4:41.) Before Christ's crucifixion, Pilate presented him to the "chief priests and officers," saying, "Behold the man!" (John 19:5-6.) And several scriptures refer to "the man Jesus Christ" (Rom. 5:15; see also 1 Tim. 2:5). 

2) He was born of a human mother (Luke 2:5, 7), and he grew as a child (Luke 2:40) and "increased in... stature" (Luke 2:52). 

3) He was tempted as men are (Matt. 4:1-11) and suffered as men do (Heb. 2:10). 

4) He possessed human qualities: he was hungry, thirsty, sorrowful, angry, weary, compassionate, and so on (see Matt. 26:38) he possessed a body (Luke 24:39). 

5) He suffered bodily pain, bled from every pore, and died. 6) God the Father is known as the "Man of Holiness" (Moses 6:57) and "Man of Counsel" (Moses 7:35), and his son is called the "Son of Man," an abbreviated form of "Son of Man of Holiness" (Moses 6:57). Jesus was in the "express image" of his Father, who also is a "Man."

7) Jesus had to qualify for his own salvation, as do all men (D&C 93:12-17). 

Master. Six different Greek words and one Hebrew word were translated to the English "master" by the King James translators. These are despotes, meaning "sovereign" (1 Tim. 6:1-2) didaskolos, "teacher" (Matt. 8:19) epistates, "overseer" (Luke 5:5) kathegetes, "leader" (Matt. 23:8) kurios, "Lord" (Eph. 6:9) kubernetes, "pilot" or "shipmaster" (Acts 27:11) and rabbi, "teacher" (Matt. 26:25). 

Jesus often spoke of himself as "Master" (Matt. 10:24-25; 26:18; Mark 14:14; Luke 6:40; 22:11; John 13:14). He said, "Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am" (John 13:13) and on another occasion, "But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren .... Neither be ye called masters: for one is your Master, even Christ." (Matt. 23:7-10.) 

Others referred to the Lord as "Master" (Matt. 9:11; 17:24; Mark 5:35; Luke 5:5; 8:24; John 11:28; 13:13). "They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master,) where dwellest thou?" (John 1:38.) The Apostle Paul, after the ascension of Jesus, called the Lord the "Master in heaven" (Eph. 6:9; Col. 4:1). 

Master in Heaven. See Master.

Mediator. A mediator is a person who serves as a go-between or middleman between two parties. Moses was the mediator of the old covenant and Jesus of the new. "Moses... was ordained by the hand of angels to be a mediator of this first covenant, (the law.) Now this mediator was not a mediator of the new covenant .... who is Christ .... Christ is the mediator of life." (JST, Gal. 3:19-20.) 

The Apostle Paul taught the New Testament Saints that "there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus" (1 Tim. 2:5). We read that Jesus is "the way" unto the Father. "No man cometh unto the Father, but by me," declared the Savior (John 14:6). 

It is through the Lord that "we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father" (Eph. 2:18). Jesus' role as the Mediator leads directly to the salvation of all those who come unto him. Paul explained to the Hebrews that "for this cause he is the mediator of the new covenant, that... they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance" (JST, Heb. 9:15). Just men are made perfect "through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood" (D&C 76:69). 

Mediator of the New Covenant. See Mediator.

Merciful. God's mercy is a constant theme throughout the scriptures. Many have testified that "his mercy endureth for ever" (1 Chr. 16:34, 41; 2 5:13; 7:3, 6; Ezra 3:11; Chr. Ps.118:1-4) and that he is "merciful and gracious" (D&C 109:53; Ex. 34:6; Ps. 103:8; Joel 2:13; Jonah 4:2). The Psalmist exulted, "The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy" (Ps. 103:8) "He is ever merciful" (Ps. 37:26). Nehemiah proclaimed, "Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful" (Neh. 9:17). Moses wrote, "The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, [is] longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin" (Ex. 34:6-7). And Alma, the American prophet, testified that "God is merciful unto all who believe on his name" (Alma 32:22). The Psalmist added that the Lord's mercy is manifest in all his doings (see Ps. 136). 

Messiah. The title Messiah is the English transliteration of the Hebrew word meshiach, which means "anointed one." The equivalent word in Greek is christos, or "Christ." John makes this connection in his Gospel, referring to "the Messias [Messiah], which is, being interpreted, the Christ" (John 1:41) and he tells us "that Messias cometh, which is called Christ" (John 4:25). The expressions Messiah, Christ, and Anointed One thus have identical meanings.

The scriptures take great pains to make certain we know who the Messiah is. Nephi identifies him as being the "Savior of the world" (1 Ne. 10:4), the "Redeemer of the world" (1 Ne. 10:5), and "the Lamb of God" (1 Ne. 12:18), all titles referring to Jesus Christ. Nephi testified to his people that Jesus was the "true Messiah, their Lord and their Redeemer" (1 Ne. 10:14), and that "the Son of God was the Messiah who should come" (1 Ne. 10:17). More specifically, Nephi identified the Messiah by prophesying, "His name shall be Jesus Christ, the Son of God" (2 Ne. 25:19). 

Jesus Christ himself testified of his messiahship. To Enoch he said, "I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven" (Moses 7:53). And Matthew testified that Jesus was ordered, "Tell us whether thou be the Christ [Messiah]," to which he responded, "Thou hast said" (Matt. 26:63-64). 

Every Israelite priest (Lev. 8:30; 10:7), high priest (Ex. 30:30), and king (1 Kgs. 1:34) was a messiah, meaning each was anointed with the holy anointing oil. As such, they were figures or types for Jesus, the Messiah. (See also part l: Anointing; Cyrus; Olive Oil.)

Messiah the Prince. Jesus is "Messiah the Prince" (Dan. 9:25), a title which denotes his royal lineage, his regal status, and his divine sonship. Since the words Messiah, Christ, and Anointed One have identical meanings, this deific title could also be written "the Anointed Prince."

Mighty God. Jesus Christ is the "mighty God" (Isa. 9:6), the "Mighty One of Israel" (1 Ne. 22:12), and the "mighty One of Jacob" (Isa. 49:26), titles which express his omnipotence and greatness. The scriptures describe the mightiness of Deity by saying he is "mighty in deed and word" (Luke 24:19) and "mighty in work" (Jer. 32:19; 10:6). All of his doings are "mighty works" (Matt. 11:20; 13:54) or "mighty works of God" (D&C 88:108-9). God has "mighty power" (Eph. 1:19). He is "mighty to save" (Isa. 63:1), for the "spirit of... might" (Isa. 11:2) is with him. Of all the souls who have resided upon this planet, the Lord is the "most mighty" (Ps. 45:3). Even John the Baptist, of whom it is said that "among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet" (Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 275), declared that Jesus is "mightier than I" (Matt. 3:11). Mighty One of Israel. See Mighty God. Mighty One of Jacob. See Mighty God.

Minister. During the days of the Mosaic tabernacle and of Solomon's temple, every high priest acted unto the people as a minister "ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices" (Heb. 8:3). Jesus also served as "a minister of the sanctuary," but his was "a more excellent ministry" (Heb. 8:2, 6), with a gift and sacrificial offering consisting of his own life (Rom. 6:23). As Jesus himself said, "The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many" (Matt. 20:28). 

Most High. "Most High" (D&C 59:10) is an abbreviated form of "Most High God," a phrase which signifies the supreme eminence of God. (See also Most High God.)

Most High God. The title Most High God, ascribed to both the Father and the Son (Mark 5:7; D&C 59:10), is a superlative description which expresses their matchless exaltation. God is at the greatest height of all gods. His position is lofty, elevated, and towering above all else - he is Lord of all. As Most High God he is King of kings, God of gods, and Lord of lords. "Hosanna to the Lord, the most high God," exulted Nephi, "for he is God over all the earth, yea, even above all" (1 Ne. 11:6). 

Nazarene. The messianic prophecy "He shall be called a Nazarene" (Matt. 2:23) has reference to Jesus Christ. The Lord, who lived in the city of Nazareth for almost thirty years of his life, said of himself, "I am Jesus of Nazareth" (Acts 22:8). Others often referred to the Savior as "Jesus of Nazareth" (Acts 2:22; 6:14; 26:9). 

Only Begotten. The title "Only Begotten" (Moses 6:57) is an apocopated and abbreviated form of the longer title "the Only Begotten of the Father" (D&C 93:11). (See also Only Begotten of the Father. )

Only Begotten of the Father. Jesus is referred to as the "Only Begotten of the Father" (D&C 93:11) and the "Only Begotten Son of the Father" (D&C 76:35), two expressions which describe his familial relationship with God the Father.

Only Begotten Son. See Only Begotten of the Father.

Passover. The ancient Passover was enacted annually during the Jewish month of Abib, commemorating the occasion when the destroying angel "passed over" the obedient children of Israel. In many ways this Passover of the Old Testament was a type for the Great Passover of the New Testament, which was fulfilled in Jesus Christ. Paul referred to Jesus as "Christ our passover" (1 Cor. 5:7) because, as the Passover Lamb, Jesus fulfilled the role of the ancient Passover lamb. Consider the parallels:

1) The ancient Passover gave temporal deliverance to those who smeared the lamb's blood on their doorposts (Ex. 12:7, 12, 13). The new Passover gives spiritual deliverance to those who accept the blood of Jesus Christ (Matt. 1:21; Luke 4: 18).

2) The ancient lamb was "without blemish" (Ex. 12:5; Lev. 22:21). Jesus Christ was without blemish (1 Pet. 1:19). 

3) No bone of the Passover lamb was to be broken in the performance of the sacrifice (Ex. 12:46). No bone of the Lord was broken during the crucifixion (John 19:33, 36). 

4) The Passover lamb was to be slain by the "whole assembly" (Ex. 12:6). Jesus, the New Testament fulfillment of the Passover lamb, was slain by a whole nation (Luke 23:1, 10, 13, 23, 35). 

5) The Israelites were told to "eat the flesh" of the Passover lamb (Ex. 12:8; 2 30:18). The sacramental bread is the emblem of the flesh of Jesus Christ (Matt. 26:26-28). (See also part 1: Passover.)

Physician. Jesus was a "physician" (Luke 4:23; Matt. 9: 12) during his mortal life in that he was often found "healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases" (Mosiah 3:5). In short, he was the quintessential Physician to those with physical deformities and illnesses.

However, in a far more important sense, Jesus was, is, and always will be the divine Physician to those who are spiritually sick-those people whose ears cannot hear the whisperings of the Holy Ghost, whose eyes cannot perceive the things of God, whose spiritual senses need repair, and whose souls require the healing powers that only Jesus, through his atonement, can provide. Christ's role as a spiritual physician has been summarized by Moroni: "Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick" (Moro. 8:8). (See also part 1: Physician.)

Plant of Renown. The Lord is known as the "seed of David" (2 Tim. 2:8), the "rod out of the stem of Jesse" (Isa. 11:1), the "BRANCH" (Zech. 3:8), the "vine" (John 15:1), and the "stem" (D&C 113:1-2), all designations that describe him as the "plant of renown" (Ezek. 34:29) and "a tender plant" (Isa. 53:2; Mosiah 14:2). A plant is a perfect figure of Christ. It is set firmly in the ground. It produces flowers, which are pleasant to look upon, sweet smelling, and generally enjoyable to mankind. Most plants replace deadly carbon monoxide with lifesaving oxygen. And many plants produce fruit which typically is delicate, delicious, and sweet, which provides nutrition, and which gives vitality and physical strength to its partakers. Jehovah, as the "plant of renown," gives fruit to Israel, so that "they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land" (Ezek. 34:29). (See also part 1: Plant.)

Potentate. All earthly kings, potentates, and princes have temporary and limited power and authority, which is both localized and limited to the extent of their kingdom. But there is one King who holds unlimited power, whose boundaries know no limits, and whose authority is from everlasting to everlasting; this is Jesus Christ, who is "the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords" (1 Tim. 6:15). 

Power of God. Jesus Christ is "the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things" (D&C 88:13; see also Alma 19:17). 

Priest. Both the Levitical and Nephite priests offered all manner of sacrifices before God, representing each member of the Israelite community. The services of these authorized functionaries were essential to the salvation of the community of believers. Further, the ordinances and sacrifices performed by the priests pointed to Christ, and in many ways were types and similitudes of his ministry.

Jesus, as the "priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek" (Ps. 110:4; Heb. 7:17), also offered a "great and last sacrifice" (Alma 34:10) on behalf of all people. His sacrifice consisted of "the sacrifice of himself' (Heb. 9:26). (See also part 1: Priest,)

Prophet. An important and well-known messianic prophecy was revealed to the prophet Moses. The Lord told him, "I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee" (Deut. 18:18; see also 18:15-18). Although this prediction is of a dual or manifold nature, its principal fulfillment was satisfied with Jesus Christ, who was the chief prophet of all time. During his mortal ministry, both his disciples and his enemies recognized him as a prophet. Matthew recorded that the enemies of the Lord "took him for a prophet" (Matt. 21:46), and his followers, upon seeing his marvelous works and miracles, exclaimed, "This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world" (John 6:14). 

Jesus referred to himself as a prophet when he stated, prophet is not without honour, but in his own country" (Mark 6:4). Jesus had a testimony and an assurance that he was the Messiah and the Savior of the world, the same testimony that all true prophets have concerning him (Rev. 19:10). Of this he constantly bore witness.

Furthermore, as a prophet, Jesus personally uttered many prophecies which were fulfilled during his lifetime. For instance:

ProphecyFulfillment

His betrayal (Matt. 20:18) (Matt. 26:14-16, 45-49)

Being forsaken by his disciples (John 16:32) (Matt. 26:56)

Peter's denial (John 13:38) (Luke 22:60-62)

Jesus' resurrection (John 2:19-21) (Luke 24:5-6)

Jesus' ascension (John 20:17) (Acts 1:9-10)

Every true prophet of God, regardless of what historical age in which he lives, is a type for the greatest of the prophets, who is Jesus. (See also part 1: Prophet.)

Prophet of Nazareth. See Prophet. 

Propitiation. Jesus Christ is the "propitiation for our sins" (1 Jn. 2:2; 4:10). It is he "whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God" (Rom. 3:25). It is he who propitiates or appeases justice for the purpose of reuniting God and man.

Purifier. Like a master goldsmith who separates the dross from the gold, thus purifying the precious metal, the Lord sits "as a refiner and purifier" (Mal. 3:3) of souls. Specifically, God purifies those found "obeying the truth" (1 Pet. 1:22) and those found "yielding their hearts unto God" (Hel. 3:35). Purification occurs through the agency of faith (Acts 15:9) and by the "blood of Christ" (Heb. 9:13-14). Paul testified that Christ "gave him-self for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people" (Titus 2:14). (See also Refiner; part 1: Gold; Dross; Furnace.)

Rabbi. During his mortal ministry, Jesus was called Rabbi, an honorific Hebrew title of great respect meaning "my master." Jesus, by virtue of his lordship, is rightly the only one who can be called Master. To the multitude he said, "But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren" (Matt. 23:8; see also John 1:38). 

Rabboni. The title Rabboni, the Aramaic equivalent of the Hebrew title Rabbi, has the basic meaning of "my master." This title of great respect is found only once in the New Testament in John 20:16. In addition, the word Lord in Mark 10:51 is translated incorrectly and should also be Rabboni.

Redeemer. The Hebrew word for redeemer, goel, is defined as one who "ransoms," "redeems," or "revenges." In the Hebrew scriptures, any man can act as a goel for a kinsman (Lev. 25:25; Num. 5:8; 35:12; Ruth 2:20). However, the Goel who acts on behalf of the entire nation of Israel is the God of the Old Testament, who is called Jehovah. He is the Redeemer (Isa. 41:14; 43:14; 44:6, 24), and his people are the geulim, or the "redeemed ones" (Isa. 35:9; 51:10; 62:12). "By me redemption cometh," said the Lord to those in the New World (3 Ne. 9:17). Without a Redeemer, there could be no redemption, resurrection, or exaltation (Alma 12:25; 21:9; Hel. 5:10-11; D&C 29:42-45; Alma 9:27). (See also part 1: Boaz.)

Redeemer of Israel. See Redeemer of the World.

Redeemer of the World. The Son of God has been called the Redeemer (Job 19:25) and "the Redeemer of Israel" (1 Ne. 21:7). But he is much more than that-he is "the Redeemer of the world" ( 1 Ne. 1 1:27). Concerning his calling as Redeemer of the entire world, Jesus declared, "Behold, I have come unto the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin" (3 Ne. 9:21). 

Refiner. At the time of the Second Coming the Lord will "sit as a refiner and purifier of silver" (Mal. 3:3) and will "purify the sons of Levi" as a goldsmith purifies gold. In other words, the Lord will refine the souls of the Levites, separating the dross from the precious metal. In a general sense, Jesus is the Refiner of the heart of every righteous soul, removing the sinful nature of man from the godly nature that is inherent within him. (See also part 1: Gold; Dross; Furnace.)

Resurrection. Jesus testified, "I am the resurrection" (John 11:25). Note that he did not declare, "I was resurrected," identifying resurrection as his own personal condition, nor did he state, "I raise the dead," meaning that he restores the spirit to the body in a temporary state of mortality, as he did with Lazarus. Rather, his statement teaches the important fact that his atonement will enable all who have ever lived to be resurrected (Alma 11:41-42; 1 Cor. 15:21-22). Jehovah summarized his mission as the Resurrection when he taught, "I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction" (Hosea 13:14). 

Reverend. Reverend means worthy to be revered, worthy of great honor. Regarding the Lord, David composed a psalm which stated, "Holy and reverend is his name" (Ps. 111:9). A literal translation from the Hebrew may be rendered, "His name is to be had in reverence and holiness."

Righteous. The Apostle John called his Master "Jesus Christ the righteous" (1 Jn. 2:1), a perfect designation for the only sinless one who has ever dwelled upon the earth. Before John's ministry, "Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh, and his soul rejoiced, saying: The Righteous is lifted up, and the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world" (Moses 7:47). Other prophets have called Christ the "righteous servant" (Isa. 53:11) and the "righteous judge" (2 Tim. 4:8; see also Moses 6:57). 

Everything about Jesus is righteous-his judgments (Hel. 14:29), his purposes (D&C 17:9), his paths (2 Ne. 9:41), and his character (1 Pet. 2:22-23). 

Righteous Judge. Only Deity can be a wholly righteous judge, because certain godly qualifications are essential. Jesus is the "righteous Judge" (Moses 6:57; 2 Tim. 4:8; Acts 17:31) because:

1) He has experienced mortal life and temptation as we have (Heb. 2:14-18; Alma 7:11-13) therefore he is able to show empathy.

2) He has perfect knowledge and intelligence (D&C 38:1-2). One cannot judge righteously if he does not know all of the circumstances.

3) The "Father... hath given him authority to execute judgment... because he is the Son of man" (John 5:26-27), that is, the Son of Man of Holiness. (See also Son of Man.)

Righteousness. Both the Father and the Son are called Righteousness. The Son is designated "THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS" by the prophet Jeremiah (Jer. 23:6), and Nephi refers to him as "the Son of righteousness" (2 Ne. 26:9), demonstrating that he is the Son of one called Righteousness. God has the name Righteousness because every trait, characteristic, and feature which belong to him pertains to justice, virtue, and purity.

Righteous Servant. See Servant.

Rock. Jesus Christ, who was known in Old Testament times as Jehovah, was given the figurative title of the Rock by many of the prophetic writers. In a simple statement, Moses wrote, "He is the Rock" (Deut. 32:4). The Psalmist spoke of the "Lord my rock" (Ps. 28:1; see also 42:9; 78:35) and recorded that "he only is my rock" (Ps. 62:2). Paul explained to the Corinthian Saints that Moses and the Israelites "did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ" (1 Cor. 10:1-4). 

These metaphorical expressions are intended to demonstrate that the Lord has many of the same characteristics as a rock. A rock is often thought to be immovable, steadfast, and sure. It serves as a foundation for building structures, is towering and monumental, and is unchangeable-the same throughout the ages.

David repeatedly emphasized the idea that Jehovah is a rock. He wrote that the Lord was "my rock and my fortress" (Ps. 31:3) he wrote, "He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shall not be greatly moved" (Ps. 62:2). Those who fortify themselves with the Rock will not be "greatly moved" by the landslides of evil or the winds of false doctrines. (See also Stone; part 1: Rock; Stone.)

Rock Of Heaven. The Lord declared to Enoch. "I am Messiah.the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven, which is broad as eternity" (Moses 7:53-55). 

Rock of Israel. Interestingly, in the "rock in Horeb" pericope recorded by Moses, three symbols of Christ- the rock, the rod, and the water-come together to bless the Israelites. With each element, the figurative and the actual both play their part in saving thirsty Israel (Ex. 17:1-7; Num. 20:1-13). Thus, David, "the sweet psalmist of Israel," refers to "the God of Israel" as being the "Rock of Israel" (2 Sam. 23: 1-3). (See also Rock.)

Root of David. To John, the Lord said, "I am the root and the offspring of David" (Rev. 22:16), referring to his lineal descent through King David. In more simple terms, Jesus is called the "son of David" (Matt. 1:1), and King David is referred to as "his father David" (Luke 1:32). 

However, Jesus as the Root may have a deeper meaning. An Old Testament passage explains of Jesus Christ, "He shall grow up... as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground" (Isa. 53:2; Mosiah 14:2). Botanists explain that the life of any plant is found in the root-first, because water and nutrients come through the roots, and secondly, because the trunk, branches, leaves, and fruit all spring from and exist because of the roots. In short, the entire plant depends upon the roots for its life. Thus, Jesus is the Root, and every Saint is a "branch" which is dependent upon Christ for both spiritual and physical existence (John 15:1-7). (See also part 1: Root.)

Ruler. There are many ways in which the Lord is described as Ruler (see Micah 5:2). He is the Potentate, Prince, Sceptre, Rod and Staff, Captain, Commander, Deliverer, Governor, Guide, King, Lawgiver, and Master. As the Ruler, Jesus Christ will "reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end" (Luke 1:33). "He ruleth high in the heavens," taught Nephi (1 1 Ne. 17:39), both "in the heavens above and in the earth beneath" (2 Ne. 29:7). He is the "Lord, who ruleth over all flesh" (D&C 133:61). 

To the Corinthians, Paul wrote, "Then cometh the end, when he [Jesus] shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power. For he must reign." (1 Cor. 15:24-25.)"I will be your ruler when I come," declared the Lord (D&C 41:4). (See also part 1: King.)

Salvation. Although the Greek name Jesus means "salvation," the noun salvation rarely appears as a title referring to Christ. Isaiah declared, "Behold, thy salvation [speaking of the Lord] cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him" (Isa. 62:11). Luke records, "And Jesus said unto [Zacchaeus], This day is salvation come to this house .... For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost" (Luke 19:9-10). And Nephi referred to Jesus as "the Lamb, and my rock and my salvation" (1 Ne. 13:36; also see 1 Ne. 15:15). 

Jesus as Salvation is an appropriate title, since this word is synonymous with the words exaltation and eternal life.

Sanctuary. The Lord explained to Ezekiel that to the dispersed of Israel "will I be... as a little sanctuary in the countries where they shall come" (Ezek. 11:16). He was reassuring them that even in far-flung areas, the Saints of God are able to find peace and refuge in Christ in a manner similar to those who discover peace at the holy temple of God. The Psalmist spoke of this when he recorded, "Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations" (Ps. 90:1) "I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust" (Ps. 91:2) and "Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked. Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation" (Ps. 91:8-9). 

According to the prophet Isaiah, the Lord is as a "sanctuary" unto the righteous, and "a stone of stumbling and... a rock of offence" unto the wicked (Isa. 8:14). Thus, to the wicked, Christ becomes offensive, like a huge stone blocking the roadway. To the righteous, he remains a source of refuge and protection. (See also part 1: Temple; Tabernacle.)

Savior. Jesus is the Savior (1 Ne. 10:4; D&C 20:1; Moses 1:6). "Beside him there is no Savior" (D&C 76:1). He has the exclusive assignment to save, or to bring salvation to as many souls as will accept him. "I came... to save the world" (John 12:47), Christ testified. Specifically, it is sinners who need a Savior; thus, he "came into the world to save sinners" (1 Tim. 1: 15). He will not save people in their sins, but he "shall save his people from their sins" (Matt. 1:21). Recorded in Alma is the explanation that he has power "to save every man that believeth on his name and bringeth forth fruit meet for repentance" (Alma 12:15). Jesus saves men from death, hell, and the grave.

Savior Jesus Christ. Of all the fraudulent men in all the ages of the world who have claimed to be the saviors of mankind, who is the true Savior of the world? As all the holy prophets have testified, the sole and only Savior is the "Savior Jesus Christ" (3 Ne. 5:20; 2 Tim. 1:10). 

Savior of the World. John, who was the "Beloved," the "Revelator," and an Apostle of the Lord, gave this apostolic witness of the Lord: "We have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world" (1 Jn. 4:14; see also 1 Ne. 13:40). 

Servant. Jesus is the "servant" (Isa. 42:1; Matt. 12:18), or "righteous servant" (Isa. 53:11) in that he serves the Father (Ps. 40:8; John 8:29) and serves all mankind (Matt. 20:26-28). Paul said of the mortal Lord that he "took upon him the form of a servant" (Philip. 2:7). 

Shepherd. The scriptures refer to Jesus Christ as the "Shepherd of Israel" (Ps. 80:1), the "good shepherd" (John 10:11), the "great shepherd" (Heb. 13:20), and the "chief Shepherd" (1 Pet. 5:4). All these designations distinguish Christ from common or typical shepherds. Jesus is an extraordinary shepherd; he is a shepherd to the souls of men (Mark 6:34; Luke 12:32). 

Many similarities exist between the Good Shepherd and the ordinary herdsman. Both have the responsibility of protecting their sheep from wild beasts and robbers. Both are constantly on the lookout for pasture and sufficient water. Both care for sick sheep and carry tired lambs (Gen. 33:13; Isa. 40:11; Luke 15:4-7). Both know their own sheep, and the sheep recognize the voice of their master.

Dissimilarities also exist between them, since some shepherds are unfaithful and wicked:

Good ShepherdUnfaithful Shepherd

1. Giveth his life John 10:11) 1. Flees in danger (John 10:12) 

2. Feeds his flock (Isa. 40:11) 2. Feeds himself (Ezek. 34:8; Zech. 11:16) 

3.Gathers the flock (Isa. 40:11 )3. Divides the sheep (Ezek. 34:8; Zech. 11:16; Jer. 23:1) 

4. Is tender (Isa. 40:11) 4. Is cruel (Ezek. 34:8; Zech. 11:14-17) 

Since sheepherding was a common occupation in the biblical world, many of the prophets were literal shepherds. Abel was a "keeper of sheep" (Gen. 4:2), as were Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Amos, Job, David, and Zechariah. As shepherds of lambs, and also shepherds of men, these prophets were types of the Great Shepherd. (See also part 1: Sheep; Shepherd.)

Shield. Magen, the Hebrew word for shield, is a derivative from the verb ganen, which means "to defend" or "to protect." Thus, a shield is an instrument that protects man from the arrows, spears, or swords of the enemy. The Lord is a shield by protecting man from both physical and spiritual harm. Thus, Jehovah told Abraham, "Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield" (Gen. 15:1), and to his latter-day disciples he promised, "I will be their shield" (D&C 35:14). "The Lord is my strength and my shield," (Ps. 28:7), wrote the Psalmist. "He is a shield unto them that put their trust in him" (Prov. 30:5). (See also part 1: Armor; Shield. )

King David sang a song in which he personified God as a protector (2 Sam. 22:2-4; see also D&C 3:8). 

The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;

The God of my rock; in him I will trust:

he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation,

my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour;

thou savest me from violence.

.................

I [will] be saved from mine enemies.

Shiloh. An ancient prophecy in Genesis relates that "the sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come" (Gen. 49:10), or as the Joseph Smith Translation renders it, "Messiah who is called Shilo" (JST, Gen. 50:24). The Hebrew Shiloh means "he whose right it is," or "that which belongs to him." Thus, the power and authority to rule and to reign belong to Shiloh, who is Jesus. Ezekiel was probably referring to this ancient prophecy when he stated, "Until he come whose right it is; and I will give it [the diadem and the crown] him" (Ezek. 21:26-27). 

Son. Authority and power accompany the name Son, a shortened form of "Son of God" or "Son of Man." Adam was told, "Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore" (Moses 5:8). (See also Son of Man.)

Son Ahman. In the pure language of Adam, God is called Ahman, Jesus is called Son Ahman, and men are referred to as Sons Ahman (see Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, 2:342). The definitions of these terms is unknown. However, the title Son Ahman is used twice in the Doctrine and Covenants: "your Redeemer, even the Son Ahman" (D&C 78:20) and "Son Ahman; or, in other words, Alphus; or, in other words, Omegus; even Jesus Christ your Lord" (D&C 95:17). 

Son of Abraham. The Lord is the "son of Abraham" (Matt. 1:1), meaning that he descended through the loins of this righteous and chosen patriarch. (See also part 1: Abraham.)

Son of David. Mary, the literal mother of Jesus, and Joseph, his stepfather, were both of the house of David (Matt. 1:1-17: Luke 1:26-38; 2:4). Jesus was referred to as the "Son of David" (Matt. 1:1; 9:27) several times during his mortal ministry, meaning that he was born through the lineage of King David, or he was "of the seed of David" (2 Tim. 2:8). (See also part 1: David.)

Son of God. Jesus was not the "son of Joseph" (Luke 3:23; John 1:45), as some had supposed. Unlike those born of a mortal father, he was begotten by a Heavenly Being, even God the Father. The scriptures testify that "the Son of God was the Messiah" ( 1 Ne. 10:17) and that "Jesus Christ [is] the Son of God" (2 Ne. 25:19). 

Son of Joseph. During his mortal ministry, Jesus Christ was called the "son of Joseph" (Luke 3:23; John 1:45) by many who did not fully understand his divine sonship. In truth, however, Jesus was the Son of God. (See Son of God; part 1: Joseph.)

Son of Man. Although the Lord is referred to as Son of Man in the New Testament scriptures, this divine name was first known to Adam. Recorded in the book of Moses is the explanation that "in the language of Adam" the Father is called "Man of Holiness .... and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ" (Moses 6:57). Thus Jesus is the Son of Man, a shortened form of Son of Man of Holiness.

Son of Mary. Jesus was the "son of Mary" (Mark 6:3; Matt. 1:18-25; Mosiah 3:8), a title which reverenced and gave honor to his saintly mother. Mary was "the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh" (1 Ne. 11:18), recorded Nephi.

Son of Righteousness. God the Father is called Righteousness, a term that describes his piousness, holiness, and rectitude. Most appropriately, Jesus Christ, who possesses all of the attributes of his Father, is referred to as "the Son of Righteousness" (3 Ne. 25:2; 2 Ne. 26:9). 

Son of the Blessed. See Blessed.

Son of the Eternal Father. Similar to all mortal beings, Jesus was born of a mortal mother, but unlike all humans, he was begotten by an Infinite Being. He is "the Son of the Eternal Father" (1 Ne. 11:21). (See also Only Begotten Son.)

Son of the Everlasting God. During the time that Nephi "was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord" to an "exceedingly high mountain," an angel of the Lord identified Jesus Christ as being "the Son of the Eternal Father" (1 Ne. 11:1, 21). A short time later, Nephi spoke of the Lord as "the Son of the everlasting God" (1 Ne. 11:32). 

Son of the Highest. Luke recorded in his testimony that the newborn Jesus was "the Son of the Highest" (Luke 1:32), an expression which describes his relationship with his exalted Father.

Son of the Living God. To those of this dispensation the Lord declared, "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God" (D&C 14:9; 42:1; 55:2). That is to say, his divine Father is not a god of stone, wood, or iron. Neither is he an ephemeral being, made of the rays of the sun or the wisps of the air. Rather, the "living God" is a being who is alive, intelligent, having a body composed of flesh and bones (D&C 130:22) and Jesus is his Son.

Son of the Most High God. The title "Son of the most high God" (1 Ne. 11:6) is a simple but beautiful expression which describes the Lord's relationship with God the Father. The Father is the Most High God, and Jesus is his Son.

Spirit of Truth. Revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith was the divine declaration of Jesus, "I am the Spirit of truth" (D&C 93:26). Also, Jesus is "the light and the Redeemer of the world; the Spirit of truth" (D&C 93:9). Associated with these statements are the declarations of the Lord: "My voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound" (D&C 88:66) and "The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life" (John 6:63). 

Star. In one brief season of the history of the earth, one prominent "new star" appeared in the heavens, conspicuous and noticeable to those living upon two continents-those dwelling in ancient Palestine and those living in the land of Bountiful (Matt. 2:2, 7, 9-10; 3 Ne. 1:21). This distant sun was so singular and unique as to cause the Lamanite prophet Samuel to declare to the Nephites that this "new star" was "such an one as ye never have beheld" (Hel. 14:5). This star was a "sign" (Hel. 14:5-6) of the birth of the Lord. It was a symbol of Jesus, who is called the "star out of Jacob" (Num. 24:17), and "the bright and morning star" (Rev. 22:16). 

Jesus is the star in the sense that, like other stars, he lends to the spiritual night beauty, wonderment, and light. And as stars exhibit the greatness of God's power and glory (Ps. 8:3; Isa. 40:26), Jesus stands preeminent in showing to the world the glory of the Father. (See also Sun of Righteousness; part 1: Star; Sun.)

Stem of Jesse. The Prophet Joseph Smith received this important revelation: "Who is the Stem of Jesse spoken of in the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th verses of the 11th chapter of Isaiah? Verily thus saith the Lord: It is Christ." (D&C 113:1-2.) Jesus is the Stem of Jesse, meaning that he is a descendant through the lines of Jesse, father of David. (See also part 1: Stem of Jesse.)

Stone. The scriptures often represent Jesus as being the "stone" (Jacob 4:15), the "stone of Israel" (D&C 50:44; Gen. 49:24), or the "chief corner stone" (Eph. 2:20), expressions which describe an important aspect of Christ's mission. In what ways is Jesus Christ like a stone? Jacob explained that the stone gives "safe foundation" to the building, and that Jesus is the "stone [which] shall become the great, and the last, and the only sure foundation" (Jacob 4:15-16). Similarly, Paul likened Jesus unto the "chief corner stone" of the structure. Although Christ and his Apostles are all foundation stones (Eph. 2:20), the cornerstone is the principal and most fundamental part of the building. Jesus is "a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation" (Isa. 28: 16).

Peter, while quoting and paraphrasing Isaiah, explained that Jesus is a stone to both the righteous and the wicked. To the righteous he is "a chief corner stone, elect, precious," but to the wicked he is "a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence" ( 1 

 1 Pet. 2:6-8). (See also Rock; part 1: Rock; Stone.)

Stone of Israel. See Stone.

Strength of Israel. Jehovah is "the Strength of Israel" (1 Sam. 15:29), a title which demonstrates God's role as protector of Israel and as the power behind all of Israel's successes. Nephi praised God by exclaiming, "My God shall be my strength" (1 Ne. 21:5) "The Lord Jehovah is my strength" (2 Ne. 22:2). The phrase "The Lord is my strength," or its equivalent, is found throughout the Old Testament (Ex. 15:2; Ps. 18:1-2). 

Strong Lord. The Psalmist inquired, "O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee?" (Ps. 89:8.) Although there is no recorded answer to this question, the answer is understood by all: "There is none like unto the Lord" (Ex. 8:10). He alone is "the mighty God" (Isa. 9:6), "the Strength of Israel" (1 Sam. 15:29), "the Mighty One of Israel" (1 Ne. 22:12). 

Sun of Righteousness. In the scriptures, stars are commonly used symbolically to denote men. But the star nearest to the earth, known as the sun, represents the Son of God. Many of the prophets have compared the Son of God to this giant celestial orb. Malachi referred to the Lord as "the Sun of righteousness" (Mal. 4:2). Similarly, the Psalmist stated, "For the Lord God is a sun and shield" (Ps. 84:11). Matthew and John employed such similes when, speaking of Jesus, they wrote that "his face did shine as the sun" (Matt. 17:2), and that "his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength" (Rev. 1:16). Both the Apostle Paul and the Prophet Joseph Smith, after seeing the resurrected, glorified Lord, described his appearance as being "above the brightness of the sun" (Acts 26:13; JS 1:16). Lehi saw Jesus "descending out of the midst of heaven, and he beheld that his luster was above that of the sun at noonday" (1 Ne. 1:9). 

Furthermore, Jesus is called the Star, the Dayspring (meaning "the dawn"), and the Light. A modern revelation says of Christ, "He is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made" (D&C 88:7). Finally, when John the Revelator viewed the celestial city, he recorded that "the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof" (Rev. 21:23). 

In what way is Jesus like the sun?

-As far as this earth is concerned, there are many stars (men), but only one sun (Jesus Christ).

-The planets and the moons and other celestial orbs derive their light from the sun.

-The sun is considered the head of all the heavens.

-Men cannot look directly at the sun, as they will become blind.

-The sun shines upon all, both upon the righteous and the unrighteous.

-The sun always shines; its motions are both regular and predictable.

-The sun generates life.

-The sun dispels darkness; it exposes what the night hides.

-The sun rises in the east, as Jesus will in his second coming.

-The sun burns as well as builds, just as Jesus will at his second coming. (See also Star; part 1: Star; Sun.) 

Supreme Being. The title "Supreme Being," found twice in holy scripture (D&C 107:4; Alma 11:22), describes the supremacy and exaltation of God. 

Supreme Creator. Jesus Christ is "the creator of Israel" (Isa. 43:15), "the great Creator" (2 Ne. 9:5), the "Maker" (D&C 134:6), and the "Supreme Creator" (Alma 30:44). Alma explained to the anti-Christ Korihor, "The scriptures are laid before thee, yea, and all things denote there is a God: yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator" (Alma 30:44). 

Surety. A surety is someone who makes sure, or gives assurance against loss, damage, or default. He makes himself responsible for another person, or stands as a guarantor of another's obligations. In the Bible, Judah became a surety to his father on behalf of his younger brother Benjamin. "I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever" (Gen. 43:9; see also Gen. 44:32). Also, Job appealed unto God to be his surety (Job 17:3) and in the New Testament, Paul agreed to be a surety to Philemon on behalf of Onesimus (Philem. 1:18, 19). 

Since the idea of one person becoming a surety for another during the biblical period was a common event, it was a natural thing for the Apostle Paul to refer to Jesus Christ as a surety. To the Hebrews he wrote, "By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament" (Heb. 7:22). 

Testator. In a legal sense, a testator is one who, having goods to bestow upon friends, relatives, or legal heirs, prepares a will and testament. The testator is often one anticipating death. He has full authority and power to bequeath his valuables according to his desires. To legitimize his testament, witnesses are present, that they may later testify as to the surety of the event. Testaments are always sealed with the signature of the testator. Furthermore, a testator has the authority to disannul any will created previously under his direction.

In a scriptural sense, Jesus is a testator, and the will that he left is the "new testament" or "new covenant." In establishing his new covenant, Christ disannuled Moses' old testament or covenant (Heb. 9:15-17). Several witnesses testify concerning the validity of Jesus' testament: God the Father, the Holy Ghost (John 15:26), the Twelve Apostles, and the scriptures. Jesus made certain that his new covenant would be published to the world (Matt. 28:19-20). 

The Apostle Paul summed up Christ's role as testator in a few short sentences: "And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. For where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the testator. For a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator liveth." (Heb. 9:15-17.) 

Of course a testator must have heirs, or receivers of the gifts. Paul explained that "we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:16-17; Gal. 4:7). 

True. Jesus is called "True" (Rev. 19:11; 3:7), an adjective which describes one aspect of his character. Everything concerning the Lord is true. Perfect truth resides with him. He has been described as "him that is true" (1 Jn. 5:20; see also Rev. 3:7; 6:10). "Jesus Christ is just and true" (D&C 20:30). He is the "true God" (1 Jn. 5:20), the true witness (John 8:14-18), "the true Light" (John 1:9; 1 Jn. 2:8; D&C 88:50), "the true bread" (John 6:32), "the true vine" (John 15:1), and "the true Messiah" (1 Ne. 10:14). Several have testified, "Master, we know that thou art true" (Matt. 22:16). 

True and Living God. See True; Living God. True Shepherd. See Shepherd. True Vine. See Vine.

Truth. Jesus said of himself, "I am... the truth" (John 14:6), "I am... the truth of the world," (Ether 4:12), and "I am the Spirit of truth" (D&C 93:26). Others referred to him as the "God of truth" (Deut. 32:4) and the "Lord God of truth" (Ps. 31:5). "He is full of... truth" (D&C 93:11) indeed "he received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth" (D&C 93:26). John recorded that Christ was born into the world to "bear witness unto the truth" (John 18:37). 

Everything concerning Christ is truth. His "law is the truth" (Ps. 119:142), his "works are truth" (Dan. 4:37), his "word is truth" (John 17:17), his "commandments are truth" (Ps. 119:151), and his scriptures are truth (D&C 17:6). He is the perfect embodiment and the quintessential representation of truth. All truth centers in him and emanates from him.

Vine. Jesus taught his followers, "I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman .... Ye are the branches." (John 15:1, 5.) Deep and profound meanings are found in these simple words. A husbandman is one who plants, plows, and cultivates the plants. This is the role of the Father. Jesus, who is the vine, supplies the branches (the Saints) with water and nutrients (with life). They "receive the strength and nourishment from the true vine," states Nephi (1 1 Ne. 15:15; see also Alma 16:17). Furthermore, "the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine" (John 15:4). Those who do not abide in the vine and produce fruit are cut off by the husbandman and are "cast forth as a branch, and [are] withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned" (John 15:6). But those who "abide in the vine .... the same bringeth forth much fruit" (John 15:4-5). The focal passage of this section is found in verse 5: "For without me ye can do nothing." Without Christ, there would be no link to the Father. Without Christ, there would be neither spiritual nor physical life. Without Christ, man would be unable to bear fruit. (See also part 1: Fruit; Vine; Vineyard; Tree of Life.)

Wall of Fire. In miraculous ways, God often employs the use of fire to protect his servants from danger (2 Kgs. 1; Hel. 5:23-49). In such a manner, Jesus, in a future day, will protect the city of Jerusalem. "For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her" (Zech. 2:5). Elsewhere, we read, "For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire" (Deut. 4:24; Heb. 12:29). (See also part 1: Fire.)

Way. "Jesus saith ..., I am the way" (John 14:6). What is the way of the Lord?

1) His is the narrow way. "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it" (Matt. 7:14). 

2) His is the way to God (Matt. 11:27; John 6:44-45; Eph. 2:18). "I am the way...: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6). 

3) His is "the way of eternal life" (2 Ne. 10:23) and "the way of salvation" (Acts 16:17). "He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die" (John 11:25-27). 

4) His is the way to heaven (Heb. 9:8). 

5) His is the new way. Moses, for a period of time, was the "right way" (Jacob 7:7), but "in the gift of his Son hath God prepared a more excellent way" (Ether 12:11). Paul called him the "new and living way" (Heb. 10:20). 

6) His is the only way. King Benjamin testified: "There shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:17). (See also part 1: Highway.)

Wisdom of God. Jesus is the "wisdom of God" (1 Cor. 1:24) and "the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory: which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory" (1 Cor. 2:7-8). 

 Isaiah prophesied that the "spirit of wisdom" (Isa. 11:2) would be with the Lord. At a much later date, Luke recorded that as a child, Jesus "grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom" (Luke 2:40). Jesus' listeners, after hearing his teachings, were heard to exclaim, "Whence hath this man this wisdom?" (Matt. 13:54.) Paul testified that in God "the Father, and Christ... are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge" (Col. 2:2-3). 

So "great is his wisdom" (D&C 76:2) that his "wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil" (D&C 10:43). Even "the foolishness of God is wiser than men" (1 Cor. 1:25). 

Witness. Seven centuries before the birth of Christ, Isaiah had prophesied that Jesus would be "a witness to the people" (Isa. 55:4). During his mortal ministry, Jesus testified to Pilate: "To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth" (John 18:37). After the crucifixion of the Lord, the Revelator testified that Jesus had been "the faithful and true witness" (Rev. 3:14; see also Rev. 1:5). 

Wonderful. Speaking of the Messiah who was to be born of a virgin, Isaiah prophesied that "his name shall be called Wonderful" (Isa. 9:6). Jesus is Wonderful in that he demonstrates grace, mercy, and justice; and especially in that he gave his life for the sake of all humanity.

Word. The only biblical writer to refer to Jesus Christ as the Word was the Apostle John. He recorded, "And his name is called The Word of God" (Rev. 19:13) "and our hands have handled, of the Word of life" ( 1 Jn. 1:1) and "there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one" (1 Jn. 5:7). 

Jesus was the Word in the sense that he was the one from whom the revelations came. He was and always will be the Word to the prophets and Apostles of all ages. According to the Doctrine and Covenants, "He was the Word, even the messenger of salvation" (D&C 93:8). The Apostle John, in an inspired play on words, interchanged the terms word (meaning the words of the scriptures) and Word (meaning Jesus Christ). "In the beginning was the gospel preached through the Son. And the gospel was the word, and the word was with the Son, and the Son was with God, and the Son was of God .... And the same word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." (JST, John 1:1, 14.) 

Jesus Christ (the Word), gave the gospel message (the word) to all mankind, through the prophets. Furthermore, Joseph Smith recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants that the words of the scriptures are the voice of Jesus; and those who read these words have the promise. "Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words" (D&C 18:33-36). 

Word of God. Jesus Christ, when he returns to the earth in all his majesty and glory, will be "clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name is called The Word of God" (Rev. 19:13). 

Word of God's Power. Through the word of Jesus Christ all things were created. Several scriptural passages explain this principle.

-"I have created by the word of my power" (D&C 29:30). 

-"And by the power of his word man was created of the dust of the earth" (Morm. 9:17). 

-"By the power of his word man came upon the face of the earth, which earth was created by the power of his word" (Jacob 4:9). 

-"And the stars also were made even according to my word" (Moses 2:16). 

-"Spiritually were they created and made according to my word" (Moses 3:7; see also 2:5).

Thus, when we speak of the "word of [God's] power," which is a reference to Jesus Christ (Moses 1:32), we are speaking of the creative process of the Father and the Son. All things were created by the word of Jesus Christ. (See also Word.)

Yesterday, Today, and Forever. The prophets describe God as being "the same yesterday, today, and forever" (2 Ne. 27:23; 1 Ne. 10:18; Heb. 13:8; Alma 31:17; D&C 20:12), meaning that his character, goals, and purposes are unchanging throughout the eternities. Concerning this, Mormon wrote, "For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing?" (Morm. 9:9.) And Joseph Smith explained, "Listen to the voice of the Lord your God, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, whose course is one eternal round, the same today as yesterday, and forever" (D&C 35:1). 

 
 
© 1990 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
