The Church magazines periodically publish an issue focusing on a single important subject. This year the October issue of the Liahona and Ensign will be dedicated to the Book of Mormon.

The issue will focus on three important questions: What is the Book of Mormon? Why do we have the Book of Mormon? What does the Book of Mormon mean to me?

The issue will include the history of the Book of Mormon, members’ personal experiences with it, suggestions for scripture study, and information on how it applies today. The testimonies of and insights into the Book of Mormon from the 15 living prophets and apostles, as well as all of the past Church Presidents, will be incorporated throughout the issue.

“There is strength in the testimonies of those who lead the Church,” said Jenifer Greenwood, assistant managing editor of the Liahona. “Their testimonies are based on the Book of Mormon, the keystone of our religion. We have a great desire for members to feel those testimonies.”

Members are encouraged to use the issue in two ways, said Elder Paul B. Pieper of the Seventy, Executive Director of the Curriculum Department.

“First, members and missionaries should review it for their personal edification and to strengthen their testimonies of the Book of Mormon,” he said. “Second, they should share the magazine with others, including less-active Church members and nonmembers.”

“Our desire is for this issue to be a stepping-stone for people to actually open the Book of Mormon itself and rededicate themselves to it,” Sister Greenwood said. “It’s wonderful to talk about the Book of Mormon, to read about the Book of Mormon, and to learn things about the Book of Mormon, but it’s the Book of Mormon itself that converts, that gets people closer to God.”

The Book of Mormon has withstood the tests of time, trial, and testimony and lies at the heart of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

“This issue has been prepared with the hope that it will bring inspiration to families and individuals as they seek to understand, practice, and share with others the teachings of the Book of Mormon,” Elder Pieper said.

The October issue will be available in 42 languages. All members are encouraged to become familiar with its content. An additional 39 languages will receive the First Presidency Message and Visiting Teaching Message from the issue. The full issue will also be available online in many languages on the Liahona and Ensign web pages.

Members who wish to subscribe, to give a gift subscription, or to obtain extra copies of the Book of Mormon issue can visit their nearest Distribution Services store or go to store.lds.org.
