Since I have been on my mission, I have come to appreciate the value of the Liahona (Spanish). I always find articles in the magazine that help me guide investigators in their search for gospel truth.

I look forward to receiving the magazine each month. I especially like reading about local Church activity in the news pages.

Elder Pillado Herrejón
Viveros Branch, Nuevo Laredo Mexico District

I send you my warm appreciation for the Liahona (English), especially “The Friend,” the children’s section. My niece, a nonmember, often visits me and eagerly reads each issue. Of course, in the process of reading the children’s stories and games, she is learning about the gospel and the teachings of the Church.

As I read the magazine, my testimony is strengthened and I am inspired by the faithfulness of Church members around the world.

Wilfredo Salem Santos
Malabon Ward, Caloocan Philippines Stake

We are a humble and very happy family. We were baptized in 1993, although it feels as though we have always been members of the Church and blessed with the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Initially, we were not interested in A Liahona (Portuguese). But then we read a copy loaned to us by a special missionary. We immediately realized that we wanted our own subscription. Now, should we ever miss an issue, it would be quite a spiritual loss for us.

Thank you for a marvelous magazine.

Carlos and Eliane De Prat
Cachoeirinha Ward, Porto Alegre Brazil North Stake

We look forward to Der Stern (German) each month. It is a joy to read it and to be strengthened in the gospel. It is wonderful to know of Saints around the world who live the gospel of Jesus Christ. Our children also anticipate each issue and enjoy reading the magazine’s Kinderstern (childrens’ section).

D. Kopfmann
Waldshut Ward, Bern Switzerland Stake

Many thanks for the Liahona (English). It is full of inspiring messages that uplift the spirit. I read the magazine eagerly and sometimes wish we had a daily version. I keep my copies on file after sharing them with my friends, including nonmembers.

Erwin S. Atillo
Toledo Second Branch, Toledo Philippines District
