John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

Introduction

Nearly forty years have passed since I began my first mission to Tonga. At the urging of many people whom I admire, I have attempted to describe some of the experiences and feelings I encountered those many years ago. The main purpose of this book is to emphasize the overwhelming need for faith in our lives.

I realize that in some ways I am describing a time and a place and circumstances that no longer exist. Yet in other ways, I am describing feelings and challenges that are as old as time and as fresh as the morning sun. I am convinced that regardless of the physical background or the decade our life's experiences are cast against, the need for love and faith to bring meaning to our lives and reason for our decisions remains unchanged.

I do not apologize for the time, the place, or the circumstances described, as that was the way it was. I suppose most people who have passed through this planet earth have lived and died closer to the type of life described herein than the hectic one we live in America today. We all need more faith, and I know we can learn from others.

In looking back and reading letters and other items written at the time, I have tried to describe how I felt then. I had no feeling that I was going into a particularly hard situation or that things were going to be tough. I had no thought of doing anything unusual, but rather simply wanted to do my best to get through each day doing as much good and as little damage as possible.

I have not attempted to analyze carefully what was going on in other people's minds or to make a sociological or psychological study, but have tried to relate things as I felt them from a twenty-year-old point of view. I suppose to a small child a horse may appear as big and fearsome as a huge monster to a grown-up. We all see and feel things based on our background and upbringing and the perceptions we have of places and people and motives at the time. I realize that some of the things I felt could be oversized or undersized and differ from how someone else might perceive them, but to me at the time, this is how things were.

I have heard people say, "Well, those people lived such a simple life and had such simple faith, it doesn't really apply to us today." I disagree.

First, their life was not so simple. At first I thought their life-style was simple, but I soon realized it was as complex as ours-not in a physical "rush here and scurry there" context, but in the context of interpersonal relationships, in finding one's place in society, and in coming to peace with God and with one's role in life. In these ways their life was no different from ours-neither more simple nor more complex-just set against a different background. Certain physical inventions may make parts of living more convenient today, but the need for faith and love has never changed-nor will it.

Second, I would not characterize their faith by the English word simple, but rather the word profound. If we say there is a "simple faith," then by extension we need to say there is a more complex or sophisticated faith and that one faith may be superior to the other. I do not believe this. I do not believe there are various types of faith, such as simple or advanced or complex or sophisticated. I believe there is just faith or lack of faith. We either have faith or we don't. Of course, some have stronger faith than others.

To me faith is like a flame; it may be as small as a tiny candle or as great as a roaring fire. A small candle can become a roaring fire or a roaring fire can be reduced to a small candle, depending on what we feed it. Both are natural flames with the power to grow or reduce; to die or consume, as opposed to a flashlight or other mechanical device that may give temporary light but cannot grow beyond its original power source.

In this world, not everyone can afford mechanical lights, but all people over all time-rich or poor, young or old, male or female-can afford fires. The growth of our personal flame depends on our faith, not on our wealth or other worldly factors.

A flame is a great refiner. I am intrigued by Malachi's words of purging and refining through fire: "But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap: And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver. . . . For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch." (Malachi 3:2, 3; 4:1.)

Those who rely only on intellect can mechanically illuminate various subjects and do so quite well, but only the flame of faith, which is available to all men and women and which taps into God's power, can grow in unlimited amounts and shed enough light that we can eventually comprehend all things. Two verses in the Doctrine and Covenants state this principle well: "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day" (D&C 50:24). "And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things" (D&C 88:67).

Could increasing our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the light and life of the world, be the process of increasing the intensity of light within us so we can eventually comprehend all things?

We are all born with some light. The Lord said, "I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world" (D&C 93:2). We all have the opportunity to develop strong faith or have bright light in our lives. I hope we don't rely on temporary mechanical sources as a substitute for the eternal light of faith!

In this book, I have chosen to use the phrase faith in God to include faith in our Father in Heaven, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and faith in all Deity and their commandments and their representatives.

On my mission I learned that faith is a real power, even a substance, and that God deals with men according to their faith, as expressed in the Book of Mormon: "For behold, I am God; and I am a God of miracles; and I will show unto the world that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and I work not among the children of men save it be according to their faith" (2 Nephi 27:23); "For he hath answered the ends of the law, and he claimeth all those who have faith in him; and they who have faith in him will cleave unto every good thing; wherefore he advocateth the cause of the children of men; and he dwelleth eternally in the heavens" (Moroni 7:28).

I did not feel that I had much faith, in fact, as stated on page 53, "I felt more like a bystander than an active participant. I felt like I was standing on the shore of a mighty river while watching the powerful flow of faith go by. That river of faith was like an unfathomable current that I could see and feel, but not fully understand from where it came or to where it was going, yet every part of me felt its force and beauty and power. It was marvelous!"

The central role of faith in God is summarized well in Ether 12:4: "Wherefore, whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God."

I have had the privilege of serving as a missionary, a bishop, a mission president, in all kinds of ward and stake callings, as a Regional Representative, and as a General Authority. I have learned much from each calling, but even today I fell that possibly I learned more of real importance on my first mission to Tonga than all the rest put together. It became the foundation of almost everything else, and I still call upon experiences and feelings from those days to guide me in many of my decisions today. What a great experience a mission is!

I learned that you can live the gospel just as well speaking a different language and using different eating methods as you can in the culture I grew up in. I learned that the gospel is truly universal and that you never need to compromise principles because of another language or culture.

At times I look back with great longing to those carefree days, when the only things I worried about were dangerous seas or broken ropes or ripped sails or being drowned or crushed against sharp coral or beaten by angry people or being seasick or learning a language or finding a place to sleep or getting enough to eat, and so forth.

But these were mostly physical concerns and really not much of a problem when your attention is focused on spiritual things and you can see clearly your duty to preach "Christ and Him crucified" (1 Corinthians 2:2) and Him resurrected and Him as the head of His church on earth and Him as the One soon to come and judge all the earth according to His laws and lead the faithful back to the joy of their Father's presence.

I hope you enjoy the spirit of the message and feel comforted as I have felt as I have reread and remembered and written those experiences of many years ago.

I know that God lives and loves and helps us, and that this knowledge is accessible to all men through faith in Him. Enjoy.
