John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

1

Abandon Ship!

Three of us were returning to our home port of Pangai from ten days of preaching on some distant islands. It had been a successful trip. The people had been more receptive than usual, and we had baptized one person with promises of a few more. Testimonies had been borne and truth taught, and the three of us were feeling wonderful.

Normally we would have been in our mission sailboat, but this time we had the use of a motor launch, which, while not much faster than our sailboat, seemed more certain as to time schedule. The combination engineer-captain was very alert and knowledgeable, and throughout the journey we had experienced no major problems.

While we had enjoyed the preaching tour, we always felt a sweet nostalgia as we finally headed home. We were now but six or eight hours from Pangai.

The weather had been stormy and threatening, but it presented nothing unusual, at least not to me. We had just passed a small island and were moving into the final stretch of open sea before our home island.

The captain expressed concern as he noted the heavy storm clouds ahead. I told him not to worry, as we were on the Lord's errand. I reminded him that many people had heard and believed our testimonies. We were now on our way home, and He would surely protect us the rest of the way. The captain said that the storm was directly in our path and seemed to be coming toward us; he even suggested that we turn back to the last island. I again told him not to worry, but something deep inside me kept me uncomfortable. We continued on.

The sea got heavier and the wind more boisterous. The waves became rougher and the swells deeper; before long we were in the midst of a furious tropical squall. I still had confidence that all would be well. After all, we were on the Lord's errand, and He did protect those who served Him-I was sure of that-so why did I feel uneasy?

The boat labored up the giant waves, then dipped over the top. The propeller raced when it briefly came out of the water. I wished we were in our faithful old sailboat. Sailboats rarely overturn, since they can go with the waves, whereas motorboats tend to fight the waves.

Up, up, up we went on increasingly menacing waves. Then down, down, down into ever deeper valleys. As we got to the bottom of one of these valleys, I looked up and saw another huge wave bearing down on us. This was getting scary. The captain turned the boat to try to go along the side of the wave rather than hitting it head on.

The motor struggled with all its might to climb the monstrous wave. I still felt we would be safe but realized we were in for a rough time. This was worse than any roller coaster ride, and the stakes were much higher.

We were just approaching the top of this huge wave when immediately behind it appeared another one even larger. The boat turned crazily as we reached the top of the wave and started down. Suddenly, almost without warning, the second wave came roaring through and caught the front of our boat, flipping us into the air like a lion discarding a dead mouse.

There was no question about what was happening. We all fell over each other and grabbed for anything we could hold onto. The last thing I remember was the insane squealing of the racing propeller and the captain yelling, "Abandon ship!"

As I flew through the air, I remember thinking, "This can't be happening! This isn't right! Where's our protection?" My whole life seemed to flash before me in that instant. It was not a pleasant-or unpleasant-sensation, just factual. Somewhere between my bruised confidence and temporary complaining, I felt a distant assurance that gave me an element of peace.

I remember the sensation of falling, falling, falling through hissing winds and stinging salt spray into the boiling cauldron of an angry sea. As I hit the water, I remember wondering where the others were, and where the boat was, and hoping it wouldn't land on top of me. I thought I could still hear the uncontrolled whining of that frantic, racing propeller.

As I sank below the water, I still seemed to falling down, down, deeper and deeper. The pressure was almost unbearable; my lungs seemed ready to burst. When would it end? And how? I wondered about my scriptures and the tracts and what few other things we had on the boat. I wondered about the most recent baptismal certificate I was carefully carrying in my scriptures. It's strange what you think of at times like that.

Then I was on the surface again, out of the grasp of that terrible pressure but still in the center of a universe in unbelievable commotion. I could see no one and hear nothing but the confused sounds of a swirling sea of madness.

For a moment I thought again, "This can't be! This isn't true! I'm a missionary; this isn't supposed to happen! I'm not supposed to swim!" But it was true and I was there, and I knew I had better quit complaining and start swimming.

Even as those thoughts filled my mind, another giant wave roared over me and I sank again. As the pressure built up, I realized that I could not spare one ounce of effort in complaining or wondering. I needed to conserve all my energy to swim, and breathe, and keep my head above water. I realized that my sandals had been ripped off my feet, that my shirt was torn, but that my tie and belt were still there, for which I was grateful.

As I rose above the surface the second time, I began to swim. It seemed almost useless as the unbridled fury of the sea threw me here and there and pulled and tugged me in every direction and appeared unsatisfied with anything short of tearing me to pieces.

I began to despair a little and found myself once again underwater. Then that hint of assurance I had briefly felt before found its way into my consciousness. I seemed to sense the Savior calming the troubled sea, and I cried out in my heart, "Master, help me! Oh, please help me!"

The tiny light of peace started to widen and deepen. As I came to the surface the third time, swimming and actually staying above the water seemed more plausible. There was extra help and I was feeling it. I sensed that if I put forth all the effort I could, things would be all right. I began to swim once more.

It was mid afternoon, and I remembered we had passed a small island not more than an hour before. As I rode the crest of a large wave, I looked in all directions. Just before I started down the back of the wave, I saw the outline of the island. It was a long way off, but it was there. I headed in that direction.

Nothing mattered now but to get out of the stormy sea and onto the shore, where I could put my feet on solid ground. I looked for the others but could see or hear no one. As I rose to the top of another large wave, I thought I saw the broken shape of our poor motorboat, but I was not sure.

I swam steadily. I knew I must not panic or swim too hard. Land was far away, and I needed to float as much as possible and swim hard only to keep above the surface. The squall was moving on, and I sensed that the waves were gradually lessening in intensity and that the wind was not quite as strong.

I swam, floated, and looked. Finally, over a wave, I saw one of my shipmates. He seemed to be all right, and I motioned in the direction of the island. He also motioned to the other side of me. When I looked, I saw our other shipmate. He was a little less confident. We continued moving toward the island and trying to get closer to each other.

It is hard to tell how long we were in the water-probably a few hours. The storm moved on, but the seas were still rough. It was getting late in the afternoon. We were now close enough to keep track of one another. I was starting to get tired but felt comforted knowing that if I got a cramp or started to go down, the other two were close enough to help.

As time moved on and we got closer to shore, the waves and the wind became less boisterous. I heard the shipmate on my right yell and then saw him stand unsteadily and wave his hands. He was standing on a rock that was mostly below the surface! Up to that time, I had been mainly concerned about keeping my head above the water, but when I saw him, I thought how nice it would be to stand on a rock, even if for only a moment. I made my way to him, and, sure enough, I also was able to stand with at least my head above water. It felt so good. We were still far from shore, but that brief moment of standing, like a kind word of encouragement, had the effect of assuring me that things would be all right.

As we started swimming again, I thought, "We all need assurances from time to time, such as a word of encouragement, an expression of love and confidence, or a rock to stand on in the midst of a sea of trouble. All of these things, if heard or felt even for a moment, give us courage to go on, to move forward." I was grateful for that submerged but solid rock and felt I should do better in giving encouragement and love to others more frequently.

We were closer together now and even managed to smile a little. We continued to swim slowly for a long time. Just before the sun went down, we were able to touch the sand and rocks and half swim, half walk to shore. What a beautiful feeling it was to have firm sand under our feet! As we got close enough to kneel and still be above water, we joined in a heartfelt prayer of thanksgiving.

Some of the folks from the island saw us as we came ashore and invited us to stay with them. We explained what had happened, and they offered to help any way they could. They were very hospitable. We stayed with them for several days. Eventually we located what was left of our boat, and with lots of help and much more favorable weather, we salvaged most of it. We eventually made it back to our home port in calmer seas.

I have thought a lot about that experience. God was with us. He saved us. He could have brought us through the storm unscathed and landed us safely in our home port of Pangai. But for some reason, He chose otherwise. I have heard it said that sometimes the Lord calms the storm, and sometimes He lets the storm rage and calms His child.

I don't know why the storm came, why we got caught in it, or why things went the way they did, but I do know we eventually arrived home safely. No matter the trouble, we were safe and alive and had experienced firsthand His saving grace.

So often in life we think that because we have done things in a certain way, certain results should follow. But life is like the ocean. Sometimes we get caught in squalls and storms and things don't go the way we think they should, even when we think we have done right. But God can find us in the eye of a storm and give us courage to swim in rough water. We learn lessons from storms that we cannot learn from calm seas.

I felt on a more personal basis than before that I could relate to the Lord's words to all of us: "If thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7).

I thought of Joseph in prison in Egypt and Joseph Smith in prison in Missouri and remembered the Lord telling Joseph to bear all things with patience. I thought of Job and of modern people with great afflictions, which are seemingly and probably unmerited by their actions. I thought of people crippled by accidents or diseases and of good families who hold home evening and do all they should and still have family members do wrong things. I realized that the storms and squalls of life come to us all.

I understood better than ever that the Lord's promise to us personally is that if we do what is right, He will give us peace no matter what the environment. I know that to be true. That peace may not come in the way we think or how, where, or when we think, but in the eternal scheme of things, it will come in the way best for us and we will yet praise His name for things we do not now understand.

Those many years ago in the islands, I reminded myself that there would be other squalls to pass through, but I now knew perfectly that we could make it so I preached to myself, "When we find ourselves in these squalls or storms, we should remember we don't have enough energy to complain and still keep our head above water. Our duty is to swim, not wonder or complain. We need to get to shore and must leave the reasons for the storm with the Lord. If all the effort we put into asking 'why' were used in swimming, a lot more of us, with His help, would reach short."

This single episode is somewhat typical of the many wonderful learning experiences I remember from my first mission to Tonga.

I suppose if I learned anything on my mission, it was that if we sincerely try to do our duty, and work hard and are patient and prayerful, and, above all, have unrelenting faith in God, we can accomplish whatever He desires, for God always comes through.

But let me start at the beginning.
