John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

2

In the Beginning

I was born and reared in Idaho Falls, Idaho. I thought I knew everyone in town. I was sure everyone knew my father. I grew up in the middle of the Great Depression, so I guess we were poor like everyone else, but we didn't think or talk about it.

Idaho Falls was largely a farm-based community. Everyone worked hard, and everyone seemed to have enough to eat. No one told us to work hard or to not waste-that was just what we did because that was what everyone did. We wore the same clothes almost every day and had some form of potatoes nearly every meal. We went to school and played Kick the Can, Red Rover, and other such games and enjoyed our family and friends immensely.

When World War II began, things started to change. When I was about five, I remember pulling the covers over my head one evening and trying to hide deep in the blankets as the newsboys yelled, "Extra! Extra! War in Europe! German planes are bombing Poland!" I didn't know exactly what it meant but sensed something bad was going on.

I was in the second grade when Pearl Harbor was bombed. We went to an uncle's home that Sunday. He had sons in the Navy in Hawaii. Everyone was glued to the radio, and some were crying. I didn't understand much but again sensed that something was very wrong.

I went through the war with memories of patriotism and rationing. I remember Dad announcing one evening, "Guess what? We're going to have real butter for supper tonight!" I remember the heavy black headlines, the wailing sirens, and the air-raid drills at school. I remember the movies and radio pushing us to hate the Japanese and the Germans. I could never quite do that as so many of our neighbors were Japanese. They were good farmers, and I knew their children at school and at church. They were good people. Later, there were some German prisoners of war working on the roads near town. They seemed like fine young men to me.

As children we fought the war by playing soldier, pilot, or navy commander. One of the trees in our backyard had a perfect branch for a pilot and a copilot, one for a gunner, another for a bombardier, and so on. We always got hit on our bombing runs but always barely made it back to base.

It was the era of Captain Midnight, Tom Mix, Gene Autry, the Lone Ranger, and many other stars of popular radio serials. I was fascinated by The Shadow ("Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men?" I was sure he did!) I could hardly wait to get home and hear the next episode on the radio. There was no TV.

I remember watching the heat waves rise from the radiators and slightly blur my view out of the window on the third floor of the old East Side grade school. I often stared through those waves and wondered what might be beyond them.

Dad was the bishop of our ward, and Mom played the organ every Sunday. We all went to church together.

It was a good time and place to grow up. Everyone worked hard, everyone was patriotic, and everyone loved their family. No one had much, but everyone enjoyed what they had. I remember coming home from school one day wearing my favorite corduroy pants (which I wore almost every day) and hearing two ladies whisper that the "poor little Groberg boy only has one pair of pants to wear." When I was beyond them, I turned and yelled, "I wear them because I like them! My mom made them!" I was telling the truth. It never occurred to me that it may have been my only pair.

When I was six, I went to the cornerstone-laying ceremony of the Idaho Falls Temple and held President McKay's hat while Dad took a picture. I was wearing my corduroy pants!

I was in the fifth grade when our principal, Miss Bunker, had the whole school come outside and stand at attention while she lowered the flag to half-mast. We had done this once before when United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt died, but this day was even more solemn. She made us all bow our heads as she explained something about an atomic bomb, thousands of people dying, and a new era beginning. It was confusing, but I had the definite feeling that things were going to change.

The war ended, only to be followed by the Cold War, the Iron Curtain, and the Korean Conflict. There were new victories and new enemies.

Junior high and high school were exciting with drive-ins, tests, ball games, dances, dates, band trips, working, and driving, which you could legally do at age fourteen in Idaho. I played the piano, the trumpet, and the French horn. I'm not sure how much I enjoyed them or how much I did it because my folks wanted me to, but I'm glad they saw that I persevered.

I remember once putting a frog in my pocket when I didn't want to go to piano lesson. When the frog croaked, my piano teacher made me take it outside and let it go. I thought she would send me home, but she made me come back and continue the lesson after I washed my hands.

I had a variety of jobs, such as clerking in a hardware store, surveying, farming, doing yard work, picking potatoes, hoeing, and topping sugar beets. We worked on the Church welfare farm, collected fast offerings, and delivered orders to "the poor people."

I was the oldest of seven boys with two older and two younger sisters. Music was a big part of our life, as was school, church, play, work, and summer trips to visit relatives. We took vacations to Utah, California, Yellowstone, and other areas. I graduated from Idaho Falls High School in 1952.

College was the next step, and the old army dorms at Brigham Young University and an ROTC class gave me a tiny taste of military life. On my first date, a blind date set up by my sister and Jean's sister, I met a girl from California named Jean Sabin, who intrigued me no end. She was beautiful, yet not affected. She was nice, evasive, mysterious, yet familiar. I had a feeling I would marry her someday. We both dated others but tended to come back to dating each other for the two years of college before I received my call to serve a mission.

At that time you had to wait your turn, as the draft board would allow only two per ward per year to serve a mission. Even though the Korean War had ended when I was sixteen and the draft was winding down, I was almost twenty before I received approval from the draft board to go on a mission.

I sent my papers in and was told I would receive my mission call in two or three weeks. At the end of that time, no call had arrived. I waited and waited. More weeks went by. I finally called Church headquarters in Salt Lake City and was told to be patient. I wondered what problems there were, but about two months later, I received a call signed by President David O. McKay to serve a mission in Tonga.

I was excited! I had never heard of Tonga and thought it might be in Africa. An atlas and some encyclopedias soon showed it to be in the South Pacific. I anxiously informed an older relative whom I admired about my call to Tonga. He looked at me and said, "Oh, no! A smart young boy like you! Why can't they send you someplace civilized, like England?" I was crestfallen by his attitude. However, I recovered and replied, "I'm going to Tonga, and it will be the right place for me because that is where the Lord wants me to go. I know the call is right."

A flurry of activity took place before I left on 17 August 1954. I wrote to Jean and told her about my call. The only agreement we had was that we would write occasionally and "see what happens." One of my sisters got married the day before I left. We all went to the temple and had a full day before I caught the midnight train to Salt Lake City to start my mission.

There was a three-day orientation in Salt Lake City for new missionaries, and then we boarded a train to Los Angeles. I left with six other Elders-three going to Australia, three to New Zealand, and myself to Tonga.

The California mission president met us at the train station in Los Angeles and took us to the mission home next to the nearly completed Los Angeles Temple. We had a meal and rested for a while. He then took us to Wilmington Harbor, where we put our bags on board the SS Ventura for the voyage to Pago Pago, American Samoa.

The ship was to leave at 2:00 a.m., but at midnight there was a wildcat strike over some labor dispute. The mission president told us we would have to wait a few days until things were settled.

Things didn't get settled and the sailing was postponed indefinitely, so the mission president assigned us to work in various parts of southern California with missionaries already there. I was assigned to the Orange District and lived in Whittier. We covered all of Orange County. There were still lots of orange groves and the towns were distinct from one another. I was given a great companion who saw that we worked hard.

During the few weeks we were together, we were able to tract out and baptize several families and individuals and had many great experiences. I will mention only two.

One day we received a call from a funeral home asking if we would conduct a service for a man "who used to be a Mormon." My companion agreed, and we were directed to the sister of the dead man to get a little more information on him. His sister also "used to be a Mormon." She was older and in poor health. She told us she and her brother had moved to California from Utah many years ago. Her brother married, but soon divorced and had no children. She never married. They eventually moved into the same house while they each pursued separate careers.

She told us that they were the only children of their parents, who had now passed away. She gave us a little history on her brother and then asked if we would also conduct her funeral when she died. We gave her the mission home telephone number and assured her someone from the Church would.

She then looked off into the distance and sighed. "I guess this is the end of the line. My folks were good people. I don't know why we rebelled. I'm sorry now we left the Church. When you get to my age, you realize how important the Church is, but the world and its money, its glamour and power have great appeal. I wish I would have listened more to my parents. This is the end of the line. I guess our family is finished. It's sad."

We tried to encourage her to come back to the Church, but she changed the subject and said we needed to get to the funeral home. We conducted the funeral the best we knew how. There were six people there, besides the dead man: two missionaries, two funeral home workers, the sister, and one of the ladies she had known at work.

When we finished, I went down and shook hands with her. She thanked me, then said, "Please obey your parents. They know more than you think. Good-bye." It made a deep and lasting impression on me.

The other experience happened as we were tracting. It was my turn to speak. A middle-aged man opened his door and asked what we wanted.

I said, "We're ministers of the gospel, and we have a message for you."

He replied, "Come on in. I'm Reverend Miller. I've just been selected as the minister for a new church to be built in Beverly Hills. A group of investors are building a beautiful chapel, and they have been listening to various preachers in the area, and they picked me! They'll give me a certain percentage of the collections. If I say the things those people want to hear, I'm sure I can do pretty well. Isn't that great? By the way, how much do you fellows make?"

This was the first time I had personally talked to someone who had chosen preaching as a good way to make money, and I was shocked. The thought of altering teachings to bring in more money had never occurred to me. I thought how grateful we should be to have correct doctrines for people to measure up to rather than measuring our doctrine to the whims of people!

I asked, "What is the name of your church?"

"Oh, they haven't decided that yet, but I'm sure they'll come up with a good one. They're sharp men, smart investors."

I was fascinated, as the concept was new to me. "And they pay you for preaching?" I blurted out.

"Of course," he said incredulously. "Why else would you preach? You've got to make a living. By the way, you never answered my question. How much do you get paid, and what church do you work for?"

I told him we didn't get paid and we were members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. "Never heard of such a thing," he said. "Where are you located?"

I said, "Maybe you have heard us called 'Mormons'."

"Oh, you're Mormon missionaries?"

I saw a gleam come over his face like a cat ready to devour two hapless mice. For the next half hour that's just about what happened. He opened the scriptures and took us up one road and down another. We could hardly answer anything.

He finally closed his book, stood up, and said, "Oh, fellas, this is no fun; you don't know anything."

I nearly agreed with him. Then suddenly a feeling came over me, and I said, "Mr. Miller, I admit we don't know the Bible very well compared to you, but there's one thing I know that you don't."

He looked at me with a somewhat contemptuous smile and said, "What do you know that I don't?"

"I know the church I belong to, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is the true church of God on earth and that it has the authority of His priesthood. I know Joseph Smith was a true prophet of God. And I know we have a living prophet today. You don't know that."

"Joseph Smith was a false prophet," he retorted.

"You don't know that," I said.

He replied, "I just told you."

I responded, "You said it in words, but you don't know it. I know he was a true prophet, and you can't deny it." The only way I could have said this was by the Spirit of the Lord, because I didn't have the courage to do it on my own. I continued, "I bear my testimony that I know the church I belong to is true and that Joseph Smith is a true prophet of God. Now, I challenge you to bear testimony that you know your church is true and that the founder of your church is a true prophet of God."

He stood there for a little while and looked at us. He still had his Bible in his hand. He looked at it, looked at the floor, and looked back at us, sort of shaking his head. He looked at the Bible again and then said, "Ah, c'mon, fellas, this is no fun. Good-bye."

As we went out of the door, I said gently, "See, you can't do it, can you? You can't testify that you know your church is true." I don't suppose we made many points as far as he was concerned, but it was a great testimony to me.

I should mention that some of the best people I know are preachers in other churches. Most of them are very sincere and give their all to teach the truth. I have deep respect for them, but this man's attitude was new to me and his philosophy struck me as very strange.

I learned that one of the things that brings strength to a missionary is bearing testimony of the divine mission of Joseph Smith. When we find ourselves in places and situations in which we're not sure what to do, we can bear testimony of Joseph Smith. The very act of sincerely bearing that testimony seems to set in motion eternal processes that allow us to come up with the right words, the right feelings, and the right actions appropriate for the occasion.

We continued working in our area from Santa Fe Springs to Laguna Beach and everywhere in between. I was starting to get used to California and enjoyed the work greatly. I knew I was close to Jean, who lived in North Hollywood, but I never called her, because it was against mission rules. Days stretched into weeks. We checked with the mission home every day; finally, after seven weeks we were told, "The boat sails tomorrow." I said farewell to the Orange District, packed a few things, and went to the mission home in Los Angeles.

The mission president took me and the six other missionaries to the boat the next afternoon. We finally boarded the SS Ventura and were ready to set sail from California for the South Pacific.
