John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

3

The Trip Down

The SS Ventura was a freighter carrying a load of lumber. It was scheduled to stop in American Samoa, where I was to get off and catch another boat to Tonga. We left California towards evening. It was thrilling to finally be on the high seas. At times the ocean was a little rough, but generally we had a smooth voyage. I enjoyed visiting with the other Elders. One of the cooks tried to convert me to his type of meditational religion, but I couldn't understand him very well and he wasn't interested in my church, so after that we just ate.

We had been out of sight of land for twelve days when one morning the mountains around Pago Pago, American Samoa, came into view. I was excited to be in the islands of the South Pacific!

It was early morning when we pulled into Pago Pago harbor. I was anxious to find out how I was to get to Tonga and fully expected someone to be at the wharf to meet me. I looked and looked and with disappointment soon realized no one was coming.

The crew started unloading the cargo. They took my trunk off, put it on the wharf, and told me this was as far as my ticket would take me. I tried to explain that I was going to Tonga, but they said they were only to take me to American Samoa, "and besides, we aren't going to Tonga."

I got off the boat and asked people on the wharf about boats to Tonga and about any Mormon missionaries around. One person said there had been a boat to Tonga, but it left six weeks ago. When I mentioned Mormons, several pointed to the far end of the bay. I kept waiting for someone to come, but no one ever did. Noon arrived and the captain said the boat was leaving. I had grown pretty close to the six Elders on the boat, and they protested that I shouldn't be left alone, but the captain said that wasn't his concern. Since I had an American passport, there was no problem staying in American Samoa, but I was worried about where to go and what to do.

The crew pulled up the gangplank and ordered the ropes slipped from their moorings, and the boat started down the harbor on its way to New Zealand and Australia. I felt very lonely. There were a few tears as I waved good-bye to the other Elders. The boat got farther and farther away and then disappeared from view. I was left alone with my trunk on the wharf.

A young Samoan boy who worked on the dock and spoke English said, "There are some Mormons who live at the end of the bay. If you want to go find them, I'll guard your trunk." I felt I had no choice, so I started walking according to his directions. It was hot, and the end of the bay was a long way away. It probably took only thirty minutes to get there, but in the heat it seemed like hours.

The boy had described a house next to a church. I finally found such a house and felt I was in the right place. I started to knock on the door, when I heard some yelling and arguing. I thought I must be in the wrong place. I heard someone throw something, then the door crashed open and a man charged out. He apparently didn't see me because he went right by and marched on down the road.

I hesitated but decided to knock anyway because the house fit the description I had been given. When I knocked, a lady yelled, "I told you not to come back!"

I replied, "I'm just trying to find some Mormon missionaries." There was silence.

A woman came to the door and said, "Who are you and what do you want?" I explained that I was a Mormon missionary on my way to Tonga, but our boat was about two months late arriving and I guessed I had missed my connection.

She looked at me unbelievingly. "What's your name and where are you from?" (We had no name tags in those days.) I told her I was Elder Groberg from Idaho Falls, and I needed to find a way to Tonga and a place to stay until I did. She said she and her husband were Mormons, but they didn't have any room and I couldn't stay with them. Besides, no one had told her about my coming.

By this time it was fairly late in the afternoon. I hadn't had anything to eat since breakfast. I asked if she had something to eat. She shot back, "No, we don't have any extra food, and there is no place to stay here. How long do you plan to be around?"

"I don't know," I said. "I'm supposed to catch a boat to Tonga."

She replied, "I don't know of any boats going to Tonga from here. If you're really a missionary and you need a place to stay and something to eat, go on down the other side of the bay. They're building a chapel there and you can probably work with them. Maybe they'll give you a place to sleep and some food to eat." She pointed down the harbor and slammed the door.

I was really discouraged now. I was thirsty, hot, hungry, and tired. My friends had all left, and I was worried about my trunk. I couldn't figure anything else to do but walk on around the bay and see if I could find a chapel under construction.

It was late afternoon when I finally found a group of young Samoan men hauling sand and making cement blocks. I asked if they were Mormons. Some of them spoke English and said, "Yes, we are. And who are you?" I told them my story and explained about my trunk and asked if I could have something to eat and drink.

They were nice. Someone gave me a boiled banana and another gave me a green coconut to drink. They tasted great!

Before long another man came by in a pickup truck. He seemed to be the boss. The others explained my predicament to him in Samoan. The boss spoke good English and said, "We had no word about your coming, but I believe you. Hop in and we'll get your trunk and bring it here. If you are willing to work with us, we will give you food and a mat to sleep on on the beach with the rest of us." It sounded good to me.

We went back to the wharf. The young boy was still there watching my trunk. It was long after work hours, but he had stayed as he said he would. I have always felt good towards Samoans since then. He was happy that I had found some other Mormons and said he was a member also.

It was dark by the time we got back to the construction site. They had a fire on the beach and gave me some more of their food. They gave me a mat and a sheet and showed me where the outhouse was and where I could shower and change.

For the next several days I hauled sand in buckets, mixed it with cement, and shook forms to make cement blocks. It was hard work, but I got food and a place to sleep and felt I was among friends. I remember thinking, "I didn't know missionary work was going to be like this."

After a few days someone came from the Church ranch at Malaeimi, on the other end of the island. He said he had heard I was a proselyting missionary on my way to Tonga. He told me the Samoan mission president would be coming in a few days, and he thought I might be under a better influence if I were living with him rather than with the building missionaries. I told him it didn't matter to me, but he seemed to be in charge, so he took me to the Church ranch and I helped him herd cows, throw coconuts on carts, and do other farm work for a couple of days.

Soon the Samoan mission president arrived. I had a chance to talk with him and explain my circumstances. He said, "There aren't any boats from here to Tonga. Come with me to Apia, Western Samoa, where the mission home is, and I'll see what we can do."

We traveled by boat to Apia, which only took one day. We went to the mission home-a large, wooden, two-story, German colonial building with lots of rooms. I thought it was beautiful. The mission president assigned me to a room and said he would check if there was a way to get me to Tonga.

The next day he said, "There aren't any boats going to Tonga from here. Why don't you just stay here?"

I said, "Well, my call is to Tonga. I probably ought to go there."

He replied, "Well, okay, if that's the way you feel, let me do some more checking. In the meantime, just be as helpful as you can around here." I was there for several days and helped in the kitchen, washed dishes, and did yard work.

After a while, the mission president realized I didn't have much to do, so he assigned me to keep his big, black car washed and clean. None of the roads were paved, so each time the car went anywhere it came back dusty. Keeping it clean turned out to be almost a full-time job. I remember one day washing that car seventeen times! Again I thought, "This sure is different missionary work than I supposed I was going to be doing."

A few days later the mission president said, "If you go to Fiji, there are occasional boats from there to Tonga. We just sent two missionaries to Fiji last month to open the work there. They can help you. I'll telegraph them and they'll be there to meet you." He put me on a boat to Fiji the next day and said I should be there in two or three days.

I was excited to be on a boat that supposedly was getting me closer to Tonga. I had a small cabin way down by the waterline. It was very hot, so I spent a lot of time on deck where there was a breeze. I met a young island girl who spoke good English and who was very friendly. At first I was happy to have someone to talk to. I told her what I was doing and where I was going. It soon became apparent that she had things other than religion on her mind. When she started asking me to come to her cabin, I realized this was going in the wrong direction, so I excused myself and stayed in my cabin the rest of the voyage.

The freighter S.S. Ventura, on which we traveled to Samoa

The day before we got to Suva, Fiji, was a Sunday. I had been alone in my hot cabin for a long time. I didn't feel like going back on deck. How I missed church that Sunday! Suddenly the thought occurred to me: You're a missionary. You have the priesthood. You can have church. I don't know if it was right, but I got some bread and water, a plate and a cup, and my scriptures, and held my own church service. I taught myself a Sunday School lesson, sang a song, and gave the opening prayer for sacrament meeting. I then sang a sacrament song and blessed the sacrament and partook of it. Then I gave a talk, sang a closing hymn, and gave the closing prayer.

I felt great! The cabin didn't seem nearly so hot. I was less discouraged, as I felt God had sent His Spirit to that little sacrament meeting on the high seas just out of Suva, Fiji. Still, I looked forward to seeing those two missionaries the next morning.
