John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

4

The Gangplank

When the boat arrived in Suva, I looked and looked but saw no Elders. An hour went by, then two, then three, but still no Elders. The captain kept telling me to get off the boat, as they were leaving soon. I told him I would be met by two young men, but they didn't come.

Finally, noon arrived and the captain was ready to leave. "Get off," he said, "you only have a ticket to Suva. I'm leaving, and you're staying here."

With great fear, I started down the gangplank, only to be met by immigration officials. "Let's see your visa, your onward ticket, and the money to keep you while you're here," they demanded.

I had no visa. I had no onward ticket. I didn't have sufficient money. I assured them that two young men would come right away with whatever was needed. How I prayed! But they didn't come.

"Back on the ship, then," they insisted.

"Not on my ship!" bellowed the captain.

I can remember standing in the middle of the gangplank and looking up at the folded arms and glaring eyes of the stern captain, and then looking down at the equally determined faces and set jaws of the immigration men.

I looked at the ocean under the gangplank. I wondered how long I could tread water. I was pretty scared.

In the end, the captain proved to be the toughest. Amidst cursing and yelling and banging of bags, the gangplank went up, the ship departed, and I found myself in the not-too-friendly hands of the immigration officials.

There was a long discussion among them, most of it in a foreign tongue. Finally, one of the younger men, who seemed more friendly, came over and explained that for now I would have to move with my things into the customs shed, where things went that weren't allowed into the country until tax was paid on them. He assured me that he felt the two young men I referred to would be along soon and everything would be fine.

The afternoon wore on. I tried several times to figure out a way to contact the missionaries, but to no avail. I know missionaries are supposed to be brave, but right then I was scared, tired, and hungry. The sun was getting low. It seemed the lower it got in the sky, the lower my spirits became. I knew I wasn't really in danger or in prison, but to one used to lots of freedom it seemed like it.

The pungent odor of curry, copra (dried coconut meat), drying fish, and the myriad other sights, sounds, and smells of an oily tropical wharf seemed so foreign to the cool, fresh smells of my Idaho home. I knew I was homesick. I wanted to cry, but knew that wouldn't do any good.

Finally, the whirring of winches, the groaning of blocks and cables, the banging of cargo, and the sputtering of machines ceased. The dock workers began to leave, followed by the immigration people, until just a few watchmen and supervisors were left. It was silent now. I really felt alone.

I tried to lie down on the dirty, uneven cement floor. I prayed to know what to do. There seemed to be no answer. I watched the last rays of sunlight as they broke through the clouds and blazed across the ocean and through the holes of the metal customs shed.

"How long will the light last?" I thought. Then I wondered, "What will happen when those last rays disappear and fold into the night? Maybe if I close my eyes, I'll just disappear or at least circumstances will change." I closed my eyes. However, nothing happened, so I opened my eyes and said, "I must have hope. Things must turn out all right."

I closed my eyes again, this time in prayer. Suddenly I felt almost transported. I didn't see anything or hear anything in a physical sense. But in a more real sense, I saw my family in far-off Idaho kneeling together in prayer. I heard one, acting as mouth, say as clearly as anything can be heard, "And bless John on his mission."

As that faithful family called down the powers of heaven to bless their missionary son in a way they could not physically do, the powers of heaven came down, lifted me up, and in a spiritual way allowed me for a brief moment to once again join my family circle in prayer. I was one with them. I was literally swallowed up in the love and concern of a loving family and sensed for a moment what being taken into the bosom of Abraham might be like (see Luke 16:22). I was given to understand also that there are other circles of love and concern, unbounded by time or space, to which we all belong and from which we can draw strength. God does not leave us entirely alone-ever!

Tears of joy flowed freely as I had restored to me the warmth of family, the light of love, and the strength of hope. When I again felt the hard, uneven cement beneath me, there was no fear, no sorrow, no trepidation, only deep gratitude and assurance.

I waited. Within half an hour I saw the young immigration man who had befriended me coming towards the shed with two Elders behind him. How happy I was to see them! It seems that on his way home he "just happened" to run into two young Americans with white shirts and ties and told them about another one just like them down at the wharf. They had received no telegram, but they believed him and followed him to the customs shed. Soon all was straightened out, and I went with the Elders to their flat in Lami, Fiji. They got another bed for me and were happy to have me there.

They explained that our assignment in Fiji was to go around the island and find out how many members there were. Each day we went about asking, "Are you a Mormon or do you know any Mormons?" In this way we located several members. We also found quite a few part-member families whom we were able to teach, as well as others who were interested in learning about the Church. This was my first opportunity to teach the lessons since California, and I enjoyed it.

I remember those two Elders taking me to an Indian restaurant (about half of the population in Fiji is of East Indian ancestry). They said I had to put more curry on to make the bland food taste good. I should have been aware of that old missionary trick, but I wasn't. When I took that first bite of food with its huge amount of curry, I thought my mouth was literally on fire. I couldn't drink enough water to quench the flames. They laughed and laughed, but we were still good friends.

We worked together for a couple of weeks. Each day we checked to see if there were any boats going to Tonga. Finally, we were told of a freighter going there in a few days. It had no passenger accommodations, but they said if I would sign on as part of the crew and work my way over, I could go. I jumped at the chance.

The boat was old and I could see why they had crew vacancies. It had a load of lumber, and I was assigned to a fellow crew member named Swede. Swede spoke broken English, but we understood each other sufficiently.

Swede told me he was born at sea and had lived all his life at sea. "It's nice," he said. He was considerably older than I was. Our job was to check the lashings on the timber. My responsibility was only minimal, because Swede actually did the work. Our shift was about six hours on and six hours off. There were several others doing the same work on different shifts. Most of the lumber was 4x4s and 8x8s, twelve to sixteen feet long. It was important to keep them firmly tied, for if they ever got loose on a rough sea they would become like giant javelins and pierce through the ship, especially the superstructure, and could sink it.

Swede and I shared the same room and usually went on our rounds together. We became pretty good friends. We couldn't communicate well enough for me to give him the missionary discussions, but pretty soon he realized I had a Bible and a Book of Mormon and a bent toward religion. I tried to explain the Book of Mormon to him, but he wasn't interested.

We had a lot of time to talk and visit. Finally he said, "Now, tell me again, you're a missionary? You're going to be a missionary?"

I said, "Yes," and tried to explain to him what that meant. I could tell he was getting angry. Finally, he said, "Come with me." He got a small picture book out of his drawer and said, "You don't want to go to Tonga. You don't want to be a missionary. You come with me. You're a good worker. I'll get you a full-time job on this boat." He then opened the book and showed me pictures of all "his girls." Most of them weren't the type of pictures missionaries should look at.

"This one's in Ecuador. This one's in Peru. This one's in Tahiti. This one's in Tonga. I can line you up with her and her and her. You'd enjoy that life a lot more than missionary life!" I tried to explain to him that it had taken me such a long time and so much effort to get this close to Tonga that I wasn't about to change now. I told him that his kind of life wouldn't bring true joy or happiness, but that the kind of life Ihad could bring eternal happiness.

When he realized he couldn't convince me, he became almost violent. He started railing on me:"You missionaries! You and your Bibles wreck all the fun for guys like me. You'll get to Tonga and teach all those girls about these silly things and about not going out with guys like me. You'll teach them they're supposed to get married and supposed to blankety-blank-blank!" He used some pretty descriptive language. I didn't understand all of it. He finally calmed down.

We were nearly to Tonga, but the last hours of the voyage were quite miserable. I was not fearful that Swede would hurt me in any way, but he was pretty upset. The next morning we arrived in Tonga.

Before I got off the boat, Swede tried again to talk me into staying on. He said he had talked to the captain, who told him it would be fine for me to stay on as they always needed more crew members.

I said, "No, I'm getting off here." This time, instead of getting angry, he said, "Well, I don't agree with a thing you're doing. You are making the world a worse place rather than a better place from my point of view. But I admire you for sticking with it and wish you good luck." We shook hands. I told him my great-grandparents had joined the Church in Sweden and came as Mormon converts to the United States. He laughed and said, "I should have known it-stubborn Swedes." We parted on a friendly note.

As I went down the gangplank, I checked the date. It was November 17. It had taken me exactly three months to get to Tonga from the time I left home. I was glad to be there. I looked around, but again there was no one to meet me. The Elders in Fiji had said they would send a telegram. I didn't know what had happened, but at least I had a landing permit for Tonga. I got off the boat and went through customs and immigration.

I started asking about the Mormon mission home. It was a lot easier here than in Fiji because people knew where it was. I stopped at a store owned by a member who spoke English. He said to wait there while he got the mission president, who didn't live very far away.

When the mission president arrived, I was immediately attracted to him. He said, "Elder Groberg, I expected you two months ago. Where on earth have you been?" I felt like saying, "If you have a few hours, I'll tell you where on earth I've been." But I just said I was glad to be there and looked forward to a good mission.

He took me and my trunk to the mission home. After we had a nice visit, he said, "I have prayed about it, and I have just the place for you. It's a little island named Niuatoputapu. It has about 700 people and is the most distant Tongan island from here. As far as I know, there are no white people there, and no one speaks English." I remember wondering, "Why is that just the place for me?" But I didn't say anything. I trusted my mission president.

He continued, "The boat for there is leaving soon. It will take seven or eight days to get there, as they stop at Viuato'ou island on the way. I'm going to assign you to a companion named Feki Po'uha. He's a good man. He's on a building mission now, but I don't want you to be alone in your first area." Then he said solemnly, "I am giving you two assignments. First, learn the language as soon as possible. Second, build the kingdom. Do you have any questions?"

"No."

"Fine, then I'll take you to Liahona to meet Feki."

As soon as I met Feki, I knew I would like him. He was so positive! The boat was to leave for Niuatoputapu in about a week, so in the meantime Feki and I stayed at the Church school, named Liahona. The mission president did not want me to teach at the school but rather to proselyte with Feki in the surrounding area, so even though the labor missionaries were still working at Liahona, Feki and I traveled each day to the outlying villages and proselyted. I suppose that given my experiences thus far, I should not have been surprised when the departure of the boat kept getting delayed again and again. I had to learn more patience.
