John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

5

Feki

I don't see how anyone could have a better companion than I had in Feki Po'uha. He was patient, kind, hardworking, and obedient. Feki was a priest in the Aaronic Priesthood. He was worthy to be an elder, but at that time in Tonga men were ordained elders only when they got married. He became my first, last, and only regular missionary companion.

I learned to love Feki's infectious smile, his sparkling eyes, and his "can do" attitude. I marveled at his ability to speak Tongan, even though it was his native tongue. I marveled even more at his obedience.

The mission president told Feki he wanted me to learn to speak Tongan, so he asked Feki to speak only Tongan to me. Feki spoke some English, but during the thirteen months we were together he spoke only Tongan to me.

It is hot and rains a lot in December in Tonga. Sometimes as we walked from one village to another, we would hear a thundering sound like a herd of galloping horses behind us. The rain would come so quickly and in such heavy waves that there was no way to escape, so we often got drenched.

At first I was irritated at getting wet so often and wondered why we didn't use umbrellas. But when I saw Feki's dancing dark eyes and felt his unrestrained, gleeful attitude, I couldn't help but feel the same. A hot sun usually followed each deluge, so we were generally pretty dry by the time we got to the next village. Feki laughed, "Why not enjoy it? Umbrellas are a nuisance. Tongans love to play in the rain! It's like a free shower."

Mud and bugs were everywhere. With the heavy rain and hot sun, I soon learned why old clothes and old shoes (or no shoes) were better than something you wanted to keep clean or dry.

Although I understood very little of what was said, I understood the joy of being with Feki and of doing missionary work. Tongans love music, and it had been suggested I bring my trumpet on my mission. Feki often asked me to play it at cottage meetings. Playing my trumpet always brought lots of extra people out, most of whom left when I quit playing and the meeting started, but some stayed and listened.

Since there were no phone lines to Liahona, we rode bicycles to Nuku'alofa nearly every day to check on the boat. It was about fifteen miles round-trip, but we soon got used to it.

While we were waiting for the boat to Niuatoputapu, the mission president received a cable message stating that President and Sister David O. McKay and a few others would arrive on the SS Tofua in one week to visit the Tongan Mission. What an event! Everyone jumped into action and worked hard to have things just right for the prophet's visit. It was great to see how united and happy everyone was.

Feki and I were assigned to help clean the grounds at the Church school, as well as some of the paths at the Church ranch, which had been the site of the former Church school, Makeke, when President McKay visited Tonga in 1921.

A few days later President and Sister McKay arrived. What a splendid man he was, and what a lovely lady she was! His white hair, regal bearing, and piercing eyes made him the model of a prophet to me. How could anyone doubt?

The walks were covered with tapa cloth and lined with school children and missionaries. When President and Sister McKay walked down those aisles of smiling children waving palm leaves, tears came easily to their eyes.

President McKay sat through a traditional kava ceremony and drank some kava. (They mix a type of pepper root with water and serve it according to rank.) In fact, he said, "Give me a bigger serving. Some people say kava is against the Word of Wisdom, but it isn't, and I'll be the first to show that." He was so gracious and appreciative of the food and entertainment and all that was done for him.

There were very few missionaries, so we were always seated close to him. When I was formally introduced to President McKay, he said without a moment's hesitation, "I knew your father-no, your grandfather-in Ogden. We worked together in the Weber Stake Sunday School. He was a great man. Do him proud." I was impressed.

Later he asked me to hold his hat while he inspected the hooves of some cows at the ranch. As I held his hat, I mentioned I had done this before at the Idaho Falls Temple cornerstone ceremony. He looked at me knowingly and said, "You were lots smaller then." His eyes were something else!

He told the mission president to start ordaining some of the men to the Melchizedek Priesthood and make application to build some brick chapels. He held lots of meetings with the Saints and shook hands with nearly everyone.

Once he met separately with the palangi (white) missionaries, who consisted of three proselyters and about ten schoolteachers. I remember we were all sitting on the floor; as he spoke, chills of wonder went through me. He looked at each missionary individually, and when his eyes met mine and he talked about being a good missionary, it was as if I had received a new charge from God Himself! How could I do anything less than be a good missionary?

After a few days, President and Sister McKay departed for other islands, but left a great legacy of faith and love and resolve among us! About a week after they departed, we received word that the boat would sail for Niuatoputapu the next day. I felt the boat had been delayed so we could meet and hear President McKay.

The boat we were to sail on was a relatively small copra boat with a cargo of pigs and other animals, as well as a deck full of passengers. I was repulsed by the smell, but still anxious to get to our assigned area. We boarded and soon were on the high seas.

I had been a little seasick on the large boats coming down to Tonga, but not too bad. Those boats were relatively large and had good places to sleep-and a tolerable odor. By contrast, this boat was small, the sleeping quarters were a joke, and the smell was something else-a mix of pigs, chickens, copra, diesel, and people throwing up.

Within a day I learned again the classic definition of seasickness: At first you're afraid you'll die; then you get so sick you're afraid you won't. When I wouldn't or couldn't eat on my own, Feki would come with a crew member: one would hold my nose and the other would pour soup down my throat. "We don't want a dead man on our hands," the captain said. I am sure they knew best, even though I didn't appreciate it at the time.

For eight days and nights we rolled and tossed across the ocean, making only one brief stop at Niuafo'ou (Tin Can Island) before arriving at Niuatoputapu. I had been deathly ill most of the way. I resolved if I ever got on dry land again, I would never leave.

Finally the boat anchored off Niuatoputapu, and we came to shore on smaller boats. I had envisioned a large group of grateful Saints warmly greeting us and letting us know how much they appreciated what we had been through to get there-maybe even singing and putting leis on us and having something for us to eat and drink.

I looked around. No one. I asked Feki, "Where are they?"

"Who?" he replied.

"The Saints we have come to be with!"

"They're not here. I've asked around, and they didn't know we were coming. The telegraph is broken, so the message didn't arrive." Since the telegraph ran on a car battery, when the battery ran out of power there were no telegrams until a fresh battery came on the next boat.

We dragged our things up the sandy beach, away from the lapping waves. "You stay here and watch our things," Feki instructed me, "and I'll go and find the branch president. We'll come back with a saliote (horse-drawn cart) and take you and our things to wherever we are to live. Don't let anyone take our things and don't wander off. Stay right here!"

I had no choice, so I sat down on the sand-tired, hungry, thirsty, and very disillusioned. My dream of the greeting party and their gratitude for my being there was shattered.

The only people around now were some children, a few of whom came up and touched me and laughingly said, "Palangi, palangi!" Some of the smaller children got close and then started crying and ran away as their mothers threatened, "Come away or the palangi will get you!"

I didn't understand a lot, but I understood enough to know that, far from my expectations, I wasn't very welcome here. I could sense a mixture of pity, fear, curiosity, and aloofness from most of the people around me. The few words I understood from the little comments I heard didn't make me feel any better.

Some people came and asked a few questions or offered to help, but my fears had started to rise and I saw everyone and everything as an attempt to steal our things or cause us trouble. I remembered Feki's words, "Stay right there and don't let anyone take anything," so I warded everyone off.

Time passed. The crowd on the shore thinned out. The sun was hot. I wondered if Feki had left for good. I felt alone again. I wanted to cry but knew I shouldn't.

I had noticed a few mosquitoes while I had been moving around to protect our things, but they hadn't seemed too bad. Now I was sitting more quietly and the mosquitoes were coming in hordes-hundreds, thousands, millions! It seemed as though they were trying to carry me off. I imagined their leader telling his troops, "We've had lots of Tongan blood, but seldom do we get the chance to have white man's blood! Feast up, everyone! Attack, attack!"

The more I struck at them, the more they seemed to come. It was getting hotter and more miserable. Feki was not back. It had been over an hour since he left. The people were mostly gone. I could tell the boat was about ready to leave.

Suddenly true panic hit me. What if Feki doesn't come back? The people don't seem to like us. What if there aren't any Saints here? What if they've all left the Church? What if we're in the wrong place? What if the boat leaves and Feki doesn't return and no one will help me and the mosquitoes keep coming and I just sit here on the beach and slowly die?

Satan has a way of combining things to bring out our worst fears. In that panicky state, I jumped up and thought, "If I run fast, I can make it to the boat before it leaves. At least I know a couple of crew members, and I'm sure it's going back to Nuku'alofa. I'll just tell the mission president what happened, and he'll be happy to have me back. I won't stay here and die from hunger and thirst and mosquitoes and heat."

I was about ready to bolt and run, when another feeling hit me: Eight more days of seasickness? I thought of my resolve to never leave solid land again. I felt a swirling confusion of fears, heat, mosquitoes, uncertainties-all of which pummelled my panicky feelings. I didn't know what to do. I wanted to run, but my churning stomach said, "Eight more days of seasickness? No way!"

I slumped back to the sand. I should have prayed, but instead I cried. Finally between sobs I asked, "Father, what should I do?" I didn't seem to receive any answer but just sat there rather stupefied and watched the boat leave.

Now I was totally alone. What have I done? Why am I here? What have I gotten myself into? Where is Feki? I hit a few more mosquitoes, then lay down and resigned myself to whatever fate lay ahead. You mosquitoes! Go ahead and enjoy your white man's blood. You mothers! Go ahead and scare your children, telling them if they are not good the palangi will get them. You others! Go ahead and poke me and make fun and steal our things. I don't care! I don't care about anything anymore!

Then I thought of home-beautiful Idaho. It isn't so hot there. There aren't as many mosquitoes. My family wants me around. They speak English. Mom has a fresh loaf of whole wheat bread just out of the oven. There is butter and honey. The loaf is broken apart. See steam rise. Smell the freshness. Watch the butter melt. Taste that heavenly bread with honey-uh, huh! I closed my eyes as tears of homesickness welled up again. Why am I here? Why am I not there?

President and Sister McKay leaving by boat after visiting the Tongan Mission in January 1955

I could see my parents, my brothers and sisters, my girlfriend and other friends. I remembered my farewell vaguely recalled someone saying, "Even if you get homesick, stick it out. Do what is right and God will protect you. We'll be praying for you." That was fine when spoken at a farewell among friends, and maybe it was true sometimes, but how do you know what is right under these circumstances? Should I even be here? I closed my eyes again as though to blot out my fears.

Someone poked me. I jumped up. They pointed down the trail. There was a cart coming. It was a long way off. Was that Feki with another man? I think so. Oh, Feki! Feki, you are alive! You have come for me! Yes, that's him! That's his smile! I looked at the boat, now far out in the channel. I was glad I had stayed.
