John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

6

Starting Out

The saliote got closer. Feki ran up and explained that even though the telegraph was broken and the Saints hadn't known we were coming, they were happy to have us. It had taken him some time to find the branch president, more time to get the horse, find the harness, hook up the cart, and quite a while to come from Vaipoa, especially since the horse went at its own pace, which varied between slow and very slow.

We loaded our things onto the cart. Feki introduced me to the branch president, who smothered me with hugs and Tongan kisses (rubbing noses and cheeks). He hadn't shaved for a couple of days, so my face was thoroughly sandpapered!

We eventually got to Vaipoa, where most of the members lived. They moved us into one end of the branch president's house. Even though I was tired and just wanted to sleep, it was obvious there would be none of that until they fixed a big meal. We sat cross-legged on the ground outside in a large semicircle with several smoking coconut husks by us-supposedly to keep the mosquitoes away.

We ate and talked. They were appalled that I didn't know Tongan and couldn't answer their questions: "Where do you come from? How many brothers and sisters do you have? What ages are they? What is your father's name? What titles does he hold? How big is your island? Who has the most pigs there? How long have you been a member? What kind of fish do you like? Why don't you speak Tongan?" Feki explained all he knew and they seemed somewhat satisfied.

Finally, after what seemed forever, especially to my crossed legs, someone suggested I might be tired and like to sleep. I agreed. I tried to get up but couldn't because my legs were asleep-that brought some laughs. They showed me where the outhouse was, where the tub for a shower was, where the well to draw water was, and where my mat, blanket, and pillow were. They had lots of ceiba trees there, which produce kapok, a light, cottony substance which the Tongans used to stuff pillows. I suppose some of their pillows didn't have seeds and husks in them, but I never felt one.

I told Feki I was too tired to shower, so I would just go to the outhouse and then to bed. Several men accompanied me to the outhouse and waited to accompany me back. "You sure you don't want to bathe? We'll get water for you."

"No, I'll just go to bed," I said.

"Okay. But you'll rest better if you bathe." I had slept for several days in my clothes on the boat, so I suspect there was a reason for their insistence. Tongans are generally very clean and conscious of odors. But I just lay down, took off my sandals, said my prayers, and immediately fell asleep.

The next morning I did want to bathe. I thought there must be someplace besides the galvanized tub in the middle of the yard, but there wasn't. Feki said he'd get water. As far as I knew, I was the only palangi on the island, and the local people seemed fascinated with the opportunity to watch me bathe.

I hadn't taken a bath with people watching since I was a child. But now I faced a new dilemma. I was the only one on the island who had been through the temple. I didn't want to be disrespectful, but was unsure what to do. The first day I decided to take my garments off in the tub. They would have to be washed anyway. But I couldn't figure out how to put new ones on in the tub without getting them wet. I finally decided to change in the house and go back and forth with a tupenu (large cloth) as a covering.

After a few days, I talked Feki into building a protective screen of coconut fronds around the tub. It kept the adults from my view, but I soon became aware of smaller eyes peering through the openings to see what a palangi looked like while bathing. Eventually I got used to bathing with an audience.

I suppose you can get used to anything, and before long bathing wasn't an issue. I don't know whether their curiosity was satisfied or whether I didn't care anymore. Probably some of both.

I found that the mosquitoes were as bad in Vaipoa as on the beach by the wharf. I also found that while it was nice to live in one end of the branch president's home, it left us (and them) no privacy. It also meant that if he had something he wanted us to do, it took precedence over our plans. It was not the best situation.

Feki and I walked around those first few days to see the other two villages and the rest of the island. You can walk around the entire island-a distance of about fourteen miles-in a few hours. I found there was no running water, no electricity, no cars, no motors, nothing mechanical-except the telegraph, which worked sometimes. There were no stores, so you couldn't buy anything, no matter how much money you had. People basically didn't use money there at that time.

I sensed the villagers were both curious and reserved as far as we were concerned. They were interested to know who we were and why we were there but generally scared and unwilling to listen when they found we wanted to talk about "Mormonism" and Joseph Smith. Most people were kind when they sensed we needed food or water. I soon felt I knew a few people and had some friends. Feki, of course, was my main support.

It was very hot. Everyone but the small children wore a tupenu wrapped around their waist. It was not uncommon for men and women of all ages to go without clothing above the waist. If the women knew I was around, they often covered up in some way, but much of the time they didn't. As it got cooler, people covered up more, much to my relief.

It is hard to remember just how the transition took place, but it didn't take too long before I felt somewhat at home and began to see past the newness and strangeness into the reality of different personalities with their various problems and concerns. I soon realized that while the setting was different from my Idaho home, the everyday problems of living and dealing with personal interactions were about the same as anywhere else.

I realized that some people were selfish; others were generous. Some were kind; others less so. Some were trying to live Christian lives according to what they understood, and others didn't seem too concerned about it. Some were open and gregarious; others closed and distant. Some were friendly; others were suspicious. The whole gamut of life and personality was evident, even among only seven hundred people.

I quickly learned to be friendly to everyone and stay on their good side, partly because that is what a missionary is supposed to do and partly because I knew that was the only way I would get food. When you can't buy food with money but can only get it through the goodness of others, it helps your attitude towards them a lot. Everyone was related to everyone else, so if you said anything bad about anyone, you were in trouble. The branch president and the members carried the main burden of our care, but nearly everyone on the island was solicitous of our needs and helped whenever they could. Feki was related some way to the chief magistrate and that helped.

Basically we ate four types of foods: (1) fruits such as pineapples, oranges, mangoes, and bananas; (2) tubers (starchy roots) such as talo (taro root), ufi (like a huge potato, eighteen inches or more long, four or five inches in diameter, and fluffy when cooked), and kumala (similar to yams or sweet potatoes); (3) leafy greens such as lu (similar to spinach) and seaweed; and (4) seafood from the lagoon, such as fish, crabs, lobsters, and the like. One of my favorites was a sardine-like fish baked whole for two or three days so you could eat it all like a breadstick-head, innards, tail, and all. It was a real treat.

Most of the time we ate hamu (fruits and vegetables only) without a kiki (meat from an animal source, such as fish or lobster). But a couple of times a week we would have some type of fish and once or twice a month we might even have chicken or a little pork, especially if there was a funeral or marriage where a pig was roasted. We had no milk, beef, or dairy products of any kind. There were, of course, no refrigerators, ice, or coolants.

I had excellent health and felt about as good as I ever have. I noticed that the people were generally very healthy with straight, white teeth, beautiful hair, clear complexions, strong bodies, and almost inexhaustible energy. We mostly drank coconut juice. There were a few barrels to catch rainwater, which we also drank. It was sweet, but often had to be dumped out when rats or other animals crawled in and drowned. If it didn't rain for a long time, we drank well water, which was quite brackish, but when you're thirsty, you don't mind.

Our church meetings were wonderful. The branch president did his best to conduct them in an appropriate way, and the Spirit of God prevailed despite some obvious problems. I remember asking the branch president what time sacrament meeting started. He looked to the west, pointed partway down the sky, and said, "When the sun is about there."

I learned that was the best way. Everyone understood and could see the sun. It was a clock everyone could afford. My watch soon rusted out. I threw it away and didn't get another until I returned to the United States. People were nearly always "on time"; that is, they arrived at church when the sun was "about there." If everyone was present, we might start early; if everyone wasn't there, we waited. Attendance averaged from twenty to twenty-five depending on sickness and investigators. The meetings varied a lot and lasted until they were done. On small attendance Sundays, that was until everyone had participated; on large attendance Sundays, that was until the umu (meal) was moho (baked well).

It was a marvelous thing to see how united everyone was. No one had watches, but everyone knew when the church service should be over. It was a united sense that everyone felt. I suppose sacrament meetings were somewhere between one and two hours, but they never ended too soon, nor went too long. You learn to feel things together in this more communal setting than when there are watches and individual time schedules. The one rule they never broke was this: when the smell from the umu came through as being done, the closing song and prayer followed rapidly.

Meal preparation was an art, especially for the Sunday meal. On Saturday they dug a hole, put wood in, and added rocks on top of the wood. They burned the wood, leaving hot rocks. They then lined the rocks with banana leaves, put in tubers, fish, sweet potatoes, or chicken, wrapped in more banana leaves. They then put more banana leaves on top of that and covered the whole thing with dirt. It steamed all night and into Sunday.

Each family or extended family had their own umu, but lots of sharing took place. If someone caught a large fish on Saturday, they shared it with most of the close-by families.

One of the status symbols of the day was to have a meal good enough to invite the Faifekau (preacher, minister, or missionary) to eat with you. The established preachers ate very well. We weren't in that category at the beginning of my mission. This practice was also a source of hard feelings for those families who invited the preachers to eat with them and were passed over for another family.

The villagers often speculated with great interest, "Where is the preacher going to eat today?" I wondered how the preachers chose. At first I thought it was who extended the initial invitation; then I thought an important factor was who had the best meal; I finally realized that probably the main factor was which family donated the most money at revivals.

I had several experiences that taught me that there were deeper feelings of love and hurt, kindness and revenge among the people than I had suspected. Most of the reasons for hurt feelings seemed pretty silly to me.

I learned you can choose to argue over anything or be offended in any manner. I saw hurt feelings that festered for years when the Faifekau chose one family's meal over another or other similar situations. They seemed like insignificant things to get hurt feelings over, but I soon realized some of the things we choose to get hurt feelings over in our culture are just as crazy. I suppose it's silly to be offended or get hurt feelings over anything. I was glad I didn't have to worry about the politics of village life. I just wanted to preach the gospel, but I also hoped I could get enough to eat.

I tried to understand what was going on around me, but everyone spoke so fast that I couldn't keep up. We tried to go out and visit every day, but sometimes it rained so hard that we could hardly move, and other times the branch president insisted on us helping him with his chores. We felt duty-bound to help him because he had done so much for us. He was a good man and I liked him and his wife and daughter.

I tried to obey the mission president and Feki but felt very inadequate and wasn't sure how much good I was doing. I studied the language as much as I could and tried to speak it often, but felt I was not doing too well. Sometimes I felt I was making progress, and other times I felt I was going backwards. Thank goodness Feki was always happy and supportive. I learned that when people are discouraged, they don't need criticism or lectures-they need positive examples of happiness.
