John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

7

Despondency and Deep Feelings

For several weeks things seemed to move along quite well. There was something new to learn or someplace different to go each day. Before long, however, I began to realize that everyplace we went, we had been before and everything we did we had done before. Seven square miles is a fairly small area, and doing the same things and visiting the same places over and over again became quite monotonous. After a while that old devil homesickness, and the accompanying discouragement, began to set in again.

It rained a lot and was hot and humid-everything began to smell musty to me. The language still seemed to run together with no real meaning. The days seemed interminably long, the food less palatable; everything appeared flat, dull, and unmeaningful. I tried to study hard, and I tried to act enthusiastic and seem excited about going out and visiting, but the fact was I was starting to feel I couldn't stand the weather, the mosquitoes, the smells, the food, or the strange words any longer.

As I started to sink into the hole of self-pity, I found my main solace in prayer and scripture study. Letters were few and far between as the boat came only about once a month. There were no visits from the mission president, and my companion refused to speak to me in English. I was frustrated and discouraged. Why couldn't I understand? Why didn't I feel better about things? What good was I really doing? This was such a small place, so few people, so far away, so different. What was I doing here? The old question of Should I even be here? kept recurring. In the back of my mind I could hear the mission president saying, "I have prayed about it and I have just the place for you." I respected him, and to some degree that statement kept me going.

Some days seemed better than others, but generally there was a downward drift, down to discouragement, discontent, and despondency. I had a feeling that no one really cared about me, nor even knew where I was or what I was going through. I tried to fight these feelings but found myself giving in to them more than overcoming them.

I remember well one morning waking to the sound of rain. A leak in the roof had developed near my feet, and they were wet. Everything felt and smelled dank and dark. No one was moving, and I sat up and thought, "I can't stay here any longer under these circumstances. Something has to change. I must get out of here. I can't stand it any longer!" It was still dark. I got up and lit the kerosene lantern. I swatted at the swarming mosquitoes and tried to read some scriptures.

I opened the Book of Mormon and read a little. Eventually my eyes fell on some verses from Ether that seemed to irresistibly pull at my attention. I read over and over again Ether 12:27: "If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them."

If anyone was weak, I was. If anyone needed strength, I did. For some reason this verse seemed to kindle a determination in me to either "do or die" and find out whether I should even be here. I guess part of humility is knowing that you don't know everything, and there were lots of things I didn't know. I felt I had to receive an assurance that I was doing what God wanted me to do and I was where He wanted me to be, no matter what it cost. I don't know why or how that feeling came, but it came and it came very strongly.

I determined I would fast and pray and read the scriptures all that day. It was raining and I didn't know that I could do any good visiting the people anyway. I told Feki of my decision. He just smiled and said, "Okay," and went about his work.

I neither can nor should go into detail as to what happened over the next few days. The thing that is important is that I learned, as all people can learn, that God hears and answers prayers. It may not always be in the way we hope, but it is always in the way that is best for the person praying.

If we anticipate voices or visions or things spectacular, we will likely not receive them. But if we humble ourselves before God and sincerely ask for His help, He will help us. First, He will help us see ourselves as we really are, which is at the same time one of the hardest and one of the most blessed things we can understand. I reflected on Nephi's words in 2 Nephi 4:17-19: "My heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities. I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me. And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins; nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted."

As the days wore on, I read the rest of Nephi's psalm and David's and many others. There is a valley of darkness through which all of us are led, but if we trust in the Lord, we will get to a point where we will "fear no evil," for we will know that His "rod" and His "staff" do comfort us (Psalm 23:4).

Suffice it to say, when a small price had been paid, when sufficient effort had been put forth, the Lord in His goodness comforted my soul. What greater blessing could there be? What greater blessing is there?

I knew that God knew who I was. I knew that Jesus knew me (weaknesses and all) and still loved me, as He does all men, women, and children. I knew that He died for me and for all mankind. I knew that He freely suffered and gave His life for me and for everyone. I knew that His love was unlimited-broad, wide, and deep as all eternity, without any bounds. I knew He was my friend.

There was much struggling of spirit and many tears, often tears of joy, and then more struggling to express that joy. Words cannot adequately express feelings, but as I finished my determined course, I could hardly contain myself when I read 2 Nephi 4:34-35: "O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever. I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh. Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm. Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss; therefore I will lift up my voice unto thee; yea, I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness. Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee, my rock and mine everlasting God."

Sometimes when things aren't going right, we think we need to get away from a place or a person. Sometimes that helps, but most of the time what we need is to get away from our old self and our selfish feelings. We can leave a place behind, or we can stay in that place and leave our selfishness (often expressed in feeling sorry for ourselves) behind. If we leave a place and take our selfishness with us, the cycle of problems starts all over again no matter where we go. But if we leave our selfishness behind, no matter where we are, things start to improve.

During this time neither my companion nor the local people bothered me. They just left me alone and only occasionally asked if there was anything they could do to help. When I shook my head, they left and said no more. My experience is that Tongans generally are much more attuned to people's feelings than palangis, and they instinctively seem to know when to leave people alone and when to press to do things with them.

From that moment on I tried to never look back. I realized that any small place or any small number of people was more complex than I could comprehend and contained more potential than I could possibly realize. The infinite cost of the Savior's suffering and dying for all of us makes even one soul anywhere of infinite worth and deserving of all the energy, effort, sacrifice, and love our whole lives are ca-pable of giving. There is no such thing in this universe as a place too small or a people too few to not warrant our full effort and more. I now knew that for sure!

True love, God's love, is the answer to all concerns. It fills the universe and should fill our lives and our thoughts and our actions. To know that He suffered and died for others as well as for us is the greatest single force in the universe to give us the desire and the power to help others. We all fall short in many ways. We all love much less than we should. But the Savior did not fall short, nor love one whit less than He should. Literally, the universe is filled with His love, and we should be filled with love because of Him. Oh, how we should try with all our hearts to become part of this infinite love! I was determined to do so.

When I returned from my odyssey back to the branch and my companion, I was quieter and more subdued in my conduct. I seemed to weep more-and to listen more. I seemed to feel more of what was going on around me and be more empathetic with the problems others were experiencing. I tended to look deeper into people's eyes and tried harder to testify to them that God lives and loves them. I tried with all of my heart to let them know that Jesus lives and loves us, and because of Him all will be well-eventually. I tried to have faith and to show love and patience in all things. I felt I understood, at least a little better, the importance of faith, hope, and charity. I tried to impart the fruits of as many of these qualities as I could.

I wish I could constantly be surrounded by that aura of warmth, love, and certainty that I felt then. I was now ready, in a new way, to go to work with Feki and teach, testify, love, and help for a different reason than before. I hoped I was ready not to complain anymore, or at least not as much.

A typical "saliote" or horse-drawn cart-big wheels were needed for the mud and ruts.
