John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

8

"The Angels Have Recorded"

After I caught my second spiritual wind, we worked harder than ever. As we spent more time out visiting and sensed the conflicts this caused with the branch president, we realized we should have our own house. We knew the only way we could have it was to build it ourselves, so we determined to do so. When we announced our intentions, it caused deep and mixed emotions. The branch president did not want us to leave his home, but when we agreed to build our house near his, he was more cooperative. There were about thirty members of the branch, most of whom were active, at least in the sense of acknowledging they were members and coming to meetings. Some of these members volunteered to help while others did not.

To begin construction, we needed several strong poles of considerable length for the outside supports. Experienced people told us that ironwood poles were best. Ironwood is aptly named. It grows in the swamps and lasts a long time both above and below ground. Since there were no saws, the only way to get the ironwood out was to wade into the swamps and cut it with machetes. The wood was so hard that the first few blows of even the sharpest machete hardly made a dent.

Several of the priesthood brethren finally agreed to a pole-cutting project. Early one morning, eight of us met to go two-by-two into the swamp. Each team was to bring back four ironwood poles of five to six inches in diameter and ten to twelve feet in length. It was a formidable task, but we were all agreed. We had something to drink, ate some left-over talo, and left for the swamp.

The branch president had made team assignments. I was assigned to a strong young man. We all noticed that Feki was assigned to the laziest one of the group. We smiled, as we knew Feki was by far the hardest worker.

It gets very hot and the mosquitoes are terrible in the swamp, so we were all anxious to cut the poles and get out as soon as possible. While we were gone, the Relief Society sisters agreed to weave polas (woven coconut leaves) to use for the roof and walls of our thatched home. They also said they would have a nice meal ready for us about midafternoon, when they estimated we would return with the poles.

Each team separated to a different part of the swamp and started hacking away. I would swing a hundred times or so while my partner rested-if you can rest while knee deep in a hot, smelly swamp with mosquitoes constantly swarming around you! After my hundred swings, my partner would swing while I tried to fend off the mosquitoes. Even though my arm was awfully tired at times, it seemed preferable to be swinging than standing. I suppose we were bitten with about the same frequency, whether standing or swinging the machete, but you didn't notice the mosquitoes, the heat, or the smells so much when you were working hard.

Eventually, we finished cutting our trees. We removed the limbs and had four poles of sufficient length and diameter to meet our goal. It was probably about three in the afternoon when we came dragging our poles back. One team had arrived shortly before us and another came soon after. We waited and waited, but Feki and his partner did not come. The Relief Society had the meal ready, but we decided to wait until Feki and his partner returned. The ladies were still weaving polas, so we helped them as we waited.

Weaving polas is an interesting process. You weave the individual coconut leaves together and then periodically break the hard back of one of the leaves and stick the broken stem into the next leaf so it holds together. Some do the weaving tight and strong, and others make the weave too loose. Over the several weeks of building our house, I wove a lot of polas and became fairly proficient at it.

We waited, wove, and talked for a long time. An hour went by-no Feki. We were hungry and the food was ready, but we waited. Two hours. Where was Feki? We all knew what had happened and why it was taking so long. We said as much as we got hungrier and hungrier.

Finally after nearly three hours, Feki and his companion came dragging four nice poles. Almost in unison we called out, "Finally! What took you so long?" We all knew Feki had done nearly all the work, and we were pushing him to tell us how lazy his partner was, but he just smiled as they placed their poles alongside the others.

We kept pushing him as the Relief Soceity sisters spread the meal, but he said nothing. Finally I said, "Ah, c'mon, Feki, tell us why it took you so long. Didn't your partner work at all?"

Feki looked me straight in the eye. He looked at the others, too, then softly said, "What difference does it make to you why it took us so long? We have our poles. The angels have recorded the work done this day, and that is all that counts." He smiled broadly and sat down. We all looked at one another, somewhat embarrassed, realizing in our hearts that he had spoken the truth and said something quite profound. I had never thought of Feki as being profound before, but I did now. The atmosphere abruptly changed from one of needling to one of contemplation.

The meal was ready, so after prayer we all ate and began to laugh. We talked about the varied events of the day. We had happy feelings, as the food was good, our hunger was satisfied, and the poles were in.

But during occasional moments of silence that evening, I pondered the power of Feki's statement: "What does it matter to you? The angels have recorded the work done this day."

I thought of the many things we do in school, with friends, in business, even in Church, which are largely for show, to get credit, or to be the top of the class. The Savior's teachings flodded my mind: "Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also" (Matthew 6:21); "No man can serve two masters" (Matthew 6:24); and more. I thought of the Pharisees, of the pomp and the trumpets. I thought of the widow's mite, and then I found my mind resting for a long time on the publican. I could all but literally see him and hear his cry as he smote his breast and cried, "God be merciful to me a sinner" (Luke 18:13).

As dusk deepened to darkness, I looked across the small fire into Feki's dancing eyes, and my heart melted with admiration. He had absolutely refused to downgrade another. I knew I could trust him. Yes, the angels had recorded the work, the words, and the feelings of that day, and they were good.
