John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

9

Building Our House

We continued to visit people each day, but most of our time for the next several weeks was spent building our house. Deciding on the size and shape of our fale (house) and placing the ironwood poles accordingly was the first step. We had to dig deep holes and pack the poles firmly with rocks and dirt so they were solid and could withstand weight, wind, time, and other forces. It took a long time, but eventually we got the main outside poles up and began working on the rest of the house.

Feki was a master planner and builder. People on Niuatoputapu marveled at his talents and ideas, as did I. I had worked some in construction in Idaho, but my experience with saws, hammers, nails, and dimensional lumber was largely useless here, sometimes to my embarrassment, so I followed Feki's lead. Inside the main poles we dug additional holes and placed a series of much shorter poles in them, upon which we built a floor about two feet above the ground. The floor was made from split coconut logs and was covered with several layers of coconut fronds and mats.

We next built the roof. We measured the exact size and then built the roof superstructure on the ground using many medium-sized poles. It was a standard inverted V configuration. When all the poles were tied firmly together and the superstructure was tested for strength and firmness, we tied hundreds of polas to it, one on top of another, only a few inches apart, much like shingles. At the apex, we placed some specially prepared polas that evenly divided the rain, so it would run down both sides. It rained a lot, so the roof was thoroughly tested on the ground and any gaps filled before we lifted the whole roof structure up on the main poles and secured it in place with more sennit.

We next built walls by attaching small poles with coconut sennit horizontally to the perpendicular main poles. (The sennit was a braided cord made from coconut husks.) We then brought the dried polas the sisters had woven and tied them to this framework in sections. We left a space for a door and tied the polas on the poles to about four feet above the floor, leaving the area between there and the beginning of the roof open for ventilation.

There were no nails used in the house, just local materials. I guess some had tried nails before, but they split the brittle wood, rusted, and seemed inferior to sennit binding. During construction, I noticed how useful the coconut trees were to the Tongans. Not only did they provide shade and beauty, but the trunks furnished poles for houses; the leaves furnished polas for roofs and walls; the coconuts furnished drink, food, and oil; the husks furnished material to make rope or string (sennit) bindings, and what was left furnished firewood for cooking.

Some of the sennit lashing designs Feki and others made on the rafter poles were absolutely beautiful and to me were works of art. Not only were the cross beams held securely by the sennit, but the pattern and design developed in the careful overlaying of various colored (dyed) cords was magnificent to behold, much like a beautiful painting. Feki, as well as others, took great pride in this work.

After we raised the roof and secured it with sufficient lashings, we had a structure that looked and felt like a house. We next placed a series of loose polas from the roof that could be let down to cover the open space in case of heavy rain or wind. We still needed a door and some steps to get up the two feet to the main floor, but we started to sleep in our house anyway.

We soon found that the pigs and chickens loved to stay under the raised floor. They made a lot of noise, to say nothing of the smell and mess they left. We decided that wouldn't do, so Feki and I got a large number of small poles, cut them into four-foot lengths, and sharpened one end. We then made some large, wooden mallets, and for days we pounded poles into the ground around our house. We wore out several mallets but eventually had a fairly large area around our home enclosed with hundreds of poles close enough together that pigs, dogs, and chickens could not get in.

Coconut fronds were woven and then dried in the sun to be used to make the roof and walls of the house.

The roof was built on the ground, then lifted into place. Dries polas were attached much like shingles.

Feki figured out an ingenious way to make a gate and a door, and soon we had a real house. The whole project took several weeks. We had quite a bit of help from members and nonmembers alike, but Feki still did most of the work. I helped the best I could, which probably wasn't very much.

It makes you feel good when you have finally accomplished something quite challenging. I wish more missionaries could have the experience of building their own homes. You appreciate a home much more when you have labored for a long time to build it. Of course times and circumstances have changed now, but I still think missionaries generally should take more pride in their living quarters.

When the house was finished, we officially moved our things from the branch president's house to our new home. It was quite a day- moving is traumatic no matter where it occurs. Our house was close to the branch president's home but far enough to be separate and provide needed privacy for everyone.

Feki pounding small poles for perimeter fence to keep animals out.

Feki tying dried polas to form the walls of our almost finished house.

We held a dedication service for our house to which we invited the branch members and several other friends. Many people had helped and most of them came to the dedication. We were obligated to furnish a feast for those we invited, so we had extra work to prepare the food and drink. The priesthood brethren and Relief Society sisters helped as much and as happily with the feast as they had on the building of the house. As a result, the dedication was a big success. We asked the branch president to offer the dedicatory prayer. He did a good job, and from then on he felt better about everything. We were now officially on our own. It felt good to be in our own home.
