John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

10

The Boy and the Mango Tree

Shortly after moving into our house, I received a great lesson in Tongan faith. It happened like this: the day was hot, the mangoes were ripe, and life moved slowly forward. Feki and I had just returned from visiting when suddenly we heard some yelling and knew something unusual had happened.

The noise of a small crowd was getting closer to our house. We went outside to see what was going on just as a member, his family, and a few others arrived at our fale.

The father carried the seemingly lifeless body of his little ten-year-old boy wrapped in a large tupenu (piece of cloth). As the father lowered him from his shoulder and put him into my arms, he said, "He has fallen from high in a mango tree and hit his head and back on the hard roots. Here, make him well and bring him back to me."

I looked at the limp body and said, "He's dead. What can I do?" The father just looked at me and said, "Whether he's dead or not, I do not know. What I do know is I want him well again, and you have the power to do it."

I said, "Life is from God. If God has allowed his life to leave, we should be reconciled." He responded, "I've talked to God. I want my boy back now more than God wants him now. Make him well. It's fine."

I didn't know the words in Tongan to administer to his son, and I was looking for some way to get out of this uncomfortable situation. I had not personally experienced this type of faithful determination before and I just wanted to leave, but the look of expectation on the faces of his father, mother, brothers, sisters, and friends was so intense that I felt tremendous pressure to do something.

"We should get the branch president," I said, stalling for time. No sooner had I said this than the branch president walked up. He had been working in his garden when he heard the disturbance and came to see what was happening.

Feki quickly explained the situation. In a sort of panic-stricken state, I said, "You're the branch president. This is your responsibility."

I tried to give the child to him, but he said, "No, just hold him. I'm going to shower, clean up, and put on my Sunday clothes. Then we'll administer to him, and we'll see what God's will is."

I couldn't believe him. I complained, "He's dead, or dying, and you want to clean up first?" He looked at me with compassion (and maybe a little disdain for my lack of faith) and replied, "It is a sacred work to administer to someone. I am not going to approach God all sweaty and in my dirty clothes."

I waited for what seemed hours (but was probably less than ten minutes). Everyone else was calm and quiet, but my heart was pounding fiercely. There was no movement from the child. Finally the branch president emerged in his clean white clothes with a bottle of olive oil. Feki, who was a priest, helped me with the Tongan words as I anointed the boy, and the branch president sealed the anointing and blessed him.

I didn't understand all of the words of the blessing, but I did understand when the branch president finished and said to me, "Take the boy. Pray. Exercise your faith, and it will be according to God's will, his parents' faith, and your faith."

In all this time, I had not felt a heartbeat or breathing or any movement from the boy. I despaired as all eyes turned to me. The logic of my thinking was to tell them, "Dig a grave. This boy is dead. Don't make me do this."

But the faith of the Tongans caused me to go into our house with Feki, carrying the boy's limp body. It was almost evening. We closed the door, let the blinds down, and sat there in a sort of stupor as I thought of the father's last words, "We'll wait right here for as long as it takes. Just bring my boy back to me alive and well." I laid the boy wrapped in his tupenu on the floor. I could see no movement at all.

I have been scared on many occasions-such as car crashes, near drownings, scholastic tests, and the like-but I'm not sure I have ever been more scared than at that moment. This was life. This was faith. This was priesthood power on the line. And there was only me, my companion, a seemingly lifeless body-and God.

I prayed as I had never prayed before, "Help me out of this. What should I do?" Tears followed-tears of sorrow for the family and the boy and also tears of fear. What could I do? My faith simply was not strong enough. Feki sat in the corner waiting silently.

Little by little the fog of my mental despair began to dissipate. I began to feel: This is God's work. I am on His mission. The branch president holds the priesthood. So do I. These people have faith. God wouldn't leave us without some way out. These people can be made to understand. It won't be that bad. Something will work out somehow.

Then I reflected: God lives and loves us. Jesus lives and loves us. He healed the sick. He brought back the dead. As my mind caught hold of that thought, a light began to appear. Fear began to recede. Faith began to motivate my prayers.

The more earnestly I prayed, the brighter the light became. My thought was no longer, "How do I get out of this?" but rather, "What is God's will? What should I do? I'll do it, no matter what it is." I felt much better. I was still shaking, but light and courage were now replacing darkness and fear.

Time went by, then a very faint impression came, "Give him artificial respiration." I waited, but the impression stayed. The only artificial respiration I remembered was when I was a Boy Scout and we learned to push on the back of the rib cage and say, "Out goes the bad air, in comes the good." It seemed silly, but I felt I should try. I didn't even think about the possible damage if he had broken bones. I turned him on his stomach and put his head to the side with his arms at right angles. I could sense the limp, cold feel of death, but I also felt the warmth and power of faith that seemed to be pouring through the very walls of our house.

I couldn't remember exactly what to do, except to push on his back and say, "Out goes the bad air," then release and say, "in comes the good," so that is what I did. For several minutes my hopes rose, but as time ticked by and nothing happened, that former dark feeling of fear began to return. "No!" I said. "Get away! You can't be here, not with their faith!"

Suddenly, I felt a little twitch. Was it one of my muscles? Silence. More artificial respiration. Another twitch. That's not me, I thought. Then another twitch, and another, more definite now. It must have been an hour since he was first placed in my arms with no sign of life. More artificial respiration. A stronger twitch, then all of a sudden a violent retching and a great gush of half-digested mango pieces and gastric juices spewed onto the floor. It came and came. There seemed to be more than it was possible for one little boy to hold.

The smell was terrible, yet sweet, for what did I notice as the retching subsided? Tiny shades of breathing? Slight rising and falling of the back? Could it be?

Faithful Feki moved from the corner and with a rag, a bucket, and water began cleaning up the mess.

The night wore on. At times I thought there was regular breathing. At other times I thought I was deceiving myself. Prayers ascended all night. The fight between the light of faith and the darkness of fear continued. Finally the first glimmerings of dawn began to appear. There was still no sustained movement. But as the daylight became a reality and the darkness faded away, so did the light of faith reign and the darkness of fear depart.

There was definitely a hint of breathing and a little warmth where his heart was. We had no thought of eating or drinking, just fasting and praying and the spiritual sustenance of faith to keep us going. Throughout the day we could hear the family outside, but never once did they complain or even inquire. They just waited, prayed, and believed.

Again, twilight came. But as the light receded and the soft cover of darkness enveloped our small fale, this time it did not bring with it fear but rather a sweet assurance that things would be all right.

The prayers continued, increasing in faith through the second night. We kept up a constant mili mili (rubbing or massaging of the back). Finally, as the light returned the second morning, there was a little movement of the boy's head, a tentative moan, and a tiny flutter of the eyelids. As the first sunbeams of the light came through the cracks of the coconut frond blinds and streamed across the floor up to the young boy's face, almost on cue his eyes popped open. He looked about for a moment, still without moving, and simply said, "'Oku ou 'ife?" ("Where am I?")

His eyes closed again for a while, then reopened. His head moved. He rolled over on his back, then on his side. He tried to get up but couldn't. He was too weak to walk, but he was alive! I picked him up and carried him to his parents outside. As Feki opened the door, the whole family stood waiting. I simply handed the little boy back to his father and said, "He'e, ko ho foha. Kuo sai." ("Here is your son. He is all right.")

With tears of gratitude, they thanked me profusely. With as much sincerity as I have ever felt, I replied, "Thank God, not me. He healed him. In an eternal sense, only He can truly heal. That is who the Savior is-the great Healer of all mankind and of all our problems. If we will only have faith in Him and do as He says, He will heal us all of all our problems." They listened respectfully.

It is hard to comprehend the feelings of that moment, for they were deep and full of love, faith, tears of joy, and the Spirit of God. Feki and I returned to our house, and after prayer we slept and slept and slept. No one bothered us. How sweet sleep is when you have done your duty and followed God's will-no matter what was required!

I don't know why this incident occurred, or exactly how. All I know is that it happened. I have seen just as much faith on many other occasions without the same results. I have learned that true faith in God does not require specific physical benefits but rather a sincere desire for God's will to be done, knowing that He knows best. The great faith behind the sublime statement, "Nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done" must find place in our hearts and lives (see Luke 22:42). When we understand His will through faith, no further questions or problems exist, for even if His will is different from our original will, His will becomes our will.

In this and other similar situations in Tonga, I felt more like a bystander than an active participant. I felt like I was standing on the shore of a mighty river while watching the powerful flow of faith go by. That river of faith was like an unfathomable current that I could see and feel, but not fully understand from where it came or to where it was going, yet every part of me felt its force and beauty and power. It was marvelous!

In a few days the boy was running around and climbing mango trees again.

There was no huge stir among the people of Niuatoputapu, even though they all knew of the event. Outwardly, at least, not much changed. A few more doors were opened to us. Most were still closed, but I felt a subtle change.

I heard little whispers, both good and bad, everywhere we went. People didn't turn us away quite so curtly. A few more questions were asked. Some listened and a few were baptized. The opportunity to teach and bear testimony was a little greater, and the work of God and the building of His kingdom moved forward.
