John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

11

A Quick Remedy

We continued to visit and continued to get turned away by most everyone. Occasionally a family would agree to listen, and when they did, we stayed and talked as long as we could. One evening we visited with a family in another village until quite late. They asked if we could stay with them that night. I was unsure, so I looked to Feki; he nodded his approval, so we stayed. They fed us a great meal and spread some mats for us in one end of the house. After prayers, we were soon fast asleep.

I was sleeping soundly when I sensed a movement. I rolled over and tried to go back to sleep, but I felt uneasy. There was a bright moon out and the end of the house we were in had some open ceiling, so it was fairly easy to see things. As I looked to where Feki should be, I realized he was gone. I then looked on the other side and saw that a new mat had been pulled in and a beautiful young woman was sleeping there. She had a sheet over most of her body. As she sensed me turning that way, she smiled and moved the sheet down some.

I was devastated. Where was Feki? How long had he been gone? I couldn't stay, but I feared getting up and walking out as I knew she was awake. If I obviously spurned her, she could start some bad rumors, and I wasn't sure what she or the other family members would do. How had I ended up in this situation? I quickly closed my eyes. Maybe she hadn't realized I was awake but was just responding to my turning.

I prayed with all my heart. What should I do? Please help me get out of this. I didn't try to do this. I felt myself getting warmer and warmer, then all of a sudden I had terrible stomach cramps. I knew I was going to throw up. I sprang from my mat coughing and trying to keep from vomiting. I raced outside to the nearest bushes, where I heaved and heaved until I thought my whole insides would come out. Soon a small crowd gathered, including Feki, the parents, this girl (now appropriately dressed), and several others. They could see how much pain I was in and really showed concern when they saw some blood in what I was throwing up.

I was finally able to settle down some, but I was still shaking and sweating and felt semidelirious. They helped me to a nice mat outside in the open. Feki and one or two others started fanning my burning brow and put some wet towels on my forehead. They stayed the rest of the night with me as I fitfully tossed and turned.

It was almost light before I dozed off and was able to sleep for a few hours. When I woke, it was daytime. Someone had made a canopy of sheets over me with four poles. Feki and two others were still there watching. They were all smiles as I opened my eyes.

What a beautiful sight to see Feki with his contagious smile, pearly teeth, and sense of self-assurance. I closed my eyes again and thanked God for His help. I slept some more, and when I woke again only Feki was there. My stomach wasn't churning anymore, the fever was mostly gone, and I felt fine. I asked Feki where he had gone during the night. He said the father had asked him to come and help on a project; while they were working on it, I had come out and began throwing up. I never told him what happened and doubt he had any idea.

I learned that God will always provide a way for us to escape from danger if we seek him sincerely, even though the means he uses may sometimes be quite unusual. I also realized more fully why missionary companions should always stay together.

I eventually got up and walked around a little, still somewhat unsteadily. The family came and apologized. They thought they had fed me something poisonous. "Strange, though," they mused, "we all ate the same food and no one else got sick." They asked how I was feeling, and I assured them I was fine. They were very relieved and expressed their happiness that I was feeling better now. The girl who had been there the night before was among those who seemed relieved that I was feeling better. Nothing more was ever said about the incident. We never slept at that house again.
