John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

12

Tangi Lau Lau

By now, I could communicate some in Tongan, but not in much depth. We had been in our house only a few weeks when a delegation came from the village of Falehau and asked if we could come and help a very sick man. Knowing there was currently no doctor or hospital on the island, we agreed and immediately went to Falehau. When we arrived, I noticed many people sitting around looking at us skeptically but expectantly.

The sick man was around fifty years old. He had developed a large boil on his neck that had grown inward and was cutting off his throat passage. He could not eat or drink and was having difficulty breathing. He seemed to be starving to death and was nearly nothing but skin and bones. Unlike the family and friends who gathered when the member's boy was hurt, this group was not united by faith. I was scared-I had no idea what to do, and I realized they expected me to do something.

The main contact Tongans on this island had previously had with white people was during World War II when some Allied soldiers set up a tracking station on top of the mountain. After a few months the tracking station was moved farther west to the Solomon Islands. Even though the soldiers were there only a short time, they left a reputation for three things: (1) being womanizers, (2) teaching the local youth how to use pineapples to make "bush beer" or "home brew" (which proved deadly at times), and (3) giving out pills and medicines. I suppose these people felt that as a white man, I should have some pills or potions to help make this man well.

When I told them I had no pills, their countenances fell, and I became even more scared. I asked Feki to explain that even though we had no pills, we would be happy to pray for him. They scoffed at the notion of our praying and insisted I try something else.

There was a smoldering fire close to the house with lots of smoke to keep the mosquitoes away, and it was hard for me to breathe. I felt this smoke was not good for the sick man with his already difficult breathing and told Feki so, but he told me to not say anything about that. He encouraged me to try something else.

As much as I prayed and tried to think of something, I received no impression of anything to do. They asked me to examine the man more closely. It was a miserable ordeal. I was sure he was in the last stages of dying: he could hardly move or breathe, and there was a terrible smell about him. I wondered whether they could get into his throat with a knife and lance the boil, and whether that might help. But I couldn't explain how to do that, and I wasn't sure it was right anyway, so we dropped it.

We stayed several hours until early evening. I never could figure what to do. Finally, after they could see I either couldn't or wouldn't do anything, they let us go. As we left, I felt a darkness from the expressions of the family and friends and a sense of anger in their eyes.

We arrived back home about midevening. After the normal chores of hauling water, gathering firewood, sweeping the house and yard, and bathing, we read scriptures, said our prayers, and retired for the night.

I could not sleep. The thoughts of that suffering man, the awful smell, the smoke, and the angry eyes of his family and friends following me-all combined to create a nightmare. I prayed for relief and explained to God that I had tried my best but just hadn't known what else to do. It all seemed to no avail, and the oppressive feeling of darkness got worse. I would fitfully drift off for a moment and then suddenly awaken with a feeling of dread and fear.

Sometime during that long and frightful night, I sat up with a start. I was aware of an eerie sound. It seemed to ooze from the walls, the ground, the sky, everything around me. At first I sensed it more than heard it. This fearful, almost unearthly, sound got louder and louder. I was not dreaming . . . it was real!

Such howling and mourning and crying! It seemed to bounce off the trees and fill the island, then rush into our house and engulf me with the darkest of fears. I noticed Feki stirring. Frantically I asked, "What is it?" He replied, "It's a tangi lau lau (mourning for the dead)." I shivered and wondered what it all meant.

The sound was getting louder and closer. In my fear, I imagined the dead man's family and friends coming after me. But why and how? What are they going to do? What can I do? I couldn't hide-there was no place to go. Besides, they were almost here.

I trembled with fear. I was certain that since I had failed them they were going to see that I paid. But in what terrible way? My imagination and fear ran wild. Almost hysterically I clung to Feki. "Help me, help me, they're coming! Listen to the howling and crying! What should we do?"

Quietly Feki put on his tupenu, opened the door, and stepped out into the heavy darkness that was now filled with wailing and shrieking such as I had never heard before. I thought of how brave Feki was, walking into the very jaws of a dark, tumultuous hell, or so it seemed to me.

I heard some subdued whispering, a few questions, and some responses. I could not understand much of the exchange. Then the howling started again as Feki returned to the room. Had he sold me out? What would happen? Feki wouldn't do that. Or would he? Maybe they had used some magic on him. What should I do?

Feki's face was somber. He sat down and looked at me for a long time. I was perspiring. My breath came short, my heart was pounding unmercifully. Then quietly and with dignity he said, "The man we visited this afternoon has just died. There has been some arguing. Some say they should have let us stay and pray; others say our coming speeded his death; still others say his death was inevitable and we had nothing to do with it. Finally, the head of the family told them we had tried our best to help, but it was God's will that the man die, and they should invite us to the wake and the funeral. They have sent a delegation and are asking us to come right now."

Feki continued, "Get dressed and follow me. Don't worry, they understand. No harm will come to you. Everything will be fine."

I wasn't totally convinced, but I trusted Feki. After the terrible imaginings I had just been through, I was ready to grasp at any straw of hope. The sky was starting to lighten as I got dressed and tremblingly followed Feki down the trail to Falehau. In the half darkness, shadows and sounds were magnified hundreds of times and seemed to literally jump out at us. With absolutely nothing mechanical on the island to interfere with the morning stillness, I could hear almost everything and imagined everything else. The weeping and wailing we were headed for seemed louder and fiercer than ever. I followed Feki. I had to trust him. I had to.

By the time we got to the funeral, a large crowd had gathered. It was quite light now. A new day had begun.

They asked us to sit close to the bier of the dead man, who was covered with mats and tapa cloth. Relatives and friends came by the score. They were disheveled, with wild hair and old clothes. They wore the dingiest of mats, tattered and dirty. Their clothes were black, ragged, and torn (the older and dirtier, the more respectful, I later learned). They wailed and threw dust in the air and on their heads. Some ripped their clothes and showed other signs of deep emotion and sorrow.

My fear was now beginning to move into shades of wonder. I was still not sure what was going on, but I was getting caught up in the emotion of the whole event. Some came and threw themselves on the dead man's body, while others would lie at his feet and howl in a way I didn't think humans were capable of. Emotionally I was torn-fascinated and scared at the same time.

A group of five ladies arrived. They were dressed in black, with old mats and frazzled hair, their faces and eyes deep with sadness and mourning. What weeping and wailing came from them! I assumed they were sisters or aunts or even daughters of the deceased. How they carried on, with their wailing, so heartfelt and forlorn! "Oi, oi, Oiaueee," they wailed at the top of their lungs, holding the "eeee" sound up high till you would think their lungs would burst. Then they came down the scale like a sliding trombone until they got very low and very soft. They then took a few deep breaths and with renewed vigor shattered the skies with a tremendous outburst of even higher and louder "Oi, oi, oiaueee's" before eventually coming down again for more breath and another attempt at record length, height, and volume.

I marveled at what I perceived to be the depth of sorrow and mourning for the deceased. How they must miss him! I felt a little more at ease now that I sensed that the emotion of the people seemed directed toward the dead man and not me.

I had never experienced such literal "weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth" (Alma 40:13). The howling and the sackcloth-and-ashes atmosphere felt like something from the Old Testament, and I thought of Isaiah's comments "howl ye inhabitants of the isle . . ." (Isaiah 23:6), "Ye daughters of Israel, weep" (2 Samuel 1:24).

I had been reading the Tongan Old Testament and comparing it to the English; in the midst of this mourning, I thought I could just as easily have been back in King David's time or in Abraham's. I felt that you can't really understand the Tongan people until you understand the Old Testament. The reverse is also true: You really don't understand the Old Testament until you've lived among and understood the Polynesian people. They truly are of the house of Israel. In their preaching, their mourning, their stories, and their actions, they refer a lot to the Old Testament and just naturally seem to understand it.

I was now becoming more and more a part of the whole event and could feel my own emotions changing from fear to wonder to sorrow. I almost felt as though I could join with them in their great lamentation over the loss of a loved one. I couldn't get Isaiah out of my mind: "Howl, O gate; cry, O city" (Isaiah 14:31). And these people did!

They had offered me something to eat, but I said, "No, I have come to comfort and mourn with you, not to eat." They said the toupai (pudding) would soon be ready and they knew I would like that. I still wondered if this was all a ploy to get me there, lull me into a form of security, then do something to me because I had not saved this man as they might have felt I could have done. I hoped not.

As I began to emotionally melt into the surroundings, I was even more fascinated at the intensity of the "oi, oi oiaueee's" of the lady next to me. Each wail was a crescendo, louder and higher and more hysterical than the last. I had never heard anything like it.

On one of the highest and loudest of her "oiaueee's," I felt there was no way a human voice could be held for so long. Finally, her voice started to come down, gradually becoming lower and softer. When she got to the very bottom, she took a deep breath (much to my relief), then unexpectedly turned to me and with anticipation whispered, "Kuo moho 'ae toupai?" ("Is the pudding done?").

I was stunned. I could hardly believe my ears. What had she said? The trance I had built for myself started to dissolve. I looked at her and replied, "Te'eki ai" ("Not yet"), and she immediately went into another long wail, higher and louder than ever before.

I found out later she was not a relative but rather a professional mourner. She was not so caught up in sorrow over the loss of a loved one as she was trying to do a good, professional job as a mourner. I often kid the Tongans that she was wailing more because the pudding wasn't done than because someone had died!

It turned out that all five of these ladies were professional mourners, and they were all very good. They came to help set the mood, to get fed, and to have something to do.

Of course, the family members and others were wailing sincerely for the loss of their brother, father, and friend. But I wondered if part of their wailing was knowing they had to feed so many people! The best thing to bring to a funeral in Tonga is a sack of flour or sugar, or a dozen loaves of bread to help feed the many friends and relatives who come and stay for days, weeks, or even months.

I soon came to the realization that these people were basically like people anywhere in the world. There are those who are sincere and those who are not. They needed the gospel as much as anyone to help them understand death as a transition and also to understand that the purpose of this life is to prepare for that transition.

I realized that these people were coming as the Israelites of old with weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, in sackcloth and ashes, but they needed help. They needed to remember some things encoded deep in their past. I understood again that the eternal question always has been and always will be not what people act like, or what they look like, or where they come from, or where or when they lived, or what language they speak, but what they are. Are they honest? Are they helpful? Have they come for their own account or to help someone else? I remembered Jesus talking about making Israelites out of rocks and realized again the significance of individual decisions.

I sat there for several hours, which was hard because I still wasn't used to sitting cross-legged and my circulation kept getting cut off. I felt I was learning some important things about human nature, such as the fact that sincerity is not always apparent, we often fear what we don't understand, and people are not always what they seem to be.

I remembered that the Savior spoke strongly against hypocrisy and said we must pray with "real intent," which I interpreted to mean having an eye single to His glory and being fully willing to do His will, no matter what it might be. If we have real intent, we have no hidden agenda.

I continued to listen and even ate some toupai as I reflected on these thoughts. I felt a deep kinship between their society and Old Testament times where a healthy expression of sorrow may have had a bigger place in life than we allow in our present Western culture. They buried the man before noon. However, the main part of the funeral lay ahead as the family hosted dozens of kin and friends. We visited with as many of them as we could, but before the sun set we returned to our home in Vaipoa.

The day had been an emotional roller coaster for me. First, fearing that which never happened and never was intended; second, naively assuming that all expressions of sorrow are sincere, when some are and some are not; third, realizing that people everywhere cover about the same spectrum when it comes to honesty of purpose; and fourth, learning that generally things work out if we are patient and sincere and willing to risk a little and listen a lot and feel for others more than for ourselves. It was an educational twenty-four hours at the very least.

Funeral mourners. The frazzled hair and torn mats represent respect and deep mourning for the deceased. The wreaths are later placed on the grave.
