John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

13

"Toe Taha Mai!"

I knew I had to learn the language better to be a good missionary. I could speak it superficially but was determined to heed my mission president's charge to learn the language well. I had memorized lots of phrases and understood a fair amount, but I knew I had a long way to go. I spent a great amount of time studying the language. Feki helped some, but generally he went out and worked with the branch president or other members while I studied. The only books I had in Tongan were the Book of Mormon and the Bible. I sat for hours and read and compared the English Book of Mormon to the Tongan. It didn't take long to recognize that the oft-repeated phrase "Pea na'e hoko o pehe" meant "And it came to pass."

I listened for words and phrases and wrote them down and asked Feki and others what they meant. As I learned more words, I started to understand the Book of Mormon in Tongan better than in English. I remember on one occasion thinking I knew what a verse in Tongan meant but was sure I was wrong because it didn't say the same thing in English. When I read the verse again in English, it suddenly dawned on me, "I think the Tongan is correct, and that's what it means in English. I just haven't understood it properly all these years."

I am convinced that learning another language helps us understand our own language better. We see things we have never thought of before. Experts say that learning another language expands our mind about as much as any activity we can undertake. I agree.

I was so fascinated by the different inflections of meaning in both the Bible and the Book of Mormon in Tongan as opposed to English that I made voluminous notes to remind me that there were different ways of understanding words and phrases. The principles never change, but the emphasis, at least in my mind, did.

Being raised in the western United States and coming from a multigenerational Church family, I naturally related to the pioneers and Joseph Smith and modern-day revelation and prophets. But reading the Book of Mormon and Bible in Tongan and living among those people cause me to relate more and more to the Old Testament. The Tongan Bible was translated directly from Greek to Tongan, not from the English King James Version. Because a number of clarifying manuscripts have been found since the King James translators did their work, the Bible in Tongan has many verses that have been translated more accurately than the King James Version. For instance, in Tongan the very first verse in Genesis reads, "In the beginning the Gods [using a word that means three or more] formed the heaven and the earth," which is significantly different from the English, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." There are many such examples.

The main change in emphasis that came to me was seeing modern-day prophets and pioneers in their historical context and relating the scriptures and my experiences more and more to the Old Testament and the covenants made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The Tongans are of Israel, and almost everything about their culture, faith, thoughts, and actions ties in closer to the Old Testament and the Book of Mormon, which has a heavy Old Testament leaning, than to what I had traditionally been used to. It was a mind-broadening experience that strengthened my faith to see how logically everything fit together.

Often while I was studying, the branch president would ask me to come and help him with various projects. I tried to help but couldn't always understand what he wanted me to do. He got angry when he told me to do something and I just stood there not knowing what he meant. He would yell, wave his hands, and point, and eventually I figured out what he wanted me to do.

I remember once he had me hold a pole while he stood back and did some visual sighting. Then he yelled, "Toe taha mai!" ("A little closer to me!") I didn't know whether to drop the pole or move it to the left or right or what. I decided to move it back. That really got him angry, and he yelled, after calling me a few choice names, "Na'aku pehe toe taha mai ikai koe toe taha atu!" ("I said move it toward me, not away from me!") I tried moving it to the side and even turned it upside down, only to see his anger rising each time. I finally moved it forward and saw a big smile come across his face as he exclaimed, "Ko ia!" ("That's it!")

Even though it was a tough way to learn, I never forgot that "toe taha mai" meant a little closer to the person speaking, and "toe taha atu" meant a little farther from the person speaking. There were lots of frustrations, but what I learned, I learned well. I was amazed at how much patience the people had with me most of the time.

By now I could bear my testimony in a heartfelt way and understand much of what was going on. I could contribute some to our discussions, but as far as feeling that I could carry on an extended, meaningful conversation or explain anything in understandable detail was concerned, I had no confidence at all. I knew lots of phrases and some parts of various lessons, but Feki kept pushing me to say new things and participate more in the discussions. I tried but often felt I was more of a hindrance than a help.

One day while in the home of a family who had agreed to listen to us, Feki started to give his usual introduction. I was busy running the words of testimony and phrases of support through my mind when I heard Feki say, "You are such good people and we like you so much, I am going to turn the lesson over to Elder Groberg to explain the correct principles in clarity and truth." I was jolted from my mental complacency. I protested with my eyes and looks of bewilderment and even a little anger, but Feki just sat there smiling. The whole family looked at me expectantly. What could I do?

I hesitatingly started to speak. I gave a couple of memorized phrases and bore testimony of their truthfulness. I then stopped and looked at Feki. Beads of sweat were forming on my brow. My throat was dry. Please help me, my expression pleaded. Feki continued to smile, with an expression of confidence in me. The mother said, "I believe what you just said is true. Do you have more for us?" They looked at me with so much hope and trust and longing. I knew I had to say something, but what? How I prayed!

I closed my eyes and seemed to see a beautiful grove of trees on a clear, spring day. There was an aura of light and goodness about the scene. I started to speak and found myself describing Joseph Smith's desire to find which church God wanted him to join. Without realizing it, I began explaining about Joseph's feelings-his desires to please God and his confusion at not knowing for sure how to do this. I asked the husband, "Do you know how he felt?" He replied, "I sure do."

I went on and on, explaining and asking questions and hearing responses. It never consciously occurred to me that I was saying words and using phrases I had never used before or that I was threading sentences together in a way that brought meaning into the hearts of these good people.

I found myself saying, "Now I'm sure when you learn what Joseph Smith learned about God's true Church, you will want to do what he did and be baptized and follow God's will, won't you?" Only then did it hit me that a miracle had occurred. The husband and wife looked at each other, then at Feki, then back to me. They had tears in their eyes. They said, "Of course we will. You'll need to explain more, but we do want to do God's will just like Joseph Smith did."

I didn't know what to say. I knew I had been able to explain things so others understood. I knew I had even used the proper tenses. I felt like shouting "Hallelujah" or "God be praised" but thought it might not be appropriate, so I simply said, "God's Spirit has been here. I'll now turn the time back to Feki."

Feki smiled and quickly made arrangements for the next meeting. He thanked them for their attention and asked if we could all kneel in prayer. He asked the father to give the prayer. He didn't want to and asked Feki if he would instead. What a beautiful prayer Feki offered! He thanked the Lord for His help, for sending His Spirit, for loosening my tongue, for confirming His word, and for blessing this family with faith. There was not a dry eye, even among the children, as we concluded that meeting.

Feki said no more, but from then on I was expected to give every other lesson, handle every other door approach, offer every other prayer, and be a full partner in all that was said and done. I couldn't say or understand everything, but from that day on I could say all I needed to say and understand all I needed to understand.

This is the way God works in our lives. We don't understand everything, or even very much, but we can understand all we need to understand. As we gain that essential core of knowledge, we find it contains within it the seeds of all other knowledge. The testimony of Jesus is not only the beginning of all knowledge but also the essential life-giving material from which all other knowledge springs. Without that testimony, we can learn nothing of real importance.

I learned that many Tongans, who some may classify as uneducated or even illiterate, have a better core of true knowledge through a firmer faith in and testimony of Jesus than many so-called educated men. I don't know how the rest of the knowledge we need will come, but I do know that those who are firmly tied to the source of all knowledge, namely faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, can eventually obtain it, whereas those who aren't so tied cannot obtain it until they humble themselves and acknowledge Him, not only as their Lord and Savior, but as the fountain of all knowledge.

I learned that day that the gift of tongues is very real and very much alive in the Church today. I learned that the gift of tongues is much more than just saying or understanding words; it involves deeper understanding that comes from a divine source far beyond mere words. I learned that this gift also involves lots of hard work, hours of study, and a degree of discomfort, even pain, that tests our resolve almost to the breaking point.

I felt good, especially as I remembered the pleased looks on the faces of that mother and father and the heavenly smiles that shone from those beautiful children. I sensed a little better why Jesus loved the children so much. That scene and those feelings stayed with me poignantly through supper and prayers and was a deep comfort as I drifted off to sleep that night.
