John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

14

My Aching Feet

It was so warm on Niuatoputapu that you could easily sleep without covers, but Feki told me to always have a sheet on at night and especially to always keep my feet covered. I wasn't sure why, but I believed him.

I soon found that a sheet did not keep the mosquitoes from biting. A thin piece of cloth was no major barrier for them! It was hard to sleep with their constant buzzing in my ears. We eventually got some mosquito netting from Tongatapu, but before that we just endured the best we could.

One night I must have pulled the sheet up around my head in frustration and left my feet uncovered. When I got up the next morning, something felt different. I stepped down and the bottoms of my feet split apart and started bleeding. I called Feki and he became very concerned. He asked me whether my feet had been uncovered during the night. When I said, "I guess so," he told me that rats had eaten the soles of my feet off!

I didn't believe him and thought he was joking, as I had felt nothing during the night. The whole thing seemed preposterous. What really happened, I guess I'll never know. What I did know was that I could not walk and my feet hurt terribly. The branch president was also very concerned, and he and his wife said I would have to have my feet seared, either by a hot iron or by the sun. I thought they were kidding, but they seemed very serious. I wanted nothing to do with a hot iron, so I chose the sun. I still thought the whole thing was crazy, but I knew I couldn't walk, and I knew something had to be done so I could walk again, and at least they seemed to know what they were doing.

The branch president gave me a blessing; then he and Feki tied me to a chair, which they then laid down so they could turn my raw soles towards the burning sun. They kept the rest of me covered except my feet. Someone was always there to keep the flies away and give me something to drink or care for any needs. They were very accommodating. At first the warmth felt good, but before long I realized that burning was taking place! How I suffered for the next few days! They rotated me about every half hour during the hottest four hours of each day so the bottoms of my feet were always facing the sun. It was terrible! I could see why they tied me the way they did. I almost wished I had taken the hot iron treatment and gotten it over with!

Finally, after several days, they said it was sufficient and I could just stay in and hurt rather than be carried outside and hurt. During these painful days I studied the language and read scriptures a lot. I also received visits from people, especially children, as I could understand them the best. I also played my trumpet and wrote letters-anything to take my mind off my aching feet!

The pain in my feet was excruciating, but eventually the soles scabbed over and I started to feel a little better. Feki and the branch president's wife constantly washed and rubbed my feet with special oils and aloe. After what seemed forever, they told me I could try to walk again.

I can still remember the deep sense of joy and gratitude that swept over me as I took those first few steps after so many days of not being able to walk. What a marvelous thing it is to be able to walk! I'm not sure we can truly appreciate something until we have lost it, or at least been without it for a while. I wonder if we can actually be grateful for something we have never been without? I know I appreciated the ability to walk, which I had always taken for granted before.

I still had to be very careful and walked only limited amounts for several days. During that time, I continued to study the scriptures. I thought a lot about gratitude. I remember reading in the New Testament where Jesus said, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46). I have heard lots of explanations, but I wondered if maybe even Jesus needed to feel what it was like to be without His Father, if only for a short time, in order to fully appreciate what it is to be with Him and be encompassed by His love. I had the feeling that we will appreciate our bodies after the resurrection more than we do now. I doubted, at least at that time of my life, that I would have appreciated the ability to walk until it was temporarily taken from me.

Time moved on, and little by little things got better. Within a few weeks, I was walking normally again. I often wondered if the story of the rats was true. Whether it was or not, I never left my feet uncovered again at night! The memory of the pain I suffered and the gratitude I felt when I first walked again is still very real.

About thirty years later, I developed a sore on one foot that would not go away. I finally saw a doctor who took a biopsy and found that it was cancerous. He removed the growth, which was smaller than a dime and the results showed that all the malignant material was removed. He told me he had never seen cancer in that location on the foot and wondered where it could have come from. I told him about the sunburn treatment. He said it was likely the cause of the cancer, since it can take twenty to thirty years for cancer caused by severe sunburn to show up.

Although I would never want to repeat it, that novel treatment did restore my ability to walk, for which I was and am very grateful. I still sleep with my feet covered-and probably always will.
