John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

15

"Wise as Serpents, Harmless as Doves"

Tracting was often frustrating. Very few people were willing, let alone anxious, to listen to us. We would often go days without getting into a single home for a gospel conversation. The people, however, were generally kind to us, especially when they sensed we were hungry or thirsty.

Many would say, "We want to feed you, but we don't want to listen to your doctrine. We are members of such-and-such a church. Our parents and grandparents have been members, and we are expected to stay members. This is a small island and everyone knows everything about everyone. Social pressure is great, so even if we did want to believe your doctrine, we probably couldn't change anyway."

I felt a deep love and respect for these good people. They were generally honest and forthright and did not want to hurt anyone, but rather wanted to help others. They had close family ties, and in many ways I felt at home.

As I began to speak the language more fluently, I became even more frustrated at not being able to share the beautiful message of the gospel with more people. I felt we needed to do things differently, but how I couldn't figure out, so in the meantime, we continued to go out every day and ask for opportunities to teach, without much apparent success.

I remember one specific day when we were invited into the home of a good family to eat. They gave us the standard line about wanting to feed us but not wanting to hear the discussions. They were such a nice family. They had fed us a few times before, and I knew they sacrificed a lot to do so. This particular day I felt an extra strong desire to share gospel principles with them but was frustrated by their request that their neighbors and friends not see us teaching them. I recognized their problem and wondered how to overcome it.

Suddenly, as though a light turned on, a thought came to me. I said, "I realize the problem you have. You have been very kind, and we would like to leave a blessing on your home. Would it be all right if we did so when we say the blessing on the food?" They said that would be fine.

When the food was spread before us, we all bowed our heads and I offered a blessing. I thanked God for the food, for this family, and asked Him to bless them with every needful thing. I thanked God for the Prophet Joseph Smith, for the First Vision, for the Book of Mormon, and for the priesthood, which was again upon the earth. I thanked Him that we now had authority to baptize all those who had faith on Jesus, who truly repented of their sins so they could be cleansed and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost to guide them through the rest of their life as members of the true Church of Jesus Christ in these latter-days. I thanked Him for the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ and the opportunity His true followers have of renewing their baptismal covenant each week as they partake of the sacrament, and on and on.

I suppose that blessing took thirty minutes or so, but no one cared much except that the food got cold. We knew the neighbors were watching, but they weren't overly concerned because it was customary for the local ministers to pray for a long time. When I finished, I felt good. I could tell the family was touched by what they had heard and felt.

We were able to use this method of teaching some principles for a few weeks, during which several families became interested. After a while, however, word spread, and we weren't invited to eat as often in nonmember homes; when we were, the family would tell us they would offer the blessing instead of us.

Another common experience when tracting was to come upon a man working in his garden and hear him say he was too busy to talk to us as he had to hoe or plant so many rows before the garden inspector arrived. This was extra frustrating to me because he could be telling the truth and we didn't want him to get into trouble, but I felt as soon as we left he would likely go back to sleep or to a kava party and forget all about the garden.

Let me explain about garden inspections, which were a pretty big part of village life. Since there were no stores on the island and you couldn't buy food, and since everyone had to eat, it was a government decree that each family had to have a garden of sufficient size for their family, plus a little to spare. These gardens were inspected regularly by a government official. If a garden was not up to standard, the father was first warned, then fined, and if he didn't plant more, he was sentenced to jail. The rationale was that if they didn't have a big enough garden to feed their family, they must be stealing from someone else's garden to eat.

The jail was an interesting affair. It consisted of a small compound surrounded by a couple of low barbed wires, which could easily be stepped over. Everyone knew everyone else and there was no place to hide on the island, so no one tried to escape. In fact, the head policeman warned the prisoners that if they weren't back from their work detail before sundown, he would close the gate so they would be locked out of prison and would not get fed that night. No one was late getting back!

I was aware of very few people who ever went to jail. Some people were lazy and liked to go to prison to get the meals and have a place to sleep. I suppose every society has its cross section of workers and nonworkers, law abiders and lawbreakers, leaders and followers, trustworthy people and those not so trustworthy.

I remember one day, when we were tracting, a man told us he had to work in his garden and finish three more rows, so he couldn't listen to us. I was somewhat aggravated, but a thought struck me and I responded, "Those three rows will take you a long time. Do you have two extra hoes? We'll help and you can finish much faster."

He looked quizzically at us and shrugged, "Okay, if you want." So he gave us each a hoe; I could tell Feki was surprised but pleased. We began to work with him. When we got to a place in the garden that was beyond earshot of neighbors and friends, the man asked, "Why are you doing this?" I said, "Because we love you and have a precious message to share with you." He said, "Okay, I'll listen so long as we keep working. I don't want my neighbors to get suspicious."

We often worked several hours with men in their gardens, but felt at peace as it was good talking time. Almost always when we worked with people in their gardens, we were able to give the main parts of our message. If we couldn't give our message, we worked to the end of what we had agreed to anyway.

At other times we found people thatching roofs or walls who said they were too busy to talk to us. Often we volunteered to help. Most of the time as we worked with them, we got the opportunity to give some of our message, but even when we didn't we stayed and helped till the project was done. I learned that if you quit helping when they won't listen, you not only lose future opportunities but you lose the Spirit. You must sincerely desire to help and allow the Spirit to guide, which it always does. I thought of Ammon as he served the king until circumstances were such that the king was ready to listen to him.

Even though the people were loving and kind, most of them were resistant to our message. It took a lot of ingenuity, hard work, and guidance from the Spirit to reach them, but over time it started to happen. Somehow the Lord opens the way for good, honest people to hear the message of his gospel.

With lots of effort, we eventually got a few families to listen to us. At this point most of our serious contacts were part-member families or families who had some prior association with the Church. Usually we baptized the nonmember spouse, and the other spouse became active.
