John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

16

Marriages and Baptisms

Prior to my going to Niuatoputapu, the mission president told me that I could not baptize anyone who was living with a member of the opposite sex but was not legally married (meaning registered with the government). He told me that as a missionary he had listed me as one with authority to perform marriages. He doubted I would use it much but wanted me to know I had the authority.

As we started teaching a few people, we found that many who had been married by local customs for years, and even had large families, had never had that marriage registered. Some of them said the papers had been lost, but usually they simply couldn't afford it. The registration fee wasn't so much, but the fee to the ministers in pigs, food, and similar fare was very high.

When we were ready to baptize one couple, we found that they were not legally married. They wanted desperately to be baptized, but couldn't afford the fee their minister required, which was higher than normal as they were threatening to leave his church. I was wondering how to help them when I remembered that the mission president had said I could marry people. There was some skepticism, but we checked with the chief magistrate, and he reaffirmed that I was registered and fully authorized to perform marriages.

The couple was anxious to get officially married and then get baptized, but now I had a new problem because I had no idea how to perform a marriage. I had only been to one wedding in my life-my sister's wedding in the temple the day before I left on my mission. I didn't think I should use the same words used there, but the ideas were good. Feki and I talked to several people, and between our investigations and what I remembered from the temple, we pieced together what we thought was a good wedding ceremony.

With the proper government authority, I married this couple and then we baptized them. When others found out that I could perform marriages and that I didn't charge anything for the service, I received many inquiries. I told them I would marry them if they would listen to at least one discussion. I guess some complained to the magistrate, and he explained to me that I was acting as a government agent and therefore could not impose extra requirements.

I guess some of the ministers complained also, so Feki worked out an agreement that was acceptable to them. While I didn't perform a lot of marriages, I did perform more marriages than baptisms on Niuatoputapu. I felt good about helping people become "officially" married, even though outwardly nothing much changed in their lives.

Our first baptism was the wife of a less-active member in another village. He wasn't interested in coming to church, but when we found he was a member and his wife was not, we instinctively knew what to do. Through much friendshipping and lots of discussions, progress was made and soon she was baptized and he became active.

There were other families brought together in similar manner, as well as some single people, and others who joined the Church later. It is good to sow seeds and it is good to harvest also-so good that no one who has been an instrument to teach another the truth, and who has seen the light go on in their life, and watched them come up out of the waters of baptism, can ever fail to appreciate the sacredness of that beautiful ordinance.

It is wonderful how well the Lord repays honest effort, no matter how unproductive it may seem at the time. We tried to reach everyone and felt we were pretty good friends with nearly everybody, including the chief magistrate (the highest government official on the island), who was always kind and helpful to us. In reality, however, most of the people whom we were able to talk to and who would listen to our message and accept us without reservation were those considered to be on the fringes of society. I thought of Alma turning from the wealthy Zoramites and speaking to those who were poor and cast out from among the rich (see Alma 32:4-8).

There were times when I wondered if we would ever get a good nonmember family to honestly listen to us. However, after some of the people from the fringes joined the Church and improved their lives dramatically, others started to take notice, and little by little a few good families began to show some interest.

I want to acknowledge how good some of the nonmember families were. They lived honest Christian lives. I learned to admire the teachings of John Wesley and others who tried hard to teach the truth as they understood it from the scriptures and who tried diligently to instill in their followers a discipline in life and a dedication to God that was impressive. Some of the ministers were very strict in adhering to their interpretation of Bible teachings. In many respects, there was not a lot of difference in the way some of the members of these churches lived from the way our members were supposed to live. Of course, these ministers had no priesthood authorized by God, but their lives of kindness, helpfulness, and trying to live according to God's laws from the Bible were wonderful, even inspirational, to me.

I often saw men and women sitting for hours reading and studying the Bible, trying to absorb its teachings and make them a part of their lives. Many people were trying hard to live good, Christian lives, so what we had to offer from a life-style point of view was not that different.

Of course there were many doctrinal differences that I constantly tried to point out, but it was still hard to get them to listen. I learned that to show any real difference, I needed to explain about Joseph Smith, priesthood authority, and modern prophets and Apostles. This was the only way I found to substantiate a viable reason for them to investigate the Church.

I became very tolerant of the efforts of other churches and very appreciative of the good things they do. I am convinced the world is a much better place to live in than it would be were it not for the efforts of many who try so hard to teach people to be loving and kind and to live good moral lives. I learned that God blesses good people everywhere as they try to do His will to the best of their knowledge.

Years later, when I returned to Tonga as mission president, I found it much easier to get people to listen to our message than before. It was not so much that our method or message had changed as it was that a generation of solid old-fashioned preachers had passed away and a new generation of much more liberal preachers had arisen.

This new group tended to move away from definitively denouncing sin and asserting the need for living disciplined lives. On the other hand, our doctrine and preaching remained the same as always: sin was sin and was not to be tolerated in any degree. It was not that we were any better than before, but the modern preachers in other churches were generally washing away the footings that had been so solid when I first met their fathers.

I am convinced the world will largely continue that way, with eventually only a few groups being willing or able to hold the line against sin, as it seems easier to sink into sin than to rise above it. I hope we can always be in the forefront of teaching the truth and holding the proper line. I am sure we can. It is our destiny!

I always felt our baptisms were wonderful, spiritual experiences. I loved the idyllic setting of our baptisms. Let me explain.

At one end of Niuatoputapu a small stream meandered peacefully down to the ocean. The source of the stream was a natural artesian well, which bubbled from some shaded rocks in a heavily forested area. As the stream moved along, it was turned at one point by a large boulder, which created a beautiful pool large enough and deep enough to be perfect for baptisms. The pool was close to town, yet secluded by heavy, verdant foliage. Since there was only one trail to the pool, there was total privacy, and the dense growth all around absorbed the sounds of ordinary life and made the pool a place of peace and beauty.

Each time we went for a baptism, my thoughts turned to the description of the waters of Mormon in Mosiah 18. I don't know how anyone could experience more peace, beauty, love, and unity than we felt there.

I can still hear the singing of colorful birds blending their songs with the quiet rippling of the water as it flowed to the sea. I can still see the sunlight filtering through the tall fern leaves and hear the silence of those beautiful, green palms as they moved slowly in the calm breeze. I can still smell the freshness of everything and feel the joy that permeated everyone as beautiful, faithful people made eternal covenants of baptism in that sacred place. The pureness of the white clothing they wore was equaled only by the depth of joy that shone from their beautiful brown faces as they rose from those sacred waters, having buried the natural man or woman and become new creatures raised by His authority to the hope of eternal life in Christ. Heavenly smiles filled all in attendance as the covenant-makers were given the gift of the Holy Ghost, and everyone knew that something eternally good had been done.

I marveled at the symbolism of the pure, clear waters springing from the solid rocks and flowing freely from a source made not by hands, yet giving life to all it touched. I thought of the living waters offered by Jesus-pure, free, and life-giving.

While our baptisms were few and far between, each one was a wonderful experience. How I wanted to baptize everyone and have them feel the joy and peace that came from that sacred ordinance! We tried very hard, but very few would listen to us. Still, we continued to hope and work.
