John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

17

Girl Troubles

Nothing made us happier than to find a good family to teach. After working with one such family for a while, they seemed willing to listen to the lessons. We taught them several times and seemed to be making progress. I felt wonderful about the prospects of baptizing the whole family, but one thing bothered me.

For some time I had sensed that their eighteen-year-old daughter was "making eyes" at me and that her family was encouraging it. There were little comments and unexplained entrances and sudden exits that would leave us temporarily alone. I dismissed these as my imagination, and we continued visiting the family and giving the discussions.

One day, on what missionaries would now call preparation day, we agreed to go to the back side of the island for a kai tunu (cookout) with this family. Such an event is always exciting, and Feki and I were up early to help get the wood, the food, and the mats ready. With our investigator family, we started for the picnic area.

It was a long way to the back of the island. The sun was hot, the trail was narrow, and over time the eight of us became somewhat separated. Occasionally those in the lead would stop and wait for the rest of us to catch up. Often they would have green coconuts for us to drink. Nothing can be sweeter on a hot day than the cool taste of coconut juice under the shade of a banana leaf on a small island in the South Pacific.

Feki was among the fastest and was usually far ahead. I was among the slowest and was toward the rear. We had been walking for quite a while and had been separated and back together many times. There was a lot of high vegetation and as I rounded one turn, I could just see the back of the person ahead of me going around another bend. I started to hurry to catch up, when I heard a cry for help from behind me. Because of the many turns in the trail, I couldn't see anyone. But I knew someone was there, so I went back to see if I could help. I called out, "What's the problem?"

A female voice called back, "Help me! I twisted my ankle." I came around the bend and sure enough, there was the eighteen-year-old daughter. She had put down her load and was in the process of undressing.

"What's wrong?" I said. She quickly looked up. As her beautiful brown eyes caught mine, she replied, "Ta hola ki he vao," which is literally "Let's run away together in the bush," but really means "Let's make love."

I couldn't believe I had gotten myself separated from the others, though as I look back now I assume that there probably was some complicity on the part of at least some of the group. I realized I was caught in a bad situation. The question was, "What do I do? How do I get out of this?"

Almost immediately an impression came to me. I said, "Listen, put your clothes back on. Let's hurry and catch up with the others. While they cook the meal, I promise I'll talk to you about marriage, family, and what love really means." Her eyes brightened. I turned and started down the trail. She put her clothes back on and followed without a word.

Within a few minutes, we caught up to the others. They asked what had happened. She said she had hurt her foot but was fine now. Since only a couple of minutes had passed, nothing more was said. We soon arrived at the back side of the island.

There were some rocky ridges and a gradual drop to the beach. Everyone knew it was against the rules for missionaries to swim, so that wasn't a problem. We played some games and had a good time with the family. Then while the others began cooking the meal, I sat by this girl, within sight of everyone but far enough away for a private conversation. For an hour or so we talked about love, marriage, and family, as I had promised her. I had no preconceived plan of what to say, but just started talking and followed the promptings of the Spirit.

I explained that we are all spirit children of our Father in Heaven and that He gives us our physical bodies as a marvelous gift, a beautiful temple created by Him, which houses the equally marvelous spirit that gives life to the body. I told her that since our bodies were created by God, they really belonged to Him and He just loans them to us. The real "us" is our spirit, and since we are using His gift of a body, we need to use it according to His desires and not defile it or deliberately hurt it. Since He created our body, He knows the most about how to use it so we can get the greatest joy and happiness from it. His instructions on how to use it are given in the scriptures and through His prophets.

I told her that each body contains within it seeds put there by God, who made it; that part of the potential for godhood is to share in the creation of additional physical bodies as earthly homes for more of His spirit children; and that this is done through marriage and family.

I explained about the priesthood, temples, and the eternal marriage covenant. I remembered my sister's wedding that took place just before I left Idaho Falls and explained parts of it to her. I told her it is God's will for all men and women to be married in the temple so their families can be together forever. I explained that it is His will that the act of procreation take place only after marriage in the temple. In this way He can ensure the greatest joy and fulfillment possible to those who obey Him, for He is then a full partner in the sacred triangle of man, woman, and God. I said that others not married in the temple could experience happiness, but the greatest joy and happiness possible could only come with a temple marriage.

She looked up incredulously and asked, "Are you saying it is God's will that we remain virgins until we marry?"

"Yes," I answered, "and then remain true to your spouse after marriage for your whole life."

"Wow!" She shook her head. "How can you possibly do that?"

"You may not be able to if you try to do it alone," I responded. "But with God's help we can do anything, no matter how hard it seems. Remember, God was talking about the process of having children when He told Sarah, 'Is any thing too hard for the Lord?" (see Genesis 18:14).

She thought for a long time and then said quietly, "And what if you've already blown it?"

"Then join the Need Help Club," I answered.

"The what?"

"The Need Help Club. Join it along with the rest of mankind. You wouldn't be so different. All of us have made mistakes of some type or another. Everyone is lost unless they turn to the Savior. If you turn to Him and have faith in Him by doing what He says, He will help you through the gift of repentance and get you going on the right course again. That's the basic reason I'm out here on a mission, to teach and testify of these things, especially faith and repentance, and also to baptize people who believe these principles and are willing to follow them."

To my knowledge, I had never talked to anyone about these things, or even thought much about them, at least not in that way. But as I spoke, my understanding was opened and I was able to explain about love, marriage, temples, bodies, spirits, God's will, and His love for us, in a way that made me want more than anything to someday worthily marry in the temple. I knew if I married someone who had those same desires, we could feel God's love and power and help in our marriage and family. I knew we needed Him as a full partner to be truly happy. I knew that all people needed the same things and that no one could have a fulness of joy in any other way.

The conversation seemed to have a profound effect on me and on this girl. She asked several questions about how you know who the right person is, when the right time is, and why God gives us such strong drives if we are not to use them until we go to the temple.

I didn't have many answers other than to bear my testimony that what I had explained was God's will and that the closer we are to doing His will, the happier He and we will be.

She asked about the priesthood power to seal for time and all eternity, who holds that power, where temples are and how you get there, and many other things.

I explained that there would soon be a temple in New Zealand and that God would not withhold his blessings from anyone if his or her desires were right. I promised her that if she would listen to the missionary discussions, pray, read the Book of Mormon, gain a testimony of the gospel, repent, and get baptized, and follow the leaders of the Church, she would be able to go to the temple and have all of these blessings in her life.

Just then the call Taimi kai (time to eat) came. It had the effect of bursting the spiritual bubble I was in; instantly I found myself on some hard rocks above a small beach on a tiny South Pacific island. It took me a few minutes to remember where I was and what I was doing. Then I remembered and realized we needed to join the others for the meal. It had been a good conversation.

Picture Jean sent John on Niuatoputapu that helped solve a problem.

John's missionary passport picture sent to Jean about the same time.

I left those rocks with a solid determination to follow God's will and eventually get married in the temple. The spirit of peace, assurance, and certainty I had felt was tremendous. Some of those feelings must have been felt by this girl also, for she later joined the Church, married a faithful man, and was sealed in the temple. She became a good mother of several children and a faithful wife and supporter of her husband, who served in many positions. She also became a good leader in the various auxiliaries and has truly spent her life trying to follow God's will and build His kingdom.

How grateful I am to God for his help in allowing His truths to be taught and understood, and also in giving needed protection from evil that could have been so destructive.

I still marvel at the wonderful blessings that have come from following the spirit of that discussion while sitting on some ordinary rocks on an obscure island overlooking the endless Pacific Ocean. How good God is!

There were no further problems with that girl.
