John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

18

"Seilo, Seilo"

After the last few problems, I instinctively listened more and stayed closer to Feki. I was happy that word about our requirements as missionaries, especially the "no fooling around" part, was now pretty well understood by everyone. This seemed to be accepted by most people, but I sensed that the girl's mother was still quite disturbed.

She was always nice to us, fixed meals, and helped us in many ways, but I felt a distance and a coolness from her that bothered me. I tried to talk to her about some of the principles I had spoken to her daughter about, but she would not listen.

Finally, on one occasion when just the two of us were visiting, I asked her, "What's wrong? What's bothering you?" When she realized no one else was close, she poured out her feelings.

"You say you love us and are trying to help us, but you don't like my daughter. Are you too good for her? Isn't she pretty enough for you? What do you want, anyway? My husband has offered you hundreds of acres of the best land if you would just marry our daughter and stay here. But you turn your nose up at us. What more do you want? I'll make you an even better offer. You don't even need to marry her or stay here. Just give us a half-white baby through our daughter and we'll not say any more. Surely you can't be so selfish as to not do that for us!"

I tried as hard as I could to explain that it was God's will to not do that and that as a missionary I was duty bound to follow His will. She refused to accept that and continued to accuse me and my companion of selfishness, of not feeling for their plight. "All we want is a half-white baby," she said. (At that time, some of the islanders still subscribed to the myth that white people were smarter or more powerful or superior in some way.)

I did not want to offend her, nor have her feel we did not care, but I could not offend God or go against His will. How to reconcile these different feelings was beyond me. I prayed and asked Heavenly Father to please soften her heart and help her understand so she would not be angry with me, but it seemed the more I tried to explain, the angrier she became. The atmosphere was such that bearing testimony did not seem appropriate. I determined the only thing I could do was leave, so as to not make things worse. I didn't want to leave with those bad feelings but could see no alternative.

As I stood to say good-bye, a thought struck me. I turned to the mother and said, "I know I haven't explained things very well. But if you will be patient, I'll come back tomorrow. We'll talk again, and I'll have something new to say." She accepted that, I suppose, with the faint hope that I might change my mind by the next day. I felt somewhat perplexed, for I didn't know what I could say tomorrow that I hadn't already said, but I had followed a prompting-and by now I knew that was always the best thing to do.

Later that day I heard that most welcome sound, the haunting cry from high on the mountain, "Seilo, seilo" ("A boat is coming").

It is difficult to describe the feelings of a boat day or the activity that takes place on the infrequent occasion when a boat comes to a small, isolated island. Normally, a boat came about once per month, but because there was no real schedule, sometimes there would be two boats per month and other times it would be two months or more between boats.

Boat day is an event that can only be appreciated by those who have been isolated for long periods of time. It is almost impossible to describe the all-pervading stir of a boat's arrival. People drop what they are doing as eyes widen with delight; and whispers of anticipation are heard and felt everywhere. Horses, dogs, and pigs lift their heads and start sniffing and moving as they also know something is happening. Slow-paced life becomes more animated, and, almost by herd instinct, everyone and everything starts moving toward the boat landing.

That cry, "Seilo, seilo," seemed to stir every type of emotion known to man. There was anticipation and apprehension (who, among family and friends on other islands, had been born or married, died or become ill?), joy and sadness (who would arrive and who would depart?), and happiness and fear (what good news and what bad news would come?). It was like a microcosm of that grander event of spirits shuttling back and forth from this small planet, earth.

It took several hours from when the boat was first sighted until it arrived. It took another few hours to unload the cargo and carry the mailbag to the post office in Hihifo. Everyone gathered around the post office and waited as the sorting began and names were called-"letter for Samu," "package for Mele," and so on.

We went to Hihifo, mingled with the people, and listened to the news: the Queen's birthday was lovely; the rugby team lost in Fiji, but the referees were prejudiced; Joe caught twenty-five fish in one night; Mele had twins. No one cared much or said anything about world events or the economy, as such things had no relevancy to them-or to me at that time.

We comforted those who had received bad news, shared the joy of those who had received good news, and encouraged those who had received no news. This total sharing of happenings and feelings by everyone, together with the small, communal interdependency of the island, produced a feeling of unity that was at the same time frustrating (because everyone knows everything about everyone else, and nothing goes unnoticed) and wonderful (because everyone cares about everyone else, and nothing goes unnoticed). With the present rapid increase in communication and transportation, boat days on small, isolated islands are a dying institution. I wonder if heaven won't be more like boat day on Niuatoputapu in the 1950s than the hectic days and hurried schedules of a busy city in the 1990s.

On nearly every boat day I received a few letters. This day was no exception. I received letters from home and from friends, including a letter from Jean. Feki received some letters also. We put the letters we had written in the return mail bag, took our mail, and walked back to our home in Vaipoa.

It was always good to receive mail from home. The bonds of love and family ties are strengthened on both ends. I was happy to receive a letter from Jean. It had been mailed from California over two months before but seemed as fresh and encouraging as though it were written yesterday. She was in her senior year at Brigham Young University and graduating soon. To my surprise, she had sent a small but lovely photo.

As my eyes fell on that picture, a thought formed in the back of my mind. It was not a dramatic revelation or an absolute, certain instruction, but rather a sort of happy feeling about a direction to take. By the time we finished reading the mail, it was late, so after prayer and scripture study we retired for the night. As I woke early the next morning, that previously nebulous feeling had become very clear. I knew what to do.

I told Feki I needed to go to Hihifo but would be back shortly. It was very early and hardly anyone was up and about. I ran most of the way and arrived at the mother's house almost out of breath. Sure enough, she was sitting in the peito (separate cooking house) stirring coals and starting to boil water.

She rolled out a mat away from the smoke and fire and motioned for me to sit down. Her attitude was still quite sullen, but somewhat anticipatory and better than it had been the day before. We sat for quite a while saying nothing. I was trying to clear my thoughts and praying in my heart that I could say what God would have me say and that He would soften her heart and help her understand.

Finally I began, "Look at this picture." Tongans love photos. She looked at Jean's picture long and admiringly. "That is my girlfriend. Her name is Jean. I love her, and she loves me." I hoped I was telling the truth. I felt I was. "We want to get married in the temple when I return, so we promised each other that until we were married, I would not have sex with anyone and neither would she." I felt I needed to be very clear to her. "See how beautiful she is? She is keeping her promise to me. You don't want me to break my promise to her, do you?"

She continued to look at the picture. I could sense a little softening in her posture, then a tiny shaking, then some semi-sobbing sounds as she inhaled deeply and began to breathe out with a light moan. Tears came to her eyes as she finally looked up at me.

"You promised each other?"

"Yes."

"You love her?"

"Yes."

"You're going to marry her?"

"Yes."

"She's true to her promise?"

"Yes."

"Kolipoki (Elder Groberg), you must keep your promise." (In Tongan there is no G, R, or B sound, and each consonant is followed by a vowel. Therefore, the closest the Tongans could come to Groberg was Kolipoki.)

Tears were coursing down her face and falling on her lap as she handed the picture back to me. "Go now. Thank you for telling me. It's okay. I won't bother you anymore." And she didn't.
