John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

19

"One . . . , Two . . ."

After much effort, another strong, prominent family finally agreed to listen to us. What a thrill that was! The family seemed sincere and invited us back several times. I suppose this upset their minister as they were probably good contributors to his church. When we gave this family the fourth discussion, they had lots of questions, so we stayed and talked late into the night. As we concluded, the father said, "We'd like you to stay here tonight." I had noticed the family getting a little fidgety towards the end of our discussion. I wondered why but thought they were just pondering our message.

"Thank you," I responded, "but we must go to our home." I was still concerned about sleeping in other people's homes. Our home was about two miles away on the other side of the forest, or jungle, between the two villages. Their house was right on the edge of this large, forested area, and the small trail that led through it to our house was right behind their home. We had been down this trail many times in the past, and I felt confident we would be just fine.

The father persisted, "We'd really like you to stay tonight. I think you should." I could even see my companion nodding in approval. I had been giving the lesson and was sort of in charge, so being a little stubborn, I insisted, "No. We must go. It's against mission policy to stay." I wasn't sure whether it was but thought it sounded like a good way to end the discussion.

They appealed to us several times to stay, and I sensed that maybe something was wrong. However, since nothing was definite, I didn't think more about it and we left. Even though I felt a bit uncomfortable, I felt sure God would protect us if there were any problems. As soon as we got outside and started home, I sensed that something wasn't right. It wasn't anything I heard, but rather a spooky feeling. I wanted to go back to the house we had just left, but as impetuous youth often do, I determined to go on as we had said we would. How foolish we are at times!

We had gone about a hundred yards when from the trees behind us emerged a group of eight tough, young men. They were partly drunk and had stones, sticks, broken bottles, and rocks. They formed a semicircle and started to tighten it, moving closer to us. We could see we were in trouble, for they were obviously bent on hurting us. As they moved closer, my companion, like a mother hen, pushed me behind him and said, "Now, here's what we'll do. I'm going to count to three. When I say, 'three,' I'll yell as loud as I can and charge right into the middle of them. The second I do that, you turn and run as fast as you can down the trail and through the bush toward home. It's dark and they won't know what's happening for a while because I'll be swinging both fists and yelling as loud as I can. By the time they find out it is just me, you'll be halfway to Vaipoa. You'll make it safely home, I'm sure."

"I can't do that," I said (even though I wanted to).

He replied, "Look, I'm older and more experienced. You do what I say. There is no sense in both of us getting hurt. You didn't listen to me in the house, but you'd better listen now." He started counting, "One . . . , two . . ." I froze with fear and uncertainty. What should I do? Just at that instant, out of the bush behind us, where the trail began, came crashing the man whom everyone on the island feared more than anyone else. He was the toughest of them all.

My first impression was, "We've had it now-sealed off from in front and from behind."

This big, tough fellow walked right past us and stopped halfway between us and our attackers. He was a little tipsy himself. He glared at those eight young men and said, "The Mormons are mine. I'll take care of them. If anyone touches them without talking to me first, they will answer to me!"

Like a cube of butter put into a hot frying pan, that crowd of young men quickly melted away. They simply vanished into the darkness as quickly and as quietly as they had appeared.

As soon as they were gone, the tough man told us to start down the trail leading to our village. He was right behind us. I could hear and smell him. I thought, "When he gets us to some deserted spot he'll surely 'take care of us,' all right." I knew he was big enough and tough enough to do so. We kept walking, and he stayed right behind us. I was scared and wondered when the blow might come. I didn't dare run nor did I dare look back. I had a fervent prayer in my heart, which counterbalanced my fear a little. Each step we took brought us closer to Vaipoa; finally we emerged from the bush onto the open edge of our village. Nothing had happened yet. My heart was still racing, but I summoned the courage to turn around and face our fearful friend. He just grunted and indicated we should head to our home.

I was breathing a little easier now. As we came to our home, I finally realized we were safe. It had been a long two miles, but how relieved I was! The walk had worn off some of the effects of the alcohol on our friend, and he seemed more willing to talk. We were alone and a big part of the night was gone, but we summoned the courage to ask, "Why did you do that? Why did you protect us and help us?"

"Well," he explained, "someone who wanted you out of here called us together and gave us some free home brew. He suggested that we take care of the Mormon missionaries and see that they don't come back to town. He said, 'Mormons are bad people.' When I heard that, something started to stir deep down inside me. I was pretty drunk but I wasn't completely under, and something kept bothering me. I thought, 'Mormons-bad people? No, they are good people. Something's wrong.'"

Our friend then told the following story: "I never knew my real parents. I was raised by some relatives on Niuatoputapu, but when I was about ten, I was sent to Vava'u [another island in Tonga]. I'm sure I was a problem there because I was picked on a lot and fought back a lot. It seemed that no one wanted me. I hadn't been to school so I couldn't read or write.

"On Vava'u, I kicked around from place to place. One day I was loafing on the street when two young men wearing white shirts and ties came by. They asked why I wasn't in school. I told them I didn't really live here and my family couldn't afford to send me to school. They asked if I would like to come to their school. I told them I had no money. They said that was all right, come anyway. So I went with them. They taught me some English. They even let me stay by their place and gave me food. They taught me to write my name and read a little and were very kind to me. Everyone else kicked me around, but they didn't. They had a feeling of love and concern for me, something I hadn't felt much in my life.

"After I had gone to school for a few weeks, they took me out in the ocean, put me under the water, and said, 'Now you are a Mormon.' I didn't know exactly what that meant, but I felt good about it. I liked those two young men, and they seemed to like me.

"Shortly after that, I had to return to Niuatoputapu. When I got back here, I had no further association with the Church because there weren't any missionaries here, nor were there any members that I knew of. So, over a period of years, I forgot about it. People started picking on me again, and soon I became a real fighter. But tonight when someone said, 'Mormons are bad people. Go take care of the Mormon missionaries and see that they don't return,' it all came back to me: 'I am a Mormon. Mormon missionaries aren't bad people; they are good people. They loved me. They helped me.' I wondered what to do. Then I thought, 'I'll just sit by the house and protect them. I'll help them, just like those two young men in white shirts and ties helped me.' And that's what I did."

How grateful I was for those two Elders serving in Vava'u twenty years earlier! And how grateful I was to God for bringing those good feelings to our protector's remembrance. I wish I could say he became active, but he didn't. He kept drinking and doing other bad things. However, we had no further problems with any of those young men or others, because they knew we were under his protection.

As time went on, we became more and more accepted by everyone. Even though our protector died in a freak accident a few months later, we had by then become such an integral part of the island community that we experienced no further problems of that nature.

I often wonder what would have happened had those two missionaries twenty years earlier not shown love to that young boy. I don't even know their names or anything about them other than that they showed love and kindness to a little orphan boy who was kicked around by others. I am confident the love and kindness they showed him went into some type of an eternal kindness bank to come out twenty years later, with rich interest, to help us and save us from harm, and, without too much stretch of the imagination, possibly save our lives.

I learned how important it is to constantly make deposits into this eternal kindness bank, not only for ourselves but also for others. No kindness shown is ever lost. It is always deposited and available, with added interest, to be drawn on in time of need by us or others. I wondered if the whole universe isn't balanced by depositing and withdrawing acts of kindness. Maybe the total amount of kindness available to draw on and bless our lives is the total amount of kindness deposited by all of us as we bless others' lives. It made some sense, especially as I realized that the greatest depositor of all is the Savior. Maybe His deposits outweigh everything, but still I feel He wants us to be partners with Him in this great kindness depository program. I don't understand much, but I do know we need to be more kind.

As I began working on developing this quality of kindness, I soon found it imperative to take anger, evil, and bad thinking of any nature from my life. I found that as I did, there flowed into my life a peace and joy that was worth everything.

It was hard, but I eventually learned that wherever we are, whatever our background, whatever the situation, if we desire to be kind, the Savior will help us act and feel as He would under similar circumstances. What a great blessing!

As I thought of these things, I determined to try to be kinder to everyone. I thought I should start with those eight young men who were bent on hurting us and also the people who put them up to it. It was hard, as they were embarrassed and I was somewhat angry, but little by little we developed a good friendship. One of the eight later joined the Church. I learned that it pays to be kind, not only for what it does to others, but also for what it does to us.
