John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

20

Of Pigs and Irons

We continued about our daily activities. At times I thought nothing new ever happened. I felt that life was pretty slow and that each day seemed the same as the one before. It would either rain or be sunny; the wind would either blow or it would be calm. We followed the same routine day after day: Get up, shower, study scriptures, eat, decide on places to visit, go out, try to share the gospel, get rejected by most everyone, return home, eat, pray, and finally retire for the night.

When it was damp and cold, I didn't feel like going out. When it was hot and humid, I didn't feel like going out. Since it was usually one or the other, and since people generally wouldn't listen to us anyway, it often seemed easier to just stay home. If it weren't for Feki, I'm not sure how much I would have gone out. But Feki made going out and visiting a regular part of each day, so that's what we did.

I soon realized that every day and every situation was less than ideal, and if I let circumstances or conditions govern my actions, I would just sit and rot. We had to decide ahead what we should do and then move forward and do it regardless of the weather, apathy, or opposition. Feki always encouraged me with a big smile, but never forced. How grateful I was for him!

Spending month after month among seven hundred people, I soon learned everyone's name and their relationship to everyone else. I learned to not talk bad about anyone because he or she was invariably related to everyone else, including the person you were talking to. They fought a lot among themselves but always came together on important matters. I not only recognized every person but could also tell most of the animals apart. Horses, dogs, pigs, goats, and even chickens have their own personalities and looks, just like people. If you constantly live with them, you soon learn these different characteristics. Anyone with a pet knows that.

There were lots of pigs on Niuatoputapu. They were a sign of wealth, and everyone knew which pigs belonged to whom. Stealing a pig was almost as serious there as stealing a horse was in early western America. They fenced the pigs inside the village so they wouldn't get out and mess up their gardens, which were outside the village.

Some of the major events in village life were the feasts for special occasions, such as births, deaths, marriages, birthdays, and commemorative days. For these feasts, certain families were required to furnish pigs. The day before the feast they would open the gate and let a few pigs run into the bush, then a few minutes later a group of men and boys armed with sticks, rocks, and machetes would go chasing after them. They had no guns. It was a big event to go pig hunting. Everyone knew which family was to furnish the pig, and had to be careful not to kill a pig belonging to someone else, although the other pigs had to be captured and returned to the inner village.

I was aware of these hunting parties but had never participated for lots of reasons. As time went on, the hunters kept working on me to come with them. Finally they said, "If you're going to eat the pig, you need to do your part in getting it." That made sense, so I finally said, "Okay, I'll go with you once." They gave me a couple of nice rocks as we went to the gate.

The gate was opened and several selected pigs went running into the bush. A few minutes later the hunters, with loud whooping and hollering, started through the gate, and the pigs knew the chase was on. There were about fifteen men and boys in the hunting party. Eventually someone found the pig we were after, and almost like magic the hunters moved into position and got the pig semisurrounded. They ignored all the other pigs and concentrated on getting this one.

The hunters gradually tightened the circle until the pig bolted and ran. They tried to hit it with a rock or a stick. The first time, they missed and the pig ran off unharmed. During the hunt you had to be careful not to hit someone else coming from the other direction when surrounding and throwing at the pig.

They eventually found the same pig again and started moving in very quietly. The man next to me pointed at the pig. Suddenly the pig jumped out and headed down a small trail immediately ahead of us. There was a small log on the trail, and just as the pig jumped over the log, both of us threw our rocks.

While the pig was still in midair, one of the rocks hit him square in the head. He crumpled over and fell to the ground, stunned and unable to do much but kick. The cry of victory went up, and almost instantly the whole party was on the scene with clubs and machetes to finish him off. I never quite got over seeing a desperate pig flying freely through the air, then seeing a rock crash into his head, and watch him crumple to the ground helpless while men and boys swarmed around yelling and hitting, then watching his neck get cut and seeing the blood squirting from his body and draining away his life. Fortunately, the pig died quickly. They tied it to a long pole, and we were soon on our way back to the village. Everyone was laughing, shouting triumphantly, and having a great time-except me. I didn't feel very good.

The man with me kept saying what a good shot I was and how my rock had hit the pig in midair. I suspect my rock missed completely and this man's rock found the mark, but he kept insisting it was mine. It started a legend of how accurate the Mormon missionary was in throwing rocks.

We ate the pig the next day at the big feast. The villagers made sure I got the two main delicacies: The ears and the roll of meat along the backbone. Both tasted great.

They put a lot of pressure on me to go hunting again, but I steadfastly refused. In effect, I retired as the rock-throwing champion. I suppose I knew I could never equal that feat (if in fact it had been my rock), but mainly I didn't feel good about being involved in hunting. Feki was a very good hunter, and he contributed our share of the work on future expeditions. I never went hunting again.

As time went on, I found myself caught up more and more in people's feelings (of which they had many) rather than people's possessions (of which they had little). I learned that people everywhere, regardless of their circumstances, have deep feelings. I also learned that a certain number of "things" can be helpful, but too many can be harmful. I'm not sure where the right balance is, but I suppose the statement "sufficient for our needs" is the best guideline.

Once I visited a member lady shortly after a boat had arrived. She looked very concerned and asked that I come in. Her problem was that her husband's family from Tongatapu had bought her a newfangled ron that had just arrived on the boat. It had a small gas tank on the back that you could light like a Coleman lantern, and the flames went down between two metal pieces and kept the iron hot.

Her question to me was what to do. If she kept it for her ironing, she could use it for a long time, but then people would call her selfish and she would not have friends. If she loaned it to others, they would soon ruin it and neither she nor they would have a good iron.

I asked her how she ironed now. She showed me her old cast-iron model. It was partially hollow, so she would drop hot coals or embers into the open chamber and try to iron without burning her hand, since about as much heat went up as down.

I told her I didn't know what she should do. I thought the family intended the iron for her use, but she would have to do what she felt best. She seemed very perplexed. I was sorry I couldn't help her more, but I had no definite feelings.

A few weeks later I saw her again. She seemed happy. I asked what had happened. She said she was miserable for a while because she tried to keep the iron to herself and use it. Then she decided ironing was only a small part of her life, but family and friends were a much more important part, so she loaned the iron around and sure enough it was quickly broken and became ta'eaonga (useless).

She pointed to it on the floor. It was being used as a weight to hold some mats down. She explained, "A rock would do the job just as well, but the iron is here and I can tell my in-laws it is useful. I'm glad it's broken and I can do things the same way others do. We're all good friends again."

I wondered about the correlation between physical progress and selfishness. I came to no conclusion.
