John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

21

Lockjaw

We had many good friends, particularly among the young men about our age. One of these young men, named Finau, showed interest in listening to us. He was in his midtwenties and very strong. His parents were opposed to us and would not allow us in their home. Even though he still lived with his parents, he was old enough to be on his own, so he came often to our house to hear the lessons. He was reverent and thoughtful and seemed to accept the principles we taught.

One day, after a lesson, he invited us to go fishing with him, but we explained we were not to do that as missionaries. This surprised him, as basically everyone fished or did some type of fangota (fishing or digging for small crabs or shellfish in the reef area).

A popular fishing method on a calm night is to take a lantern and a machete into the lagoon and hold very still. The light attracts fish, and if you are fast you can slice through the water with the knife and get one. On the next calm night, Finau went fishing with a lantern and a knife. A large fish came to his light, and he carefully raised his knife. Apparently just as he was ready to strike, some slight movement caused the fish to flee, but Finau was so intent on getting the fish, he sliced through the water behind him as the fish darted away. He must have lifted his foot, for he missed the fish and sliced off his heel!

Others who were fishing nearby responded to his yells of pain and got him to his home. With next to no medical facilities on the island, there wasn't much they could do. I suppose a tetanus shot would have helped, but they didn't have any. They did the best they could, but within a short while, lockjaw (tetanus) set in.

At first his parents tried to blame us and told him, "That's what you get for listening to those Mormon missionaries!" He kept calling for us, but they wouldn't let us see him. They called their own religious leader to help. Finau continued to get worse and continued calling for us. When the parents realized he was going to die anyway, they finally asked us to come and visit as he desired. They refused to let us give him a blessing, but said we could pray for him, which we did.

I had never seen anything like this before. Lockjaw is a terrible disease, and I thought, "No one should ever choose to die in this way!" Finau was having convulsions and was rigid and shaking terribly when we got there. It was a pathetic situation. I tried to hold him and talk to him. Occasionally I thought there may have been some meaningful eye contact, but I wasn't sure. I felt compassion for him and could tell he was in great pain as he shook with spasms and convulsions. Trying to hold him was like trying to hold a raging, twisting bull. I tried to calm him, but to no avail as he was very strong.

I watched him as he went through that final stage and died. My testimony that there is a spirit in our body was made doubly sure at that time. One moment there was a young man with a strong body; the next second there was nothing. You could almost feel something leave him as his body went limp. I knew his spirit had left his body, and I knew that spirit gives life. In fact, I knew that spirit is life and there is no life without it, literally or figuratively.

As his spirit left, I had a distinct feeling that he appreciated what we had done. It was as though his spirit, now free, was expressing appreciation to us for teaching him and for coming and comforting him. I felt an impression from him that went something like this: "Don't be angry with my parents. They don't understand. Help them. Help the other people. Thanks for being my friend. Thanks for wanting to help me; thanks for trying to help me. I'm just fine. Thanks for everything."

His way of dying seemed so cruel to me, but his spirit didn't seem to mind. I wondered why some struggle so hard to die and others slip away so quietly. I didn't know the reasons then, nor do I now, but I am convinced that in the eternal scheme of our lives, there are little chinks filled in or rough edges smoothed over or understandings gained that have something to do with the way we pass to the other side.

When the parents realized he was gone, they began to cry and howl and tear their clothes. Fortunately they were no longer angry with us. I'm sure his spiritual influence helped them. They knew their son was gone, and they also knew he had wanted us to be there, so they were grateful we had come and had done what we could. Through their mourning and howling at his death, they thanked us for trying to help and even asked us to come to his funeral.

We held the funeral early that afternoon. I was not asked to speak but was asked to sit in a place of prominence. The family had been pressured to not have us come to the funeral at all, but they knew of their son's kind feelings towards us and invited us anyway.

During one of the lulls in the funeral, I heard a few old men sitting by me talking. They were asking each other, "How come he's so lucky to die so young, and we still have to live and work and sweat and hurt? It doesn't seem fair. What does God have against us?"

It was a new thought to me. I realized how different our Western attitude toward life is as compared to many places in the world. For many, life is tough, and to continue to live is to continue to sweat, hurt, and wonder when and how the end will come. I realized as forcefully as ever that all people everywhere need the gospel and the true understanding of life and why we are here. They need to know that life is precious and comes from God and that we are here to learn to obey God, to love Him, and to show this love by helping others.

How I wanted to explain these things to those people, but in that setting they wouldn't let me. They were good people, more "blinded by the craftiness of men," I suppose, than anything (see D&C 76:75).

This whole experience had not been very pleasant, but I learned a lot. I had a sure knowledge of the true nature of body and spirit. I knew that the body has no power without the spirit and that the spirit can express feelings or convey ideas, even after leaving the body.

The Lord has ways of teaching us truths that many of us miss by refusing to go through some of the required "unpleasant" prerequisites. How grateful I was for Finau and his parents and the great lessons the Lord taught me through them! We continued to teach gospel truths whenever, however, and to whomever we could. Unfortunately, Finau's parents were not among those willing to listen.

While Finau's death and other similar experiences were tough to go through, to a degree I began to feel sorry for those who don't experience them. Birth and death are part of life. Aging and sickness are part of life. In our modern society we tend to isolate ourselves and our children from these things. Some of these situations are difficult to handle, and often we don't know what to do. I remember trying more than once to get out of uncomfortable situations.

One time a family called me to come quickly because a lady was having terrible complications with a birth. I went over, but with all the screaming, the blood, and the very personal nature of the birth process-and my knowing absolutely nothing about what to do-I took one look and asked if it would be all right if I stayed outside and prayed for her. They could see I was scared, so they said that would be all right.

And did I ever pray! I wanted everything to be in order, not only for them but also so I wouldn't need to get more involved with the lady and her baby, who was having such a difficult time getting here. The screams seemed to last a long time, but eventually the baby was born and things were then satisfactory with both mother and daughter. How grateful I was!

Again, I received a strong testimony of prayer. If we pray with all of our heart for that which is right, that which is according to God's will, it will be granted as the scriptures promise. The key, of course, is to be willing to accept His will and ask only for those things that are according to His will. In fact, I don't believe you can pray in faith except for those things that are according to His will.

I remember thinking about God's plan for this earth. Here I was a young man not knowing much about life and yet being involved in births, deaths, and sickness-in what we sometimes term "raw life." I thought again how we tend to isolate ourselves and our children from some of those fundamental parts of this earth's experience. When someone gets sick, we turn them over to a doctor or to a hospital. People generally die in a hospital or a rest home or under professional care. Too often family members do not experience the feelings that come from being part of the whole experience.

I quickly add that I do not advocate a return to primitive conditions. I am grateful for the health professionals, the morticians, and other helpers in our modern society. I am convinced, however, that there is something missing from our mortal experience when we do not participate to some degree in some of these basic life experiences firsthand. Sometimes we, or our children, see a person getting sick, and the next time we see them they are in a beautiful casket all nice and pretty. We don't realize the trauma and pain that has occurred in the interim, nor the reality of the physical and spiritual separation that has taken place.

To understand that spirit is life and to be able to feel gratitude coming from someone's spirit who appreciates what you are trying to do for them often gives you more incentive to do good and help people than any number of sermons might do. I doubt we want to go back to the way it was on Niuatoputapu, but I think good would come from more involvement by more people in more of these things.

Maybe we are too removed in our society from some of the basics of life. Tongans generally put more importance on how people feel, act, or even smell, than we do. They seem to be able to read more in our eyes and in our sighs than we can.

I remember once while going along a trail, Feki suddenly stopped, put his finger to his mouth while pointing with his other hand to a tree some distance ahead. I whispered, "What's the matter?"

He whispered back, "There is someone behind that tree. Let us approach it carefully."

"How can you tell?" I asked.

"Oh, you wouldn't understand, but let's be careful." As we got closer, sure enough there was a man resting behind the tree. He obviously meant us no harm, and we continued on our way. I guess this ability comes from living closer to nature than we do.

I remember people often saying to us, "You look hungry or tired. We'll give you something to eat. Sit down and rest." Soon we would hear the final death cackle of a chicken, and a while later, there it would be, ready for us to eat. When people just go to the store and buy a clean piece of meat all wrapped in plastic or buy a bottle of milk, they often have no idea of what went into getting it there. Maybe that is the way it should be. I am just glad I was able to feel and understand a little of the other side as well.

I learned a lot from Finau and his family. Expressions of true tenderness and love, under all circumstances, then as now, are very real and very needed. Finau's family never joined the Church, but from then on they were friendly to us, fed us, and helped us.
