John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

22

"For Good and Evil"

Niuatoputapu is relatively small, but by now I had learned there was always plenty to do. Sometimes missionaries get the idea they have "tracted out" an area. I doubt that is possible. Spending a year with seven hundred people in a seven-square-mile area-and with only one companion-could be considered boring, but there was always more to do than I could get done. I honestly felt I had as much to do and learn in my last month as I did in my first month.

If missionaries ever get discouraged by thinking they are assigned to one place with too few people for too long a period of time, they should realize that others have been through it before and grown thereby. I know there are always lessons to learn, as well as blessings to gain, if we are only willing to pay the price for them. I am convinced that there is more potential in the smallest area, or in the seemingly least significant calling, than any of us will be able to achieve.

Shortly after Finau's funeral, we decided to go to the nearby island of Tafahi. Probably eight miles away, it is the only island within reasonable sailing distance of Niuatoputapu. Beyond Tafahi, the closest islands are Samoa, Vava'u, and Fiji, which are several hundred miles away.

Tafahi is a high volcanic island and very steep. About eighty people lived there. Since there was no naturally level place on the island, the inhabitants had literally hacked the side of the mountain away in one place to have a level area to build a few houses and raise crops.

While there was nothing mechanical on Niuatoputapu, and the people lived close to nature, with no running water or electricity, and very little contact with the outside world, the people on Tafahi were even more isolated and, if possible, lived closer to nature and had less contact with civilization as they had no telegraph and no scheduled boats.

When we sailed to Tafahi, the seas were very choppy. We got as close as we could to shore, waited for the bigger waves to recede, quickly jumped in, and swam and waded to shore. I was impressed with the strength of the people who lived there. Some of the young women put a yoke on their necks, attached a large kape (big tuberous plants weighing up to eighty pounds apiece) to each end of the yoke, and carried them up the hill, almost running. I could hardly lift one, let alone two!

Shortly after arriving, we started tracting. We visited every home (eighteen in all), leaving a tract at each one and inviting the people to a meeting that evening. At the last home, a strange thought occurred to me, "Why don't you test the prophecy that the name of Joseph Smith should be known for good and evil throughout the world?" I don't know why the thought came, but it did.

We gathered the family of six around, invited them to come to our po malanga (cottage meeting) that evening, and handed them a tract. I then asked, "Have you ever heard of President Eisenhower?"

"Who's he?"

I explained that he was the president of the United States.

"Where's the United States?"

I tried to explain where it was, but they couldn't understand. They asked how big an island it was. I replied that it was a very big island, thousands of miles away with millions of people living on it. I told them that many people there had never even seen the ocean and that many people didn't know one another. They couldn't comprehend that. I then asked, "Have you ever heard of a man by the name of Kruschev?"

"Who's he?"

"Well, he's the leader of Russia."

"What's Russia?"

"Russia is a country." I tried to explain that it was a great big island, even bigger than the United States, and there were millions of people there. They had no way of comprehending that.

I then asked, "Have you ever heard of a person by the name of Charles DeGaulle?"

"No, who's he?"

"Well, he's the president of a country called France."

"Where's France?"

I again explained and then asked about other countries and leaders, but they had no comprehension of these famous political figures of the day.

Next I asked about some sports figures, some movie stars, famous business people, about the Depression, the Korean War, and other things. It was an exercise in futility because they had no comprehension of any of these people or events.

There was not a member of the Church living on this island, although there were two other churches there. I took a deep breath and said, "Have you ever heard of Joseph Smith?"

Immediately their faces lit up. Everyone looked at me, and the father said, "Don't talk to us about that false prophet! Not in our home! We know all about him. Our minister has told us!" I could hardly believe what I was hearing. The scripture from the Pearl of Great Price sounded in my mind that Joseph's name "should be had for good and evil among all nations" (JS-H 1:33). To me this was a direct fulfillment of prophecy.

I am convinced that you could hardly get a place more remote, more out of touch with modern civilization, than the little island of Tafahi. The people there knew nothing of the great leaders of the day-political, economic, or otherwise-but they knew the name Joseph Smith. In this case they knew it for ill, at least to begin with. I spent the next few days explaining more of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and before we left, a few of them knew his name for good.

We made some friends on Tafahi, and several of us hiked to the top of the mountain. We went up through clouds and mists, bamboo forests, and thick junglelike vegetation until we finally came to the top. What a sight! It seemed like we could see forever. The ocean was everywhere. The only land you could see was Niuatoputapu, which seemed so small and far away. I was impressed at what different perspectives we have from different vantage points. I guess that to God this earth seems pretty small.

During my stay on Tafahi, several of the older men, who claimed they had the authority, went through a ceremony and made me a matapule (chief) and gave me an official name, Ngalu 'o Tafahi (The Wave of Tafahi). Other than writing it in my journal, I never used the name or made further reference to it. I preferred the title of missionary.

Sailboat taken to Tafahi (in background). The only way to get to shore was to swim.

When we finally left Tafahi, I had a greater love for the Prophet Joseph Smith and a firmer testimony of his divine calling. A few people from Tafahi eventually joined the Church. I never visited there again, but I have not forgotten the people, the climb to the top of the mountain, the spectacular view, the ceremony, and particularly the deepened testimony I received in the last home as I asked about the Prophet Joseph Smith.
