John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

23

The Hurricane

After returning from Tafahi, we continued tracting and trying to visit people on Niuatoputapu. For some reason, they seemed even less receptive than before. We asked the Lord to soften their hearts and to bless us with understanding of how we could better teach them. I'm not sure of the exact correlation of all these things, but shortly after, an interesting event took place.

Niuatoputapu is generally flat but has a relatively large mountain that rises rather abruptly from the flatlands about two-thirds of the way through the island and falls away just as abruptly to the ocean on what we called the "back side." The prevailing winds come from the south, or the back side, where the waves crash against the coral that rises sharply from the ocean. The wind-whipped sea is stopped by the mountain, which acts as a barrier and protects the front side of the island from the deadly salt spray.

Going north over the mountain, you drop quickly onto a large fertile plain that is quite flat and runs to a lagoon, with its smaller reef, that further protects the level cropland. Generally life goes on smoothly, with the mountain absorbing the salt spray and the protected side growing all the food needed for a suitably sized population.

Once in a while, however, nature plays a mean trick in the form of a hurricane. Most people are familiar with the devastating winds and terrifying waves, heaving themselves beyond their bounds, that mark a hurricane. But for small islands, one of the most destructive elements is the winds that reverse themselves and bring the waves and salt spray from the opposite direction onto the unprotected side.

There was no official warning, for at that time and in that remote location, forecasting or weather tracking was not available. The old-timers said they could feel it coming, though. I'm not sure whether I actually felt it or just believed others. There was something about the oppressive heaviness of the air that made all the animals and humans sense that something was wrong. There was a subtle, almost indiscernible, feeling of uneasiness as the wind started coming from the wrong direction. The sky was dark, the air was heavy; even without a lot of wind and rain, the people's disposition became dark and pensive. Everyone instinctively looked for shelter.

Suddenly that oppressive feeling burst in indescribable fury onto the defenseless little island. The winds shrieked, the waves crashed, and salt spray and sea came roaring across the fertile garden land and through the homes all the way to the front side of the mountain before being stopped.

Trees were uprooted, houses were toppled, roofs went flying, and people and animals tried to hide wherever they could. The flying debris was dangerous. A vacuum effect occurred sometime during the hurricane, causing pieces of reed and blades of grass to become like tiny spears that buried themselves in trees and even killed small animals. I saw pieces of flying tin roofing cut small trees in half and become deeply imbedded in the thick trunks of other trees. I tried to act excited or curious but must admit I was also scared. The fury of nature and the sights and sounds of destruction, especially when compared to the normally placid days and nights, were unnerving.

I don't know exactly how long the hurricane lasted. It struck during the afternoon and continued on through the night and into the next day, or at least it seemed to.

It was a long, terrifying afternoon and night. When you are closer to nature and not so protected by concrete buildings or prepared ahead by forecasts, you feel things in a different way. I can better understand the prophecy from the Book of Mormon telling of the storms at the time of Christ's crucifixion, "Many of the kings of the isles of the sea shall be wrought upon by the Spirit of God to exclaim: The God of nature suffers" (1 Nephi 19:12). That's just how it felt.

Hurricanes don't start with a single blow or end with a final whimper, but they do eventually stop. As we felt the winds lessening and the storm passing, we came from our hiding places with a feeling of awe and a look of unbelief at the terrible destruction we beheld. Trees were uprooted, roofs were gone, houses torn apart, fences missing, debris from everywhere was deposited everywhere else. Nearly all the big mango trees were down, the breadfruit trees were down, other trees were down, the wells were fouled with seawater, but worst of all, the crops were ruined, mostly by the destructive salt water.

Several animals had died, but as far as I knew no person was killed, although several were hurt in one way or another. What a pitiful sight we looked on! People began looking for family members, friends, animals, and other possessions. Men came from their gardens with tears in their eyes as they told of the loss of the year's labors and the looming specter of hunger.

The government magistrate called a special meeting for all adults. He tried to reassure everyone by saying, "We've been through this before, we can make it again. Let's all help one another. Gather the breadfruit from the fallen trees, and get as many tuber crops out as you can before they spoil. Start cleaning up and rebuilding. Don't hoard. See that the old, the young, and the sick are taken care of. Be glad no one was killed. Eat sparingly. Let's ration what food we have to last about four weeks. A boat should be here within three or four weeks so we'll be okay." He called on someone to pray and give thanks that we had been spared and ask God to guide and protect us, especially over the next few weeks. What a wonderful official government meeting! Belief in God and keeping the Sabbath holy are major parts of the Tongan constitution and culture.

We began cleaning up, and everyone made sure everyone else had something to eat. There was a beautiful feeling of cooperation. It's strange how disasters bring out the best (and occasionally the worst) in us.

Even though most of the fruit trees were blown down, there was lots of fruit on them, so we gathered it and used as much as possible. Many of the root crops were newly planted, so there was not much to salvage there. People generally did not seem overly concerned as the situation appeared to be mostly a matter of rebuilding and waiting for the next boat. So life slowly got back to a semblance of normality. I suppose most people were glad they didn't have much in the way of worldly possessions, because nature or others couldn't take away what they didn't have.

The storm ruined the telegraph, so we couldn't send a message for help. The boat normally came about every four weeks, so food allocations were made to last about five weeks "just in case." On those rations you'd never be full, but you wouldn't starve, either.

We started eating breadfruit, which would be our main staple. We also ate mangoes, oranges, and other fruits that wouldn't last long once picked. They tasted good, except the green ones, but they weren't very filling.

Everyone hoped the boat would come in about three weeks, since it had left Niuatoputapu for Nuku'alofa several days before the hurricane struck. The first two weeks passed rather uneventfully. The third week came and went with no boat. The hopes for a boat during the fourth week were very high, so when it passed with no boat, we could sense a different feel everywhere. It was somewhat like a cloudy day: the normal optimistic attitudes were more subdued, and people began telling stories of hard times that they had heard as children.

I remember some of the old men talking about whole islands being wiped out because of drought or storms that ruined the crops. Some talked about the earthen pits they used to make for storing food. Apparently in earlier times they practiced food storage through some type of fermenting process. They would wrap certain food in leaves and bury a huge mass of it, enough to feed many people for a long time. According to the old-timers, it kept well for years and years and had been the means of saving many island populations when natural disasters struck. They lamented that there was no such storage now. "We rely too much on the outside world, such as boats and telegraphs," they told me. "We should be more self-sufficient."

By the end of the fifth week, the food supply was low and there was still no boat. Things started to look and feel rather grim. I learned that attitude determined a lot. As people began to think pessimistically, things did get worse for them. The facts did not lend themselves to much optimism, but some on the island remained optimistic. I noticed a marked division among the people: some slid into negativism and defeat while others kept their optimism and faith intact and kept moving. Those who maintained their optimism seemed better off, physically and mentally.

The sixth week began on a very somber note. I suspect some people had stashed a little food away here and there, but even that was now mostly gone. Feki and I had each been eating the equivalent of about half a breadfruit per day. Now we cut that to a half between us per day. Then a quarter, then a sliver as the days dragged on. Liquid was a big problem too, as there had been very little rain after the hurricane. The wells were still brackish, and we had used most of the coconuts.

It is strange what our bodies do as we begin to cope with hunger. At one time we went into the swamp where we had previously cut ironwood for our house. In just a few seconds my forehead was full of mosquitoes. I quickly clapped my hand on my forehead, removed it, and licked off the dead mosquitoes. I never would have thought to do that, but someone mentioned it, and someway my body told me there might be a bit of protein in those mosquitoes, so I tried it. It wasn't very filling, so I only went to the swamp once.

Another interesting signal my body sent was to be quiet, don't move much-just sit, wait, relax. I found myself not going far and not doing much. No one told me to act that way, I just started to slow down automatically.

At the end of the sixth week things were serious. There was some light rain, which helped, but generally people were hurting badly, as they had been on very limited rations for a long time. The seventh week saw some genuine despair, as well as more fervent prayers. We stayed close to home and I spent a lot of time reading the scriptures. Helaman chapter 11 was especially meaningful to me. I felt I could understand Nephi's request in verse 4: "O Lord, . . . let there be a famine in the land, to stir [this people] up in remembrance of the Lord their God, and perhaps they will repent and turn unto thee."

I could see the reality of verse 7: "And it came to pass that the people saw that they were about to perish by famine, and they began to remember the Lord their God." I sensed that the people were more humble.

I wondered if we would live to see the same thing as recorded in verses 17 and 18: "And it came to pass that . . . the Lord did turn away his anger from the people, and caused that rain should fall upon the earth, insomuch that it did bring forth her fruit in the season of her fruit. And it came to pass that it did bring forth her grain in the season of her grain. And behold, the people did rejoice and glorify God, and the whole face of the land was filled with rejoicing."

During the seventh week there was more light rain, so although not plentiful, water was available in limited amounts. The eighth week began with deep foreboding. No one moved much. The sun was hot, and everyone stayed in the shade. I was aware of people dying, but it was generally the very old or the very young or those who had previously been ill and whose bodies just finally gave up. I don't think anyone died from what we technically call starvation, although some must have come close. Seeing the looks of hunger in the children was the hardest thing. Mothers had difficulty nursing babies, and there was generally a lot of suffering and despair.

I could understand Jeremiah's feelings as expressed in Lamentations 4:8-9: "Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a stick. They that be slain with the sword are better than they that be slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field."

During the eighth week I could almost hear my body say, "Don't move. Don't do anything." It wasn't really painful, I just didn't feel much. I remember sitting on the ground with my back resting on the trunk of a tree that had blown over. Some of its roots were still in the ground and a few branches had leaves that gave shade. The tree was at a rather odd angle but perfect for me. I sat there for several days and pondered, prayed, and read the scriptures. When you don't have much food or water, your body seems to absorb about everything so you don't have to move a lot.

It was a good time for pondering. The Lord really gets our attention at times like this. Just sitting in a weakened condition for several days makes a deep impression. I wondered if that may have been one of the reasons that the Lord allowed Joseph Smith to sit in jail for several months. I reflected on the Prophet's statement, "The things of God are of deep import; and time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 137).

I learned that we need to take time to ponder. Sometimes the situations that compel us to do so, such as illness or disasters, are seen as cursings rather than the blessings they can be if properly used. Is it possible that in our busy, work-a-day world, one of the great blessings the Lord gives us is to put us in a situation where we must be quiet, without a lot of outside disturbance and pressures? Maybe then we will study, ponder, and think of Him, His ways, and His purposes.

I reflected on the scripture, "Be still and know that I am God" (D&C 101:16; Psalm 46:10). I had always thought of that scripture as a statement to watch for His salvation after we had done all we could. Now I looked upon it more as a commandment, or better, an invitation and explanation of truth: "Be still (sit quietly, get rid of outside pressures-go to the temple, for example-don't worry about this world) and know that I am God." Or: "Be still so you can know that I am God and so you can learn of Me and My ways." If we aren't willing to be still, it's harder to know that He is God. If the purpose of life is to know and love God, then maybe one of Satan's best weapons to keep us from that knowledge is to keep us so busy, even doing good things, and so occupied with commitments and pressures that we don't allow ourselves to be still so we can know that God is God!

The ninth week began with little outward change. There was, however, a great inward change. I started talking, or at least thinking to myself, saying, "Well, maybe my mortal life will end here." It was not a panicky feeling at all-I was past that stage. It was a calm feeling, an assured feeling, a feeling that it really didn't matter, because I knew all would be right.

I remember thinking, "If I do die here, my folks may feel kind of sad for a while. They sent me on a mission and hoped I would return to their home." These feelings were more sorrowful for them than for me. But I also remember thinking, "They have great faith. They can handle any problem."

I was pretty much skin and bones by now. I remember being aware of my ribs sticking out, of sensing my heart beating and my lungs breathing, and feeling a great wonderment for the miracle of the human body. What a marvelous mechanism the Lord has put together to house our equally marvelous spirit! The thought of a permanent union of these two elements, made possible through the Savior's love, suffering, and resurrection, was so inspiring and satisfying that any small physical discomfort faded into nothingness. What a great blessing to know that things will be right! What a tremendous blessing faith is! Faith is the opposite of fear. We fear what we don't understand. When we understand who God is, who we are, how He loves us, and what His plan for us is, fear evaporates.

At times I wasn't sure which side of the veil I would end up on, but it didn't matter. All that mattered was that God was in His heaven, and He knew me and my situation; He would see that what was right was done, for as far as I knew, I had done all I could.

I remember jotting down a little phrase, which undoubtedly is not original but which came at that time with the power of firsthand knowledge: "The only thing that is important is your standing in the sight of your Father in Heaven. If that is as it should be, nothing else matters. If that is not as it should be, nothing else counts." I am amazed how hard it is to learn that simple lesson and even more amazed at how hard it is to remember it!

As I sat there, I realized more and more how much I had to learn. I was genuinely excited about getting on with that learning-on whichever side of the veil the Lord deemed most appropriate. I wish I could always have that zest for learning spiritual things. I understood clearly that the spiritual is more important and more powerful than the physical and, in fact, controls all physical things. I understood that both physical and spiritual elements are necessary and are in effect one when fully comprehended and perfected.

The next day as I sat under the tree, almost trancelike in my thinking, I felt a hand on my shoulder. I barely moved. An old man tapped me again, and I slowly turned.

"Here," he said, "I want you to have this can of jam. You're young. You're a missionary. You can live and do good. I am an old man. I will probably die. I am evil and bad. I have no right to live. Take this jam. It will help you."

The old man was gaunt and pale but very sincere and very determined, so I thanked him and took the can. There seemed to be a certain aura of light about him. I felt he had given his life to me. The jam would only help sustain life for a little while, but by now each little while was critical. It may be farfetched to say he gave his life to me, but not beyond the realm of possibility.

He turned and walked away. I looked again. I thought I recognized him. I vaguely remembered some past conversations with him and some feelings I had had.

Yes, I remembered now, he was one of the "bad guys," at least in my former way of thinking. I was aware of some things he had done that were wrong by almost any definition, yet here he was giving his last precious can of jam to me, me who in some respects was his enemy-at least to his life-style.

I experienced an overwhelming feeling about the importance of not judging (see D&C 64:8-11). We must leave judgment to the Lord. He alone knows all the facts. We may have had some experiences with some people at some time, but only God comprehends all experiences with all people at all times. Only he can weigh everything in its proper context.

It is interesting how the Lord orchestrates things. Feki and I ate that jam on tiny slivers of breadfruit for the rest of that day and part of the next. One could say the Lord sent the man with the jam to preserve our lives in a physical sense, and to a degree that is true. But in a more important sense he may have sent him to preserve our spiritual lives in helping us not judge. That jam and the man's willingness to give it to us was a blessing not only to us but also to him. He didn't die of starvation, but he did die a few months later of other causes. I am sure he was even happier than we were that he had given us the jam.

The next day started as another hot, humid set of hours slowly passing. We continued to waste away physically but grow in the more important spiritual sense. Feki was much stronger than I was. I guess he was more used to going without. I read the scriptures a lot, but even that got to be somewhat taxing. I pondered things and tried to understand relationships. I often dozed and at times wasn't entirely certain where I was. There is sometimes a very fine line between "here" and "there."

Many of the things I experienced cannot and should not be elaborated on. But during those days of sitting quietly, studying, praying, and pondering, I learned much about who God is, what the plan of salvation is, who the Savior is, and what His part in that great plan is. I learned something about why and how the world was created, a little about the love our Father in Heaven and Jesus have for us, and why God allows supposedly evil things to happen. In effect, I learned that the world was created to accomplish certain purposes and that everything, including our being here and having moral agency, is planned to accomplish those purposes.

I learned a lot about relationships: our relationship to our Father in Heaven and to the Savior, Their relationship to us, our relationship to each other as children of God, and the all-important role of the Holy Ghost in conveying and confirming the correct understanding of these relationships. I learned a little about our relationship to this earth, the earth's relationship to this solar system, its relationship to the universe, and the relationship between systems, universes, stars, and also something about how they are governed. I didn't understand much, but I could sense the grand design.

I sensed that I was learning more and more about less and less, but also felt that that was all right. I realized there aren't many things we must know to fulfill our purpose here, but the few vital things we must know must be known deeply and well.

I read and reread, with increasing appreciation, the accounts of Abraham and Moses. My soul resonated to the words of Moses, "which thing I never had supposed" (Moses 1:10). All I can say is that these are important things to understand, and they simply cannot be understood fully in a worldly or engineering or mathematical sense, although those disciplines are undoubtedly valid and can and should be used in their proper context.

I became convinced that just as we must break the bands of the gravitational pull of this earth in order to explore the farther universe, so we must break the bands of the gravitational pull of the cares of the world before we can begin to see the realities of some of these eternal relationships. When we begin to understand the relationship of opposition to growth and start to sense the type of growth God has designed for us and is trying to help us achieve, we tend to give thanks rather than complain about obstacles to overcome. People unchallenged are largely people undeveloped, be it physically, mentally, or spiritually.

I thought that just as rockets must overcome the pull of gravity in order to roar into space, so we must overcome the pull of the world in order to soar into the eternal realms of understanding. That is where God is, and that is important!

I realized that as we get the tiniest glimpse of these things, our concern over physical or worldly things becomes almost comical. To think that we actually fall for Satan's lie that things like worldly power, fame, or wealth are important is truly laughable, or would be were it not so sad.

As these thoughts were rolling around in my soul, I gradually became aware of some excited voices. I heard people yelling that a boat was coming. The sleepy, languid atmosphere that had oppressed the island for so long seemed to fade as everyone started to "wake up." With the renewed energy that comes from anticipation, most everyone began to move almost as a body to the shore where the sighted boat would soon arrive.

Feki's eyes were dancing once again as he came over and asked if I wanted to go to the boat with him. I was mostly awake, I think, but I said, "Thanks, but I'll wait here. I'll be fine until you come back." Several others asked if I wanted to go, and I gave them the same response. I was very comfortable leaning against my tree.

I remember realizing that things were going to change. A certain chapter was closing and another opening. I thought about some of the things I had learned: If you die, you die, and it doesn't matter so long as you've done what is right, and the only thing that really matters is your standing in God's sight. When you feel God's love and have the confidence and assurance that He is there, then other things aren't important. You understand that what we're doing down here on earth all revolves around learning to love and serve God and our fellowman. Life here is but a little blip in eternity. Mortal life and its environment, while important in terms of growth, is really the abnormal rather than the normal state of things. I suppose seeing things in their true relationships is among the greatest gifts we can receive.

Everyone about me left for the boat, and I soon found myself alone again. I recognized the yard, the well, the houses. They were not displeasing-in fact, they were lovely. But I found myself wanting to close my eyes, wanting to go back, wanting to understand those eternal relationships better. However, I felt myself being pulled away from them and returning rather grudgingly to the reality of skies, trees, shade, water, jam, and other people. I don't know how long I struggled with these two realities before I heard Feki excitedly telling me, "The boat's in, and it's full of food: flour, sugar, taro, and hard biscuits. I have some. Aren't you excited?"

I had to honestly say it didn't really make much difference to me. Since the boat had come, that must be the Lord's answer, so I was happy. Feki handed me a piece of hard-baked bread with the last touch of jam on it. "Here, eat it," he said.

I hesitated. I looked at the bread. I looked at him. I looked into the sky. I closed my eyes and heard Feki say, "Oh, yes, we should have a blessing first. I'll say it."

He thanked God for the food, for the boat, for preserving our lives, and for all the other blessings we had received. I added my own heartfelt thanks for new understandings, especially of eternal relationships. I also asked for help to remember these things and to act accordingly.

Others were returning from the boat now with sounds of joy. I remember taking that first bite of ma pakupaku (dried biscuits), closing my eyes, and crying. When I opened my eyes, those about me were crying as well. Some said how good it was to eat again and to feel this great gratitude to God for saving our lives. But I felt something deeper. I would never say I was unhappy with being able to eat again, and I was happy that life here would go on as before. But there was a wistful feeling-a subtle sense of postponement, as when darkness finally closes the brilliant colors of a perfect sunset and you realize you must wait for another evening to enjoy such beauty again. Fortunately, life can be colored by the memory of that brilliance which, while not always discernible, is always available and can be drawn upon, especially in times of great need.

I am convinced that everyone can feel this who will take the time to reflect on who they are and whose they are, where they are and where they came from, why they came here and where they can go, and what kind of help they can receive along the way. I am certain that that understanding can influence our lives, just as that perfect sunset, though long since faded, never quite leaves our consciousness and is available for us to draw on as we come face to face with the sordidness and unpleasantness of this earth's challenges.

When we have these special feelings, we often say, "I'll never be the same again," but the fact of the matter is, we often are. The pull of this world is strong, and too often we revert to former attitudes and behaviors. Thank goodness for repentance.

By this time, quite a group of friends and members had gathered around. How excited they were to bring me plates of steaming food! We had another prayer of thanksgiving, and everyone joined in eating. One older man said we should not eat too much for a day or two. Most everyone ignored him, but I felt he spoke the truth. I ate a little but did not fully share in the obvious joy of the main group as they relished the now-abundant food.

Evening came. I looked at Feki. I think he knew something of what I was feeling. I took another bite of food. I raised my head and slowly chewed a few times. I sensed it was growing darker. I looked over the heads of the circled crowd and caught the last rays of the most beautiful sunset I had ever seen. I could eat no more.
