John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

24

Mail and Other Messages

The relief boat stayed overnight and was to leave the next day. In the morning I felt like moving around some, so Feki and I slowly walked to the government building in Hihifo to see about mail. When we got there, we were told that the boat had not brought mail, only food and supplies. They explained that the same storm that hit us had moved south and crippled the boat; because of repairs, this was the first they were able to come. They were taking mail back to Nuku'alofa, however, so I sent a few letters that covered about ten weeks, assuring my folks and others that I was fine.

After this boat left, the next one did not come for another six weeks, so in total it was nearly four months before I received any mail. That wasn't too bad for me, but it had been over three months since my folks had heard from me and I suppose they were worried. I felt sorry for them but I assumed that since the Lord had let me know they were all right, He would also let them know I was all right.

When this second boat after the storm arrived, the effects of the hurricane were largely over, and we were busy tracting and teaching wherever and whenever possible. On the second boat, I got about four months' worth of mail. It was great! I probably shouldn't have done it, but I told Feki I was going to take the afternoon off and read letters. I put them in chronological order in piles: family, Jean, mission office, and friends. I started reading mission items first, then letters from friends, then from Jean, and finally those from family. It was almost like reading a book, as a letter would talk about a problem, then the next letter would tell of another happening, and by the last letter a resolution had been reached. It was fascinating. At times I wondered why they spent so much time worrying about things which generally turned out fine anyway.

I could tell I was getting more and more removed from the life at home because many of the things they talked about held no special interest for me.

For several weeks after the hurricane, I was blessed with a series of special feelings or understandings, most of which I will not mention. These came mostly in the early mornings. I will mention but two examples.

I awoke early one Sunday morning with one of the most beautiful, calm feelings a person could imagine. I don't remember if it was a voice or whether I just instinctively knew that my father had been ordained a patriarch in our stake in Idaho Falls. I remember that when I said my prayers that morning I said, "I'm glad to know that Dad is worthy to be a patriarch, and I am grateful thou didst give me this understanding." Three months later I got a letter from home, saying, "Guess what happened? Elder Mark E. Petersen interviewed your dad and set him apart as a patriarch." It had happened at the time I felt the impression.

I don't know why that message came, but I felt a deep reverence for the calling of a patriarch and sensed there is a stronger link between patriarchs and heaven than we now understand. I had the feeling that we will have a much deeper appreciation for our patriarchal blessings at a later time as we see things more clearly. I also felt we should try to follow our blessings better and be more appreciative of them.

These feelings, each a little different, usually came early in the morning just as I awoke, but some were in the evening. They were all glorious, and each carried a feeling of love and peace and beauty that is hard to describe. I suppose they cannot be described in mortal terms as they have to be spiritually experienced, and that, in a way, is beyond mortal description.

The second example occurred again in the early morning. I saw myself in a farm setting with fields and cows and with a long pasture leading up to a beautiful house. I was aware that some very special people were visiting the house, where my folks and some of my family from some other generation were living. There was an aura of light and a feeling of love that can't be described, only felt.

I heard someone calling, "Johnny, I want you to come up here and meet someone." I walked up that long pasture and went into the house. They introduced me to somebody I had never met before, yet he seemed familiar. There were three other people there. I felt sure they were relatives. The spokesman was an old man, kind of grizzled but with the kindest expression you can imagine. He smiled and spoke to me, saying, "I'm sure you have enjoyed your farm work and the other work you have done. That's wonderful work. But there is another work to do, and you will enjoy that just as much." He sat me down and put his hands on my head and blessed me. There were some other people around. I didn't hear any words, but felt the whole scene evaporate into an aura of joy and beauty that cannot be described.

The main message I received was, "Wherever you go or whatever you do, under proper assignment, put your whole heart and soul into it and you will be happy and have joy therein. It doesn't matter whether it be family, work, missions, or other callings, joy comes from hard work and proper attitude, not location or type of work or calling." I knew I could enjoy any assignment, or any place, if I made up my mind to do so. I determined that I would.

I was glad for this period of special feelings and experiences, which were mostly family oriented. I sensed firmly that families are the important thing. I understood this was not necessarily the nuclear family we tend to think of-such as mother, father, and children-but the broader family, which we call multigenerational, extended family, clan, kin, tribe, or whatever. I knew for sure that all of us-married or single, male or female, old or young, light or dark-are part of this larger family unit and we need to understand it and appreciate it even more than we do now. Here again I felt that the Tongans may have a better understanding of the true eternal nature of family than Westerners do.

As I thought of many in our society putting other things ahead of family, such as their own convenience, schooling, friends, or other conditions, I almost gasped with disbelief. One reason we are here is to do things for others that they cannot do for themselves, such as vi-carious temple ordinances and having children. I remember thinking, "If we, as Church members, delay or refuse to have children, where will God send them?"

As I thought of the eternal consequences of putting worldly things ahead of God and family, I literally shuddered. I realized that everyone has moral agency and no one but God can see the whole picture, but I also knew that we will answer to him for our actions. If those actions have been motivated by selfishness, it will be a sorry time for us. On the other hand, if we have been motivated by a sincere desire to help others, it will be a happy time for us no matter what inconveniences we have experienced.

I became firmly convinced that we should always look at the eternal perspective in all we do and say, for only by acting according to that perspective can we find safety and joy. It was a happy, peaceful few weeks, for which I was most grateful.
