John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

25

The Delegation

On the third boat after the hurricane, my mission president came to visit us on Niuatoputapu. The boat stayed overnight. How happy I was to see my mission president! He was a great man, and I had the feeling he could do anything. For instance, he met a member just returning from his garden. The member's hands were dirty, so he didn't want to shake hands with the mission president. The mission president looked at him and said, "I don't care how dirty your hands are, so long as your heart is clean," and they shook hands. How that impressed me!

We held meetings with the mission president and the Saints, and I was able to talk to him for a long time about many things. He asked about the hurricane and about how things were going. I told him they were going great, and Feki and I loved it here and had plenty to do. He said he had a meeting that evening with the chief magistrate and several other important island leaders. I was impressed. I was not aware of what the meeting was about.

Feki and I had no appointments that evening because of the mission president's visit, but for some reason the president asked Feki to be at the meeting, but not me. I wasn't sure what to do, so Feki made arrangements for me to visit an investigator family on the other edge of Vaipoa. It felt strange visiting them alone, but they were happy to see me, and we talked for a long time about important principles. They had many questions, and it was late when we finished and I started walking home. I had no idea what time it was.

We were entering the hot months again; since the people didn't use watches or go by outward schedules, the general flow of activity just naturally tilted away from the hot daytime towards the somewhat cooler nighttime.

It was a beautiful moonlit night and a soft breeze caressed the palms and enveloped me in a hint of coolness. How lovely everything seemed! I thought I could see and feel and hear everything as I walked towards home.

There were small flickering glows of light from kerosene lanterns coming from a few houses where friends were gathered for kava parties. I heard the quiet tap-tap-tapping of rocks carefully pounding the kava root and could even hear the muffled swish of the fau as it filled the coconut cups with kava.

As I continued homeward, I heard a beautiful sound coming from a distant fale. I instinctively moved in that direction. As I came closer, I heard the plaintive sounds of a heartfelt love song filling the air, and I thought, "What a beautiful voice"; the young man sang with great feeling. I listened to his perfect, clear voice and the soft guitar accompaniment and thought, "How could anything be lovelier?" I listened for a long time, transfixed by the beauty of it all. In a sense, I felt he was singing just for me. I was glad there were no talent scouts around that evening, for surely they would have gobbled up that young man with the crystal voice and mellow guitar.

I felt that the song, the evening, the moonlight were all made just for me. I knew then I was in love with Tonga and the Tongans, their language, singing, character, and faith. I could hardly keep myself from crying. I listened, watched, and drank in everything for a long time. I thought of my family, of Jean, and of God. I wondered if this is what true love felt like. If it was, I wanted to be in love forever.

I finally returned home, quietly said my prayers, and carefully slipped into bed. Feki was already asleep. The next morning we went with the mission president to the boat and saw him off. Nothing more was said, and when the boat left, we went back to work.

Years later I learned that the mission president had originally planned on keeping me on Niuatoputapu for just a few months, then transferring me back to the main island and returning Feki to the building program. It seems the Lord had different plans, though, for the hurricane hit, then the famine followed, and nearly three months went by with no boat. I guess the three months my folks went without mail from me created a concern, and the mission president came to Niuatoputapu with the intention of bringing us back.

The local leaders must have guessed his intentions, and a delegation of leaders (mostly nonmembers) came and pleaded with him to let me stay. It was probably the trumpet they wanted more than anything. The mission president considered their request overnight, and the next morning canceled the transfer so that we could stay. I knew nothing about any of this, and he said nothing to me except that he was happy with my work and that I should keep on working hard. I was happy and anxious to do whatever my mission president told me. He gave me no new instructions, so we just kept doing what we had been doing.

As I look back, some of the greatest lessons I learned came during those last several months on Niuatoputapu. It was during this time, when the language and the setting were no longer a major challenge, that I learned to feel how the Tongans felt. That is very important. How grateful I am for inspired leaders who listen to the promptings of the Spirit and are willing to make changes when that is the right thing to do, rather than paying attention only to logic or predetermined reason.

I never had the opportunity of seeing my first mission president in Tonga again, as he was released a few months later. However, his influence on my life was, and still is, incalculable. His having the courage to do what he did has been a constant inspiration to me.
