John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

27

"I Feel Sorry for Him"

As time passed and I became more and more acquainted with the islanders and their language, food, and customs, I also became more aware of the physical poverty in which they lived. I thought of all the conveniences we had at home and wondered why we should have so much in America and they have so little here. It seemed irreconcilable. I still didn't fully perceive the great spiritual blessings they had.

As memories of deaths, illnesses, and hurricanes faded, the monotony of living out the daily routine of a small island returned. One long, uneventful day gave way to another with very little change in village life. It would rain fiercely, then the sun would shine intensely. The diet of fish and breadfruit was almost unchanged from day to day. The oneness of the sun and the sea, the lagoon, and the soft laughter of those beautiful, brown-skinned people seemed to melt into a covering of peace and quiet.

Then, one day, new excitement! A strange boat was working its way into the harbor. Hurray for something different! The whole island was soon down to the seashore looking at one of the most beautiful sailing yachts I have ever seen.

Quietly, as if in slow motion, a crewman threw an anchor into the waiting lagoon. It did not even appear to make a splash, as though to refrain from disturbing the beauty of the scene. It was nearly dusk. The light from the setting sun silhouetted the yacht's sleek shape, its sails furled against the backdrop of deep blue waters and emerald green islets. Golden shafts of light painted everything in unbelievably vivid hues, as though framing the whole picture for eternity.

Silently the crew rolled out deep red carpets on the freshly scrubbed deck, and then the master emerged in his crisp white "tropics" to survey the situation. By now there were canoes all around as curious islanders wanted to be a part of this experience, this change.

Our members were caught up in the excitement. They soon brought back reports, and even though I was young and inexperienced, it did not take long to realize what was happening.

The man was a millionaire from overseas, cruising the world. He wanted to trade for food and water, and he wanted girls. There was liquor on board and a real "swinging time" for those who would accept his invitation.

I counseled the members to stay away. Most did, but some did not. The wealthy adventurer stayed for a few days until he filled his wants. Then he announced he would leave before noon the following day. Some of the faithful members pleaded, "Can we go out before he leaves, just to see the boat?" I agreed that at ten o'clock the next morning we would briefly look at the yacht.

When we got there, it was even more elegant than I had pictured. Evidence of the previous night's activities was still being cleared away, and preparations were being made to raise anchor and take sail. We spent a few moments in wonder and awe, astonished at the beauty of the deep mahogany paneling, the rich bronze fittings, the luster of the freshly painted surfaces, and the gleaming white of the hull as it lapped quietly at the deep blue lagoon.

We got in our canoes. The owner, nearly sober, waved good-bye, and we returned to shore. As we pulled our dugouts onto the sandy beach, I turned again to see that sleek, white form move toward the horizon. I thought of the millionaire in his white "tropics," having had his fill, comfortable with his well-stocked cupboards and expert crew, with his money and power. He seemed to have everything he wanted.

Then I looked at the men who had brought me to shore: no shoes, shirts of rags, tattered valas (skirts) tied with coconut sennit around their waists. I looked past them to the village. I saw the smoke from the morning's cooking twisting lazily into the air, heard the monotonous sound of tapa being beaten, and felt the heaviness of the overhead sun as it filtered through the palm trees. I watched the men slowly walk to their gardens and heard the laughter of naked children as they chased scrawny dogs.

Suddenly the oppressiveness of island life, with so little opportunity for change, struck me as being grossly unfair. I turned again to gaze at the yacht, now receding into the distance. The contrast was so great as to be almost unbelievable. My heart cried out, "Unfair! Unfair! These poor people-look at them. And you-look at you!"

This scene, representing the story "I Feel Sorry for Him," shows the shore of Niuatoputapu with Tafahi in the background.

Painting by Clark Kelley Price, a missionary who served in Tonga.

I returned to the group, and we trudged up the shore to the village. Then one of the older men turned to me and said softly in his native tongue, "I am very sad. I feel very sorry."

"Well," I interrupted, "I am very sad, and I feel very sorry, too. It just isn't fair, is it?"

"No," he continued, "it really isn't fair. I feel so sorry for him, for he will never be happy."

I stopped dead in my tracks.

"You feel sorry for him? He won't be happy? What are you talking about?"

My mind was groping to come to an understanding of what he had just said. This man with nothing was saying he was sorry for that man with everything! My immature mind was spinning, trying to interpret words, feelings, and relationships.

The islander continued: "I feel sorry for him. He will never be happy, for he seeks only his own pleasure, not to help others. Yet we know that happiness comes from helping others. All he will do is sail around the world seeking happiness, hoping others will bring it to him, but they cannot. He will never find it, for he has not learned to help others. He has too much money, too many luxuries, too much power. Oh, I feel so sorry for him."

I looked at the wrinkled brown body of the old man. His teeth were gone, his hair was white, and his skin was leather. But his eyes were soft, his voice quiet, and his countenance immaculate. His powerful words had taught me a great lesson.

Years have passed, but occasionally as I see proud people traveling in their sleek, new cars or sense my own unwillingness to help others, I close my eyes and see a beautiful yacht moving toward the horizon, then see an old man with a wrinkled, brown body, white hair, and skin of leather. I listen as his soft eyes penetrate mine. His toothless mouth moves and his spirit explains: "I feel sorry for him. He will never be happy. He hasn't learned to help others."
