John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

28

"My Island"

By now I was so thoroughly enmeshed in island life that I truly felt I belonged. There were those who still fought against the Church and us, but I felt I understood them. They were more open now and talked as friends, even though we saw things differently.

Feki and I were invited to attend almost every major function including government meetings, funerals, and similar events. You learn something about cultures, customs, and people when you sit among them and visit for hours on end. I had many opportunities to do so.

Some of the major occasions for large gatherings and feasts in Tonga were funerals, marriages, holidays, and some birthdays. Much has changed now, but back then actual births were not celebrated much. If a child lived a year, however, it was cause for celebration-then it was considered his birthday. From birth to one year a baby was somewhat of a nonperson, like a test to see if he or she could survive a year.

It was also considered a big event if a child lasted to around twenty-one. Not many people knew their actual birthday, but they generally had an idea of approximately when they were born by reference to some event-a hurricane, a drought, a boat sinking, someone catching a big fish, a celebration, or something similar.

A funeral was a big event. On small islands, there are not too many things to do. You work, you fish, you sleep. To have something unusual happen is a welcomed change, and a funeral is a major break from the norm.

At this time there was no embalming in Tonga. The rule was that if you die in the afternoon, you are to be buried before noon the next day. If you die before noon, you are to be buried before the sun goes down that day. It was so hot and humid, the body starts decaying within hours of death and the smell became really bad after several hours.

Even though a person was buried quickly, the funeral often lasted several weeks. Family and friends came from all over, to be with the family. This placed a big burden on the family of the deceased to furnish meals and lodging. Visitors would cry and mourn and comfort in their own way, which was usually loud and long. I wondered if it was healthier emotionally to "let it all out" than to try to act controlled as we so often do in our Western culture.

During the last few months I was asked to speak at several funerals and found it was an excellent time to explain some of the most important doctrines of the Church. At first some people were critical about my preaching "my doctrine," but the truth is so comforting that eventually no one complained, not even the ministers. In fact, many people accepted those truths, for I was told that several of the preachers modified their sermons about what happens when we die, especially their teachings pertaining to infants.

Even though I generally controlled my emotions, there were times, such as at the funeral of the infant daughter of one of our investigators, when I felt I could join with the family in venting my grief and sorrow-not for the infant daughter, who was fine, but rather for the parents, who as yet didn't understand. As I watched them, I thought of their Israelite background and wondered how they felt as they read Micah 1:8, "Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked: I will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls."

Sometimes I cried in a way that would not be acceptable in our society but which was fully acceptable and even expected among them. As I became closer to the people, I found myself crying more often. I could see how they were related to the Book of Mormon people, particularly as mentioned in 3 Nephi, "Behold, they began to weep and howl again because of the loss of their kindred and friends" (3 Nephi 10:8).

I also found myself relating much more to the way they felt about "mother earth" and "father sun," and plants, and fish, and nature in general. They truly saw God's handiwork for what it was. They sensed the spiritual element of temporal things and felt they were entrusted as caretakers rather than exploiters of all that lived and breathed, including the earth, the sea, the plants, the animals. Most important, they felt that way about one another.

I remembered hearing how the early Native American Indians felt about these things and realized that there was a closeness that was more than coincidental.

Generally, the people were very healthy, with straight, white teeth, clear complexions, beautiful hair, and strong bodies. I enjoyed excellent health most of the time as well. Very rarely was there flour, sugar, or any kind of processed foods. There was no refrigeration, and all cooking was done with fire.

Unfortunately there was quite a bit of drinking (mostly home brew), and people who could get cigarettes certainly used them. There was a sort of unofficial contest between a certain element of older boys and young men to see who could stay drunk for the whole week between Christmas and New Year's Day. Sadly, there were several cochampions.

The culture and the people of Tonga seemed ingenious in devising elaborate ceremonies that took up lots of time. At nearly all major events, such as the coronation of a king or welcoming of a visitor, there was a kava ceremony that went on for hours, even days. Speeches were given that went on and on, with lots of flowery words but no particular progress toward a conclusion. To me, at the time, it seemed ridiculous-just a lot of talking back and forth with no change in the predetermined outcome.

Once I was helping at such a ceremony that seemed to go on forever. In frustration, I asked one of the old men sitting by me, "Why do you take so long? Why take hours or days to accomplish something that could be done in thirty minutes?"

He thought and thought, then said, "Well, it's something to do. It is very orderly and very long. When we finish this, we'll just have to think of something else to do, so why not do this?" I thought that was silly. But the more I thought about it, the more I realized that we are not so different in our culture. Men and women play bridge for hours, watch soap operas, or do other things that do not really accomplish much but are just something to do. I wondered how much of our lives are spent in this way. The more I thought about it, the more I realized we were indeed the same as the Tongans, if not worse. I penned these words at the time about our society:

Most of what we buy isn't necessary

Most of what we eat is not very good for us

Most of what we do is not very important

Most of what we store should be given or thrown away

Most of what we talk about is trite

Why don't we spend our time and means better?

Why don't we concentrate more on loving and helping others?

I didn't have a good answer then, nor do I now, but at least I thought about it.

I suppose I was getting to a point where the language, customs, and activities on Niuatoputapu seemed proper and normal; by contrast, my old palangi words and ways seemed strange, contrived, and in many ways hypocritical and meaningless.

There were still adjustments to make, but often as I walked to another village, and passed a familiar tree or rock, met a familiar horse or person, saw a familiar house, or heard a familiar sound or voice, I had the feeling, This is my language; these are my people; this is my island.

Niuatoputapu (in foreground) and Tafahi (in background).

Painting by Clark Kelley Price.
