John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

29

Leaving Niuatoputapu

We were busy and happy and continued to work hard. We were teaching several families with hopes of more baptisms, when one day I received this telegram from a new mission president: Elder Groberg-Niuatoputapu-If you are there, please reply. It was my first notice that we had a new mission president.

I replied that I was there, and he sent another telegram back: New assignment for you-Take the next boat to Nuku'alofa with Feki.

What a shock that was! A new mission president, a new assignment, and leaving Niuatoputapu-all in one telegram! I wasn't sure I could cope with it all, but knew I had to. Leaving Niuatoputapu? I couldn't believe it. And worse, the boat was scheduled to arrive in just a few weeks. How could I ever get all the things done I felt I needed to do before I left?

As the reality of it all sank in, I became quite philosophical. I knew I couldn't finish everything, so I would just do everything I could and leave the rest to others. I reflected on what had happened over the past year.

I had come not knowing the language or any of the people on Niuatoputapu. I was now leaving, able to speak the language and recognize everyone. When I first came I was scared and felt the locals had bad motives. Now I felt at home and knew the people had good intentions and were wonderfully helpful. I had come to a small branch with lots of problems, now I was leaving a relatively strong branch with at least a few less problems.

We had baptized only seven people in a year's time, but we had worked hard and tried the best we knew how. It was very satisfying to know that all seven were still active members and were powerful additions to the Church. Generally those who join the Church despite heavy opposition tend to remain active.

Years later, I did a quick calculation and found that those seven baptisms eventually formed six families with over fifty members, including spouses and children, in those immediate families, or an average-sized branch. They all had large and faithful families. For example, one family we baptized ended up with twelve children: nine boys and three girls. All twelve served missions. Using average baptisms per missionary for Tonga, the family members of these six families who served missions accounted for over 450 new members, or a good-sized ward. These children then got married, and many of them went on another mission as couples. Nearly all of their children served missions as well. Again, using average figures, this group of missionaries would have baptized over three thousand new members, or an average-sized stake.

With no stretch of the imagination, there could be well over three thousand additional members brought into the gospel from those original seven baptisms who remained faithful, even to the third generation and beyond.

When we do things according to the Spirit, the power of God takes over, the Spirit justifies what we have done, and the Lord orchestrates future events so that what was started spiritually is brought to fruition downstream-both temporally and spiritually. When the Apostle Paul wrote, "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6), he wrote the truth. Seven isn't very much, but the Spirit brought life; eventually branches, wards, and stakes came into existence, and the end is not yet. If we do our part, if we make and keep commitments under the influence of the Spirit, what marvelous things happen! I am convinced that all we have to do is try our hardest by putting forth effort and having great faith in God, and He indeed will cause the increase.

Those last few weeks rushed by like a fleeting cloud. Suddenly the boat arrived on which I was to leave. The time of departure was here! I can't explain the depth of emotion I felt as I realized this was my last day on Niuatoputapu. The boat was in, the passage had been purchased, and we were going back to Tongatapu in the morning and leaving Niuatoputapu and its wonderful people behind.

I could hardly believe it, yet I knew it was true. I had become so accustomed to the island and its people, I didn't want to leave. A year doesn't seem like a long time, but from an emotional and spiritual point of view, the months on Niuatoputapu seemed more significant than the last twenty years of my life. I had learned much. I knew Niuatoputapu would always be a sacred place to me, a place where I had seen the power of God manifest among his children.

I had learned the greatest lessons anyone can learn in this life, namely that God lives, that He is our Father, that He loves us and is involved in our lives and cares what happens to us; that Jesus is His son, our Brother, our Friend, our Redeemer, who because of His infinite love for us paid a terrible price that we might return to our real home with Heavenly Father with joy, love, opportunities to serve, and increased capacities that are indescribable. I learned that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God and through him the Book of Mormon, other scriptures, and the priesthood of God and the holy ordinances thereof are again on the earth; that the kingdom of God, with living prophets, is real and here and now, with the power to seal for all eternity and bind on earth and in heaven. I had seen and felt its power and knew of its efficacy.

I knew all of these things and felt them deeply, but strangely enough, my thoughts that day were not so much on those things as they were upon the people. I wanted to see and talk to everyone. I knew everyone, or at least thought I did. I was sure I could call all seven hundred by name and tell who they were related to and what house they lived in and how many pigs they had and how often they had fed us. It was a heart-tugging experience to move around and visit everyone.

Even though we didn't sleep the whole night, the next morning came too quickly. We slowly walked toward the boat, where a large crowd was gathered to see everyone off. This boat was scheduled to arrive in Nuku'alofa just before school started, so it was full of students-mostly high school age-going away to school on the "big" (twenty-one miles long) island on Tongatapu.

Feki and I said our farewells and embraced almost everyone. We loved our little flock and hoped that we left them better than when we found them. We loved those we had baptized and those we had not. We had great hopes for all of them. Everyone expressed their love, member and nonmember alike. The chief magistrate gave us a warm farewell. He was a wonderful man and a great friend.

As we got on the boat, the Saints gathered together and sang the beautiful parting hymn "Oka Tau Ka Mavae" ("When We Part"), sung as only Tongans can sing. Talk about heart tugs! Tears flowed freely and emotions were hard to control. I suspect most missionaries feel the same way as they leave the area and the people they have served and come to love. For me, it was a day of wonderment and fulfillment. My first mission president had asked me to learn the language and build the kingdom. I felt both had been accomplished, at least to some degree-and oh what I had learned in the process!
