John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

30

Warning in the Night

The boat finally got under way. We were actually leaving Niua-toputapu! I still couldn't believe it. I realized that physically we were leaving, but a big part of my emotional and spiritual being was staying and would stay there forever. I stood by the rail and looked longingly at the people and the island for hours until it sank below the horizon.

Would I ever return? Would I ever forget? Would I ever be the same? Could God's love and goodness and man's kindness ever be found in such rich abundance again? I felt they could somewhere, sometime-at least in the celestial kingdom. I was glad for that hope, but I sensed a loss as I knew it would be difficult to duplicate those feelings anywhere soon. Once you have felt these feelings of deep love, you want nothing less. I hoped I could endure faithfully to the end and feel that indescribable love eternally.

The promise of new adventures seemed a little hollow when compared to the loss of known love and acceptance and the certainty of being needed and wanted. The assurance that I was following the directions of an inspired, albeit new, mission president gave me the strength to move on.

The day was beautiful and the ocean mild. There were a few whitecaps and some choppiness, but nothing unusual. It only took three days to go directly to Nuku'alofa as the boat was much larger than the one I came on. We slept on the deck along with many others, mostly students. We talked, sang, and enjoyed the voyage. We drank coconuts and ate crackers, taro, and ufi that some of the Saints had given us. I remember trying to recall how large and what shape plates and glasses might be and wondering what it would be like to use a knife, fork, and spoon again, as I had eaten only with fingers the last twelve months.

It seemed strange to be on a large boat with crowded decks, but Feki and I staked out a nice area for our mats, baskets, and tapa cloth (used for warmth, like blankets) on the higher deck. Everyone helped everyone else and enjoyed each other's company. Not many got seasick. It was wonderful to visit with good friends, and the days passed pleasantly.

We came to the last evening of the voyage and were told we would be in Nuku'alofa the next morning. It was a beautiful evening as we swayed to the gentle, undulating motion of the boat. I marveled at the bright stars above and wondered at the clouds playing hide-and-seek with the moon. I felt the caress of the warm sea breeze and listened to the quiet murmur of peaceful conversations. I was enraptured by the beautiful strumming of guitars and the melodious singing of some of the best voices on earth. It was almost intoxicating. All this and more combined to lull me into a state of wonderment at God's goodness to us all. I finally fell asleep with these beautiful feelings on my mind. Feki was close by, and tomorrow a new adventure would begin.

I soon learned we should never get too complacent. As I slept, my hand was lying outside my covering of tapa cloth. Sometime during the night, I felt something moving my hand slightly. I stirred a little but thought nothing of it. A moment later I felt something rub across my hand. I stirred again slightly. Part of me said, Just relax. But another part said, There is danger here, wake up! I wrestled between the two for a moment, then felt a surge of strength and sureness of what to do.

I woke and sat up with a start. The moon was bright and I could see fairly well. I looked around. Where was Feki? Where was everyone else? I was in the same place where, with many others, I had gone to sleep, but now there was only one young girl nearby, who had moved her mat next to mine. As I sat up and began looking around, I heard a few snickers from behind a large metal stack and noticed this girl putting her shirt back on. Where had the others gone?

I asked where Feki was. The young girl said he was visiting someone "over there," but didn't I want to stay where I was? "Lie down and go back to sleep. It's okay." I was fully awake now and it was pretty easy to see what was going on. I simply said I needed to be with my companion. There was some whispering, and soon Feki returned. I asked him where he had been. He said he had been asked by several people to come over and tell them more about the Church. Since there were lots of people sleeping by me, he went. He was surprised when he returned to see so few people there. I asked him not to leave again. He agreed. The girl and some other students moved away, and Feki and I went back to sleep.

The next morning this same girl asked me, "Koeha na'a ke hola ai anepo?" ("Why did you run away last night?") I knew what she meant. I told her I was a missionary, and that missionaries don't get involved in that way. I was not so much angry as factual. I felt great compassion for her and for the vast multitude of mankind who have been deceived by the evil one as they continue to seek pleasure or joy in places and ways it cannot be found.

I thought of the lessons I had learned, particularly that in physical things our imagination or anticipation is much kinder than reality, whereas in spiritual things, no matter what our imagination or anticipation, the reality is always greater and deeper and more fulfilling. How grateful I felt to God for His protection and for the gospel of Jesus Christ and for its teachings and for His laws that bring eternal joy when followed.

I have often reflected on that night. It was warm, beautiful, and full of feelings. The rolling motion of the boat, together with a long voyage, a tropical breeze, beautiful music, and tender feelings, combined to bring out emotions that are deep and basic and that may be closer to the surface under these circumstances than in some other climates. I was grateful for the help the Lord gave me that night and grateful for the feeling that warned me of danger. I never saw that girl again.

Later in the morning, someone called and pointed to the south, where we could barely make out the faint outlines of the big island of Tongatapu. In a few hours a new phase of my mission would begin. What will it be like? I wondered. Where will I be going, and what will I be doing? What will the new mission president look like and be like? I felt nothing could be better than my time on Niuatoputapu, but I also felt good about going wherever and doing whatever the new mission president wanted me to do. I was sure he would be inspired, as my first mission president had been. I knew that with God's help, any assignment could be accomplished. I also knew there would be trials and challenges, as that is part of missionary assignments. However, I knew that filling assignments with God's help, no matter what the challenges, brought happiness and joy and deep fulfillment.

I hoped I would never forget Niuatoputapu. I also hoped I was ready for the next step.
