John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

31

Soft Beds

Shortly before noon we arrived at Nuku'alofa on the island of Tongatapu. The island did seem big-and very different from Niuatoputapu! There were two wharves, roads, cars, stores, electric lights, and people everywhere. All these things! All this noise! All these people! My mind was a blur. I had left from here a year ago, but in contrast to Niuatoputapu it seemed so different now.

I didn't know what the new mission president looked like, but soon I spotted a kindly looking American couple who were obviously looking for us. As we met, I introduced myself and Feki to them and they asked about our suitcases. I told them we had none, but my possessions were folded in a mat, as were Feki's. The mission president had two helpers who put my mat in his car and Feki's mat in another car. I wanted to visit a bit and get an idea of what was going to happen, but almost immediately they whisked Feki back to the building missionary quarters at Liahona, and I hardly had a chance to say good-bye. It did not seem right to me, as I wanted to be with Feki, but there wasn't much I could do about it.

The mission president and his wife were kind. She reminded me of my mother-a warm, loving woman. I remember her putting her arms around me, crying, and saying, "Oh you poor thing, how could they leave you up there for so long?" As far as I was concerned, there wasn't anything poor about it at all. It was great! I didn't know what to say. In fact I could hardly say anything in English. She may have taken my silence for agreement. We got in the car and drove to the mission home. The cars, roads, wooden houses, stores, and power lines-all seemed so strange. We arrived at the mission home and went in. It was noontime.

The mission president's wife seemed very excited. She asked me to sit down as she spread the table. She had a meal of steak, potatoes, gravy, bread, milk, butter, and jam. "It's ready now," she smiled, "I know how much you'll enjoy these foods you haven't had for so long. Let's eat!"

A prayer was offered. I tried to appear happy and grateful, but I missed Feki terribly. It was the first time we had been apart for over a year. I missed the Tongan language. English seemed so foreign to me. I missed sitting on the floor and eating with my fingers. I missed the familiar smells and sounds and people I was accustomed to. I felt awkward sitting on a chair by a table and trying to use a knife, fork, and spoon. Plates and cups seemed so out of place with eating. And this strange food tasted weird!

It was difficult to converse. They spoke of things I did not understand, such as how sorry they felt for me and how I was now back in civilization. I'm sure they were sincere, but it did not ring true with me. That wasn't the way things were in my life. I had been happy on Niuatoputapu and was beginning to feel uncomfortable, even miserable, here.

They could see I was somewhat melancholy, so they said, "Why don't you rest for a while? You must be terribly tired after all you've been through. We'll leave you alone for a few hours." The mission president said he was going to some meetings at Liahona but would be back for supper.

They took me to a room. It had a wooden door with hinges, a door knob, windows, and curtains. It also had a bed with a mattress, a pillow, and clean sheets. They showed me an inside bathroom with a shower that turned on with a tap, a basin with running water, and a mirror. There was a toilet that flushed by pulling a chain, and I noticed there were even curtains on the bathroom window as the breeze rustled them slightly.

They left me and told me to rest and relax and assured me everything would be fine. I suppose they wondered about my mental state because I was quiet and stared at all these strange things for a long time. In a way they seemed familiar, yet I wasn't quite sure. I was grappling with trying to put two worlds back together. I remembered steak and potatoes; mattresses, toilets, and running water; even curtains and English words; but they seemed to have little relevance now. I was having a difficult time seeing exactly where everything fit.

I wondered what I would be doing and what my new assignment would be. It was hard to be alone, and it was hard to think and feel comfortable in this foreign atmosphere. I tried to rest, but couldn't, so I sat on the floor and started to read the Book of Mormon in Tongan. I came to a verse where Jacob lamented, "For we [are] a lonesome and a solemn people, wanderers, cast out from Jerusalem" (Jacob 7:26). I started to cry. I knew how he felt.

That evening we had supper and talked for a while, and then I took a shower and went to bed. I do not think I slept at all that night as my stomach hurt from the strange food, my mind hurt from the strange language, my back hurt from the soft bed, and I hurt all over from missing Niuatoputapu and Feki.

The next morning my mission president called me in for an interview. He assigned me to be the district president in Ha'apai, a group of about seventeen islands one or two days north of mission headquarters. He said, "They have lots of problems there. There are several factions and much discord and disharmony. I want you to go up and straighten it out. You will be in charge of all the missionaries and the missionary work, and also in charge of all the members and the branches. You will need to choose two good counselors. Pray about it, and when you feel right, set them apart and go to work. We are short of missionaries, so I don't think I can spare a companion for you, but if you have good counselors, you'll be all right. You can use your counselors and other members who are willing to help you as companions. I would suggest you choose two men who are married as counselors.

"I also want you to start a school there. Schools have proven to be helpful in the work. I won't get there very often, but you will be fine. The Lord will bless you. Get rid of the discord up there. Do whatever is necessary to get the people united. Teach the gospel. Build up the Church. Baptize those who believe. Strengthen the branches and follow the directions of the Spirit."

He asked if I had any questions. I shook my head negatively. He then said, "The boat for Ha'apai leaves in a couple of days. We are having a conference at Liahona now, and I would like you to come and participate." I agreed.

We got ready to go to conference, but before we left, his wife asked if I had any special request for supper, as she was anxious to make my stay as pleasant as possible. I suspect she sensed I was miserable. "If there is anything at all we can do to make your stay more comfortable, just let us know," they both said.

It was hard for me to do, but they had asked so I gently said, "If I really have a choice, I do have a request."

"What is it?" they replied in unison.

"Could I take my things with me and stay with Feki at Liahona until the boat goes to Ha'apai?"

The mission president was surprised, and his wife began to cry. "You mean you don't like us?" she sobbed. I tried to explain the best I could that it had nothing to do with them. It was just that I couldn't sleep on the soft mattress, I couldn't eat the food, I was uncomfortable with English, and I missed being with Feki and the Tongans. They told me there were only little thatched huts for the labor missionaries, and the conditions were pretty primitive. I said that would be fine. I am sure they felt bad, but they were very nice and said they would think about it.

I could tell they were concerned about my health and about me. They communicated that well. I assured them that I had never had better health or been happier than while on Niuatoputapu. They had heard of the famine and other problems and were a little questioning, but in the end they believed me and let me take my things, and we all went to the conference together.

The conference meetings lasted all day, but in the evening I walked to the labor missionaries' huts, found Feki, and excitedly told him I had been given permission to stay with him for a couple of days until I went to Ha'apai. The huts were really only thatched roofs lifted up on one side so you could crawl in. I couldn't stand up, but, oh, how good it felt to take a piece of boiled taro in my hand and savor it and lick my fingers! How fresh and familiar the smell of the dried coconut fronds was, and how wonderful it was to sleep on a nice, woven mat on the ground! It rained hard the next night and everything got wet. Despite this I felt much better, as my body and mind were used to this.

I enjoyed the conference meetings and was asked to speak several times. I enjoyed getting acquainted with other people. The evening before my boat left, someone came with a message for Feki saying his mother had passed away. She had been ill, and Feki and I had visited her the day before. Feki left immediately. I wanted to come, but he said, "No, you stay here."

He was back before sunup and ready to go to work. I asked about going to the funeral to be held about noon that day. He said, "No, I will do my regular building missionary work, and you will go to town and take the boat to Ha'apai. That's the way Mom would like it." I never questioned him. His attitude of total commitment always made a great impression on me. Feki thanked me for coming and staying with him at the school. He assured me all would be well in Ha'apai if I worked hard and was humble. I thanked him for his help. This was the last time I saw Feki on my first mission, although in my heart I felt that we would meet again, and I knew he would remain true and faithful.

I found out years later that the little act of moving in with the labor missionaries, which I did because I felt more comfortable, is one of the things that solidified my acceptance among the members on the main island of Tongatapu. When they saw I truly preferred to eat Tongan food and sleep on the floor and be with Tongan people, rather than staying in the big house with the fancy food and the soft beds, they felt my love for them came from my heart and that I did what I did because I wanted to, not because I had to. I certainly had no lofty motives but rather came because I felt better-physically and emotionally. In a sense, those few days closed the circuit with the local members as they said, "He understands us. He can feel the way we do."

I learned that unless we feel the way others feel, we cannot be too effective in meeting their needs. I have often said we must feel another's needs before we can fill them. Sometimes we learn another language or culture and are able to feel the way they feel, but not always. Feelings go far beyond mere language or knowledge. To feel how others feel is a great blessing and is accomplished as we hurt with them, laugh with them, mourn with them, rejoice with them, cry with them, suffer with them, wonder with them, pray with them, experience miracles with them, and become reconciled to die with them if necessary.

I think the Savior truly felt how others felt. The scriptures tell us that "I, the Lord, will feel after them" (D&C 112:13). He went below all things so that He might rise above all things and draw all people to Him. I think this means not only physically but also emotionally, as He actually understands them and knows how they feel-each one. I don't think we can feel what we haven't experienced, at least to some degree.

I wonder if some of our so-called trials with wayward children, poor health, or financial reverses may be to help us feel things we other-wise might not be able to feel. I am confident that we can best understand and help people when we have felt the way they have felt. God has lots of children, some of whom do some pretty strange things, but His love is still universal.

Sometimes when we tell others, "I know how you feel," they say in their hearts, "Sure. You're just saying that. No one knows how I feel, especially not you, for I am the only one who has ever felt this way." It takes a great deal of trust to open up and bare our true feelings to one another, but it can be done. Feki and I could share feelings. My wife and I can do so also, and there are others with whom I can share how I feel. I know that the Savior understands how we feel. We can share fully with Him and be helped fully by Him.

As I prepared for a new assignment in Ha'apai, I prayed I could understand the people there as I had tried to understand the people on Niuatoputapu. If I did, maybe I could accomplish what the president had asked me to do.
