John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

32

Ha'apai Veu

I rode from Liahona into town with my mission president. The boat was almost ready to leave for Ha'apai, but we still had awhile to visit. I asked again about a companion because it seemed strange to be without one. He told me that since there was a government restriction on foreign proselyting Elders in Tonga (four, counting the mission president) and since they needed most of the able-bodied young Tongan men as builders, I would have to work alone. He assured me I would be just fine and reminded me again that my counselors could help and be like companions.

He also explained a little more about my new area. It was more developed and more populated than Niuatoputapu, with bigger towns, some stores, and better transportation and communication. He said there were about thirty local missionaries (mostly couples) on the various islands of Ha'apai, but he wasn't sure where they were or what their names were. He suggested that as soon as I got counselors, we should go around to the various islands and see what missionaries were where and how they were doing. He suggested that I call as many local member missionaries as I could; if I needed more, I should let him know and he would try to do what he could, but he wasn't sure how much he could help. "If you're smart," he said, "you'll get your own help locally."

I asked about the present district presidency. "Just tell them they are released and you are taking over," he said. "They are in a state of disarray anyway, so you shouldn't have any problem. But if you do, send me a telegram and I'll verify that you are in charge." (I had no problem. The members were anxious to have someone new take over.)

He basically told me that I would be on my own and that I shouldn't bother him unless absolutely necessary, because he had lots to do on Tongatapu, such as running the main Church school, coordinating the building projects, and handling various official matters there.

He gave me a couple of lists and said to look at them later. I got on the boat and just as it pulled away, he said, "Work hard. The Lord will bless you. You'll have plenty to do." Truer words were never spoken.

I felt the mission president trusted me. I hoped I could live up to his expectations. The lists he had given me were the most current lists of the twelve branches and branch presidents and approximately two thousand members in Ha'apai. I looked at the lists and wondered who they were, where they were, and what they would be like. I felt a thrill of excitement pass through me. I looked forward to this assignment.

When I arrived in Pangai, the capital of Ha'apai, I was met by a large group of members and missionaries. The telegraph worked and besides, some of them had been to the conference in Liahona and heard that I would be coming as district president. The former district president was nowhere around. The members showed me the chapel and the missionary home next to the chapel. The chapel was a rectangular building about twenty feet wide by forty feet long. It had no rooms or offices, just one large central area filled with benches. It seemed to be in fair shape.

The missionary home was a different story. It was a white, frame plantation home, smaller than the chapel, with a red roof of corrugated tin and a front veranda. It had one central living room with two walls that divided each side into separate rooms. The right side was for sleeping and the left side for cooking (although I never cooked meals because the members always brought food to me). The house was built about 1910 and had fallen into a terrible state of disrepair. Large sections of the roof were rusted out and big parts of the walls and floors did not exist because of termites.

It did not take long to realize that feelings among the members were in about the same condition as the missionary house. The members were angry with one another. There were a lot of personal and family conflicts. The phrase "Ha'apai Veu" basically means "Ha'apai in turmoil," and it was!

By way of explanation, the people in Ha'apai live on seventeen scattered islands. Some islands are relatively close to each other, and some much farther away. One must travel long distances by sailboat to get anywhere in Ha'apai and just the process of staying alive there required a lot of effort. Generally, the people of Ha'apai are the most aggressive of the Tongan people. Many leaders, both Church and political, have come from Ha'apai, even though many have now moved to Tongatapu or other places. Ha'apai people represent the same syndrome as people moving to cities from small farming communities: They come to the larger areas with a strong work ethic, which almost automatically propels them forward.

Many strong-willed men and women lived in Ha'apai. Several men had taken turns being district president. When someone from one family was installed as district president, many of the others would not participate. Later when someone from another family was installed as district president the first group would stay home. It was a mess.

The Church was not growing much because there were too many personality conflicts and very little unity. The members were good people-they just couldn't stand one another! Under the circumstances I guess it made sense to have an outsider as district president. I knew very little about Church administration and didn't know what being a district president was all about, but I was willing to try.

I reviewed in my mind what the mission president had asked me to do: (1) set the Church in order; (2) get missionary work going; and (3) start a school. I wasn't sure where to begin but remembered that he had suggested I get two good counselors as soon as possible. Over the next few days I met most of the members close to where I lived and felt pretty good about some of them.

When I asked how we visited the members on the other islands, I was told there was a twenty-eight-foot mission sailboat (a former whaleboat), but the ropes and canvas were rotten, the hull was full of holes, and the boat was on the beach right now. When I heard this, the thought came very clearly to me, "To visit other members and missionaries, you have to use a boat. Therefore, at least one counselor must be a good captain, who can fix the boat as well as sail it." That narrowed my choices some.

After a few days and lots of prayers, I knew who my counselors should be. I approached both of them and their wives and told them of the call. They knew by the Spirit ahead of time and willingly accepted.

When I first met with my counselors, I asked them, "What are the problems?" They looked at me and said, "You name it, we've got it." At that time, the district president was over all the members and the missionaries. My counselors were married and had families, so they needed to be home quite a bit and to work to support their families. They were both strong, faithful men with great wives and families and both had been in presidencies before. We talked about how to get the boat repaired, how to put the Church in order, how to help the missionaries get going, and how to start a school, as the mission president had requested.

Missionary house (in foreground) and chapel (in background) in Pangai, Ha'apai, Tonga. School was held on front veranda, which was later extended considerably as the number of students increased.

We felt we should start officially, so we called a district conference, which was fairly well attended. I told the members that I had been asked by the mission president to be the new district president and that I would like these two men to be my counselors. I asked if the members would sustain that action. They all did. We were proceeding with the meeting when someone asked if we shouldn't release the former district presidency. I wasn't sure how you did that or even who the counselors were, so I got up and said, "All in favor of releasing the former district presidency, show by raising your hands." They all stood up and raised both hands. I hoped it was official. Whether it was or not didn't seem to be the most pressing matter at the time, for I knew we had lots to do and we were now irreversibly on our way.
