John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

33

"The Spirit Giveth Life"

For the first little while, I spent nearly every evening with my counselors trying to figure out how to fulfill the mission president's charge to bring unity to the district, as that seemed to be the overriding problem. Since my counselors worked, I had to find others to help me during the day. I did this by asking around and watching who came to church regularly. I soon had a list of several men who would go visiting with me during the day. Between them and my counselors, we visited the nearby branches and noted many problems. Nothing was going very well, mainly because the members were arguing so much. The missionaries seemed to be working hard but getting virtually no results, and, of course, we hadn't done anything with the school yet. I wasn't sure how to proceed or what to give priority to, but felt I should work with the members and missionaries first, and then work on the school later.

I was unable to visit the missionaries or branches on the outer islands, because the boat was still in disrepair. No one seemed willing to help repair the sailboat. Since I didn't know anything about boats, I told one of my counselors that we were going to visit the outer islands in two weeks and would be taking the Church boat, so he was responsible to have it seaworthy by then. He accepted the assignment and got a few others to help him with the needed repairs; in two weeks the boat was able to go.

I felt an urgent desire to visit the rest of the missionaries first. I knew we had one other palangi Elder in Ha'apai, and I knew where he and his companion were, but I did not know how many local missionaries there were, or where they were. I hadn't been given a list of names but instead was simply told there were quite a few missionaries, especially couples with families, in Ha'apai. Who the other branch presidents were and where the other chapels were was still a mystery to me.

With the severe limits on missionaries from America, the only way missionary work could go forward was to call local missionaries. Married couples were the most trusted group. When a man and woman got married and showed a desire to be active, they were usually called on a mission for a couple of years. They always responded to the call, and they always came back happier and stronger in the faith. At that time the leaders weren't too sure about calling local young men and women on missions. I couldn't understand why, as Feki was as good a missionary as it is possible to be. They did call quite a few young men as labor missionaries. However, within a few years they began to call many local young men and women to serve regular full-time proselyting missions, and they did very well.

I marveled at how the Lord makes strengths out of supposed weaknesses. I suppose the enemies of the Church felt they would seriously hurt our efforts by curtailing American missionaries from coming into Tonga. As it turned out, they couldn't have helped us more. Since the local people couldn't rely on Americans to do missionary work, they had to do it themselves. What strength came as they grew under the burden of carrying the whole program themselves!

With the boat now somewhat seaworthy, we began to visit the outer islands. I was not pleased with what I found there. If anything, the disunity was worse than in Pangai. I learned that when the members are in disarray, the missionaries tend to be in disarray also. There was arguing between members and missionaries, between missionaries and missionaries, and between members and members.

I tried to settle differences as best I could, but after a few weeks I began to wonder if the Church in Ha'apai would ever come together. It seems that the three charges we had been given: (1) the members, (2) the missionaries, and (3) the school, were going backward instead of forward. Everything, including the house and the boat, seemed to be falling apart. I couldn't think of anything else to do but keep trying to hold things together the best I could.

I was most surprised and discouraged by the poor attitude of the missionaries. My previous experience on Niuatoputapu with Feki was very positive, with a marvelous attitude of hard work, unity, and dedication. I had been aware of some personal bitterness between people, but remembered it as generally short-lived and resolved by gospel forgiveness. But here I found anger that seemed exaggerated and long lasting. I couldn't understand it.

When I found companions fighting with each other, couples not getting along, and missionaries arguing with branch presidents, my heart sank. With the school not yet started, my counselors questioning some of the things I was doing and telling me I just didn't understand, and the boat not fixed very well, I knew I needed major help from above. I did not know how to proceed, so I fasted and prayed a lot-but seemed to make precious little progress.

I remember one particular evening very clearly. I was out alone walking and pondering what to do. It was a clear, balmy evening with a fresh sea breeze. Everything in Ha'apai is close to the ocean. It was later than usual for me to take such a walk. I noticed the sister of one of our good leaders riding a bike with one of the wealthier men in town, even though she was married to someone else. I could hardly believe my eyes, as she was obviously enamored with this fellow.

The next day I asked that leader about his sister. He hesitatingly said, "Yes, she has been going with him. In fact, she's pregnant with his baby. It's a bit of a problem because she is married to someone else, and that man is married to someone else, but it's best to just leave it alone."

"A bit of a problem!" I exploded. "In this Church, that can't be!"

He replied, "Well, that's the way it is, and there's not much you can do about it."

"You bet there is something I can do about it!" I shot back.

I went to visit this lady's widowed mother, and did I ever get a shock! While she wasn't for the affair, she wasn't really against it either, as the man was one of the wealthiest men on the island and she was getting some nice benefits from it. Life was tough in Ha'apai, and because she was getting some help, this widow was looking the other way! It shocked me, even though I felt for her situation. Here was a supposedly good Church leader, a mother who had been a Relief Society president, who in effect was going along with this affair because of personal benefit. We talked about it, and she and her daughter said I shouldn't pick on them-lots of people were doing the same thing. They told me of another prominent Church leader who had a daughter in the same kind of situation: not married and having children out of wedlock. I checked and found it to be true.

I immediately called a special meeting with my counselors, explained the situation, and said, "This has got to stop."

They condescendingly nodded their heads and replied, "Well, after you have been here a while, you'll understand. You'd better just leave it alone." It was one of those times, especially as I look back, when I felt the hand of the Lord very clearly.

I replied, "I've been here long enough. What they are doing is wrong. I'm going to talk to them again and tell them either they leave these men or they are out of the Church."

My counselors replied, "You can't do that! They are very prominent families and you will wreck the Church!"

"Their evil will wreck the Church if we don't," I replied.

Still, I had to consider their counsel. I knew there was a risk, but I knew what was right. After prayer, I still felt strongly so I told my counselors we should go and talk to the two women and their families and give them the choice. They shook their heads and would not come, so I went alone.

I told the women, "You either drop this, quit it completely, or you are out of the Church."

Each in turn said, in essence, "You can't do that. My dad is So-and-So," or "My brother is So-and-So."

I said, "I not only can, but I will."

I told my counselors what I had done and they both said the same thing, "You just can't do that. You've got to be more understanding; you've got to be more loving and kind."

I replied, "I have been. I've given them both two chances, and they won't respond."

When they could see I was determined to do something, one of them said, "Well, you still can't do it. You don't have the authority. You've got to go according to the handbook. Have you read the General Handbook of Instructions?"

I had to admit that I had not read the handbook. In fact, I didn't even know such a book existed. But I knew what was right and I didn't have to have a handbook to tell me that. I gave the two women a third warning and explained what they had to do. They refused to do it, so I said, "Okay then, you are out of the Church." They replied, "Does that mean we are excommunicated?"

I replied, "I don't know exactly what that word means. All I know is that you are no longer members of the Church." They repeated that I couldn't do that, and I told them I already had. I told my counselors of my action, and they both shook their heads. I announced in the next leadership meeting that these two were no longer members of the Church. There were many looks of disbelief.

To begin with, there was anger and bitterness. It seemed I had made an already bad situation worse, but soon a very interesting thing began to happen. Several people quietly and almost unbelievingly whispered, "Is it true that So-and-So are no longer members of the Church?"

"That's right," I replied. "They are no longer members."

Everyone knew what the girls had been doing, so when they were actually cut off from the Church, other members started to shape up. The dire prediction that people would quit coming to church proved wrong. In fact, the opposite occurred. People started coming back to church, confessing their sins, and asking for forgiveness. Within a few weeks, things were not only better, they were markedly better-and the Spirit was stronger! A remarkable transition began taking place, and everything started to improve.

The missionaries started being more cooperative with the local leaders and more helpful to one another. The members not only came to meetings but also started to smile and speak nicely to one another. We were still not making much progress with the school, but we were at least talking about it more. There continued to be a lot of opposition, but it did not seem to have the same effect as it did before. We felt we were finally moving ahead.

One of the strong testimonies I have of doing what is right regardless of opposition is that over a period of not many weeks, order started to come into the Ha'apai District. I began to learn a great lesson: The scriptures say, "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6). Maybe I didn't follow the letter in that I did not have a handbook, but I knew what the Spirit was directing me to do; I was sure the handbook would have directed me to do what I did, for the handbook is written under the direction of the Spirit. I learned that if you follow the direction of the Spirit and do what is right, you turn the responsibility over to the Spirit-and it gives life.

In effect, the Spirit said, "You did what I asked you to do, now I will do my part," and it did. It breathed life into the district; it breathed life into the members; it energized the missionaries; and it softened the hearts of our enemies. I didn't work any harder, nor did I do anything very different, but things just started to change for the better.

We had a fair number of disciplinary actions during the first few months, but after that not so many. We didn't try to find problems, but we did quickly handle those we became aware of. For many years some district members had gotten away with bad things simply because they were related to important people. This followed the Tongan tradition that if you are of high birth, you can pretty much do as you wish. But when the members and the leaders understood that the priesthood and principle took precedence over high birth and that they could not get away with violating God's laws, no matter who they were, things started to improve.

After the excommunications and the general "tightening up," missionary work started to move strongly forward. We had many baptisms. Ha'apai was the smallest of the seven Tongan mission districts, but for the next couple of years, we accounted for the majority of the baptisms in Tonga. I do not think we were any better or smarter, we were just more united. That made all the difference.

Leaders from other areas often asked what program we followed to get such results. I couldn't tell them, for I didn't know. We had no program. We just tried to do what was right and were very united.

We did lots of training with the members and the missionaries, and everyone worked together. Often the missionaries were the branch presidents, so that was easy. The scriptures were our lesson materials, as that was all we had translated into Tongan, except the pamphlet series, Rays of Living Light, by Charles W. Penrose. The missionaries and members read and studied the scriptures, memorized many of them, and tried to follow them. That was our program, and those were our principles. Everyone tried, and little by little unity came; before long, there was a great outpouring of unity.

I learned that unity is peace and that lack of unity is pain. If you have once experienced the peace that comes from unity, it is always a goal you seek to achieve. I gained renewed appreciation for the Lord's plea to "be one," and if "ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). I know the principle is true. You can't be one if you are doing evil or winking at evil in others. I have experienced the miracle that being united can bring. It is wonderful. I learned that you cannot compromise principle to achieve unity. Peace and unity only come from living God's principles. There is no other way.

Some thirty-five years later, I was at a conference in Ha'apai. I noticed in the congregation these two ladies who had been excommunicated years before, and I wanted to find out what their status was. Even though I had been to Tonga many times since my mission, for some reason I had never learned what had happened to them. We had a full day of feasts and meetings, but that evening, after we had all retired, I couldn't sleep. I wondered about those ladies, so I got up and went out. It was about 2:00 a.m., but in Ha'apai, two o'clock in the morning is just about as good a time to visit as two o'clock in the afternoon. People don't care. To them, the important thing is the visit. Also, I knew a person was as apt to find them asleep at two in the afternoon as at two in the morning.

Since there was always someone up and about, I asked a few people and soon found where the ladies lived. Even though nothing had been said, I think they felt I might visit them. At least they seemed to be expecting me. One lady introduced me to her husband and several of her eight children. Six of the children were returned missionaries, and all had been married in the temple.

She told me that being excommunicated had caused her to realize for the first time, "I can't rely on my brother. I really can lose my membership in the Church if I don't do what I ought to." She eventually quit her sinning, sincerely repented, was rebaptized, and later married in the temple. She was very active in the Church.

Basically, the same thing was true with the other lady. She had had more problems with her marriage, but someway they worked it out. She was active, and her children were active. One of her children was serving as a bishop. In fact, he was one of the illegitimate children fathered during the affair, but he had been "adopted" by her and her husband when they got back together.

It was a great lesson to me: if we repent and return from our evil ways, the Lord can take most any situation and make it right. I thought of Ezekiel's promises. I thought of David and Bathsheba. As terrible as their sin was and as much as David lost, apparently there was enough repentance that through that union came the ancestry of the Savior. In one sense the Lord tries to tell us, "Don't do wrong things, for there is a terrible price to pay." But he also says, "If you do wrong things, repent as fast as you can and as completely as you can, and I'll take the sin away."

I thought of that bishop, the offspring of an affair. You can't hold the fact that he was born out of wedlock against him. You have to follow the Spirit. There does have to be discipline in the Church, and in our lives. There is a place for excommunication. Both of these women told me the same thing, "Excommunication was one of the greatest blessings in my life." I know they didn't feel that way at the time, but looking back they realized how necessary it was and what a great blessing it turned out to be for them and their families.

As I returned home that night, I was almost walking on air for joy. I noticed the same clouds, the same breeze, the same balmy evening of over thirty years before. And as I floated home, I seemed to hear those words again, "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." Then the understanding of what that "life" was came to me. The Spirit not only had brought life to the district thirty-five years ago but also continued to work with those ladies through the years so that they and their families were now enjoying the sweet fruits of the gospel. They too had been given "life."
