John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

34

The School

Things were starting to move in the right direction with the members and the missionaries, so I felt I should direct my attention to getting the school started. This was a major challenge as it was new ground for me. The members were excited about helping until they found how little I knew about a school. It must have been hard on them, for if they took their children out of their present schools and sent them to "my" school, and I left or the school failed, what would they do?

Despite all the problems and reservations, many members said they had faith in the mission president (not necessarily in me); if he had said I should start a school, they would send their children to it.

On Niuatoputapu I had taught a little school in the chapel for a while, but it was mostly for member children after their regular school. My understanding from the mission president was that he wanted me to start a full-fledged school in Ha'apai. Even though I didn't know how to start a school, nor did my counselors, we felt we must do something, as the mission president had sent a telegram asking how the school was coming.

The only places large enough to hold a school were the chapel or the front veranda of our home. Some of the members had been to the Church school at Liahona and knew that the Mormon school colors were green and white. We announced that we would hold a meeting on our front porch Monday morning for all those who were interested in attending our school and who could afford green skirts with white stripes (or the reverse). To our surprise, about twenty children came with their parents.

Now the questions started: What was the tuition? What subjects would be taught? When? By whom? What time did school begin and end? How long would classes be? What was the syllabus? When were holidays? Did we have government approval? Did we pay our teachers? Were our teachers qualified?

Unfortunately, we had no answers and no official government approval, as I had thought the mission president's permission was all I needed. We had no teachers, at least none who knew what they were doing. To say the least, we were off to a rocky start.

The other schools in the area were opposed to our efforts and obtained a local government order barring us from holding classes until we got official Ministry of Education approval from Nuku'alofa, which required certified teachers. Some of our members started arguing with the local government officials, and others began questioning if I knew what I was doing, which I really didn't. It was a mess, but at least we were making an effort.

As I look back now, I was incredibly naive. Starting a school required all sorts of government approvals, and neither the mission president nor I had communicated well on where to start or how to get the needed permission. I guess I was naive enough to think the authority I had received from my mission president exceeded all other authority.

Since at least twenty children showed an interest, I just bulled ahead and announced that we would start holding classes the next day. I spent the rest of the day and all that night desperately trying to get some experienced help and figuring out what to do.

Despite our best efforts, when we actually started holding classes there was great confusion. We were not well prepared, and opposition to the school was intense. Several times the Ha'apai director of education came and said I had to close the school down until he got word from his superior in Nuku'alofa that it was approved. I said, "You tell the children they can't come anymore. I'm not going to." He wouldn't either, so we kept going. The battle went on for several weeks as telegrams flew back and forth between myself and the mission president, and between the local education official and the head government office in Nuku'alofa.

After a few weeks, we were still not doing very well and it appeared we might not get the needed government permission. At the height of all this, the mission president wired that he thought the officials in Nuku'alofa were dragging their feet and suggested I should close the school for a while and come down to Nuku'alofa to see if we couldn't work things out.

The telegram was a bitter blow to me and my counselors. They pleaded with me, "Let's call a special fast before we tell the members, as they have sacrificed so much. We feel it would be better if we didn't close down. We think the Lord will see it our way, but we have to get through to Him first."

The next day we all fasted and prayed-and we all felt impressed to keep the school going. I wired the mission president and told him we felt we should try to keep the school open, and I asked if it would be all right if I stayed in Ha'apai and didn't come to Nuku'alofa. I received no reply, so I stayed and we kept the school going. A few days later, the local director of education came up the road to the school waving a telegram in his hand.

He had come many times before with telegrams from his superiors. But by the strange way he was smiling, I thought he might have some bad news. He asked to see me alone. My heart was heavy. I still hadn't been able to absorb Tongan faith fully. When we were alone, he opened the telegram and with that same strange smile read:

Today we have granted official permission to the Mormon Church to hold a school in Pangai, Ha'apai, with Mr. John H. Groberg as headmaster. See that they follow the prescribed government syllabus and have adequate quarters.

Director of Education

Nuku'alofa, Tonga

He informed me I would need to meet with him immediately and review the syllabus. He also said he would inspect our facilities and classes weekly. He let me know if we didn't meet the standards he would close us down. He didn't seem to be so much angry as resigned, but I suppose there was a touch of annoyance at having "lost round one." I could tell there were more rounds to come.

I was so happy I could have shouted for joy and probably did. I ran to my counselors and told them the good news. They nodded knowingly. I asked if they weren't excited. They said they were, but I had the distinct feeling that they wondered about me with a sort of a "what-else-did-you-expect?" attitude.

The school, which we named Deseret, started with 20 students, but began growing, especially after we got official government approval. It went from 20 to 30 to 40, 50, up to 120, then 150, and finally close to 200. Naturally this created jealousies and problems among the other schools.

Some of the students at the LDS school in Pangai, Ha'apai, in front of the veranda where classes were held. Elder Groberg is about four rows back on the right. Also note several missionary teachers in the group. Official school uniform was green and white stripes or the reverse.

I wrote to the mission president and said I had to have more help. To be district president and do all that entailed; then to go tracting, visit the outer islands, and work with the missionaries; and to try to teach school-all at the same time-was more than I could physically accomplish. He was glad for our success and sent me three local lady missionaries and two local Elders, all of whom were certified schoolteachers. With those five, and myself, and two others I had recruited locally, we had a good staff.

The five new teachers lived with the members, as did all the missionaries. They taught school during the day, then tracted and taught discussions in the evening. They were good teachers, brought discipline and order to the school, and helped make it very successful.

By the time I left Ha'apai, there was so much unity and such a feeling of oneness among the schoolteacher missionaries that it had to resemble very closely the society described in 4 Nephi, where the people were of one heart and had no contention among them (see 4 Nephi 1:17). What a blessed experience the school was! I can't say this same oneness was true of all the members, because they were a little more individualistic, but they were building good unity as well.
