John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

35

Riding the Circuit

With things starting to move in the right direction with the members in Pangai, and with the school under way, I turned my attention to proselyting.

We traveled between islands by sailboat and either walked or rode horses while on land. There were very few motorboats and no airplanes. We had no cars or bikes, no telephones or electricity, no running water or indoor plumbing, no use for money or day planners, but lots of desire to preach, testify, and baptize.

While our methods of traveling, preaching, and proselyting were a little different from what is common today, the process was about the same as it has been throughout the ages: we took our testimonies to the people and tried to preach and testify to them of what we knew to be true. Our challenges were basically the same as all missionaries: (1) travel from where we were to where the people were; (2) encourage them to listen to us; (3) help them study and pray about what we taught; (4) help them see the importance of baptism, then baptize them; and (5) help them stay active in the Church. It wasn't easy, but it was wonderfully worth the effort!

We spent a lot of time in the sailboat. I estimate that I spent at least six months actually on the surface of the ocean going from island to island. I was seasick much of that time, especially in the beginning. I often wondered, "Since the Lord knew how much time I was going to spend on small boats in rough water, why didn't He bless me with a stronger stomach?"

It took a while to see His wisdom in this. I finally realized that if the only physical challenges to overcome had been the weather and the dangers of reefs, rotten sails, and leaky boats, then getting out and going to where the people were wouldn't be overpoweringly difficult. But when I added to that the personal discomfort that comes from seasickness on each voyage, I had to develop a strong enough desire to share the gospel to overcome that personal discomfort.

How grateful I am that God gave me the needed desire, as I know I could not have done it on my own. There may be a principle here somewhat akin to mothers who must not only overcome the discomforts and dangers of childbirth but also long periods of personal sickness to allow a new spirit to receive a body. I know they will be doubly blessed.

On the first several voyages in Ha'apai, I was terribly sick, but as time went on I became a little less sick, or at least more used to it. On rough voyages I was very sick, but occasionally I would have a voyage during which I didn't feel sick at all. What a blessing that was! Being ill during most of those trips made my joy and thanksgiving very meaningful when I had a voyage that was relatively smooth and I didn't feel very sick. Once in a while my happiness became almost ecstasy as I realized I was in the midst of a heavy storm with the boat twisting and jerking and bouncing all over creation-and I was not ill! Maybe the joy of feeling well helped me to not worry about other dangers. I'm not sure about that, but I do know I was very grateful when I wasn't ill.

As I look back now, I should have been frightened to death to go out on that unpredictable sea in a tiny sailboat with holes in the hull, old sails that often ripped, and ropes that were largely rotten. But concerns about safety or danger never entered my mind, because this was God's work and I knew He would protect me. I knew that going to those islands was part of my duty, because that was where the people were for whom I was responsible, and the boat was the only way to get there. Having been raised in a farming community with the Depression and World War II as a backdrop taught me that you did whatever you needed to do to get things done.

One of the problems with all of the safety consciousness we have today is that it tends to cause us to hesitate to do things that we might otherwise do. I'm sure it's good to have better information, such as weather reports, forecasting, safety inspections, and audits, but I sometimes wonder if we don't get so filled with facts and figures and possible dangers that we do less than we should. I suppose we could all find legitimate reasons to hardly do anything because of the potential dangers involved, all the way from not going someplace because of a possible storm to not making a business decision because of a possible loss or lawsuit, to not getting married or not having children because of the possible physical, mental, social, or financial problems.

As I see it, all of life is a risk, which is where faith comes in. We do what is right, and let the chips fall where they may. God will help us-I know that for sure! We will have problems with health or accidents, finances or family-at least we will have the ones God knows we need for the growth He wants us to have. If we protect ourselves from too many things, I have a feeling we may protect ourselves right out of the celestial kingdom!

I know we shouldn't do foolish or rash things, as there is enough evil and danger around without our seeking it out. I tried not to do dumb things; however, I knew we needed to be moving and accomplishing many things, much of which would be done in the face of potential dangers. I understood that life was risky, and trying to do good things makes it even riskier. But I knew that God understood all of that and still wanted us to move forward. I remembered something about a plan and then a counterplan that supposedly removed the risk, but at the terrible price of no progress. I knew which one God chose. Even in troubled waters we make more progress if we are trying than if we wait until the dangers and discomforts are removed.

I suppose the Savior was aware of the danger that awaited Him as He entered Jerusalem that last time, but He went anyway. He may not have known the full extent of what lay ahead or exactly how He would handle it (witness His prayer in Matthew 26:39 that "if it be possible, let this cup pass" [italics added]), but His faith in His Father and His love for all mankind propelled Him forward as He willingly "finished [His] preparations unto the children of men" (D&C 19:19).

I didn't look on these voyages as acts of faith so much as a performance of duty. I'm sure I didn't understand all the dangers involved, which was probably just as well. Many times on those voyages things got pretty rough, and a few times life and death at sea hung on very tenuous threads, but that was just the way things were. What a great blessing it was to know that God was there! It was always comforting to remember Him calming the turbulent seas.

As we visited the islands, we learned that we had missionaries on about half of them. Most of these missionaries were married couples-normally young couples with small children. We also had a few young local Elders and sisters serving. During those days, if the mission president saw someone he felt should go on a mission, he just called them and assigned them. He always checked with me before moving someone into or out of my district. Virtually everyone I dealt with was local, and what good workers they were!

The mission president authorized me to call missionaries also. When we called a couple, we assigned them to a particular island to become the branch president or a counselor in the branch presidency and to live and raise their family there for a few years. On most islands, we had a ngoue fakafaifekau (a piece of land given either to the Church or to the missionaries) to grow food on. Generally, it was not deeded to the Church, but everyone understood it belonged to the missionary family while they served there.

If there wasn't already a missionary house, the branch got together and built one for the missionary family. Generally the house and the chapel were on the same property, and sometimes the house doubled as the chapel or vice versa. The missionary family was expected to plant and tend the garden for their family. When they were transferred and a new missionary family came, the garden would be ready for them. It was like the pioneers going west as they planted crops for those who followed. This system was supposed to provide a continuous cycle, with each successive family living in the same home and planting and harvesting from the same garden. It worked most of the time.

When we decided to open new islands, the missionaries started from scratch. Sometimes they had a difficult time getting established, so we tried to call only the strongest families to the new islands.

There was no monetary cost to missions then. Each missionary family furnished their own clothes, grew their own food, and lived in a house built by the branch. There were a few costs for stamps and such, but local members helped or the missionaries would work for others to get these things. These couples experienced many difficulties but thrived spiritually; consequently, they became some of the strongest members I have ever known. Eventually we had forty missionaries, including the schoolteachers, in the Ha'apai District. Most of them were couples with families.

I taught school as much as I could, but being responsible for the members, the missionaries, and the school, my time commitment to teaching became a real conflict.

The official government registration had me as the headmaster of the school, so I needed to be there some of the time, but I basically turned the school over to the newly called teachers sent by the mission president. They did a much better job than I could anyway. I continued to teach a few classes in English, music, geography, and history on an irregular basis, but assigned nearly all other classes to them. In this way, I could visit the branches and the missionaries on the outer islands nearly every week on preaching circuits. Usually we were gone four or five days, but sometimes we were away for several weeks; even the government officials understood when I couldn't get back to school because of weather or boat problems.

We tried to have a regular schedule of visiting the various branches and missionaries. I understood well the early ministerial labor of riding (or preaching) the circuit. It sounds somewhat romantic, but it was a lot of work.
