John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

36

Wind in My Face

On a typical week, we would leave whenever I could get away from the school to visit two or three outlying islands. I would ask one of my counselors or some other experienced member to captain the boat. We would then ask a few other members to come along and help. Most of the time there were from three to five of us in the boat. The boat had one center mast and required at least three people to keep it going properly: one person at the rudder, one to work the main sail, and one to work the jib sail.

I became fairly experienced in each position, but I always preferred to have three Tongans working the boat. I don't think I was lazy, I just felt better about the way they did things-as they had much more experience. I think I only got knocked into the ocean once when I wasn't quite quick enough to get out of the way of the boom as it swung from one side to the other during a fakahua (tacking maneuver).

I enjoyed working the jib sail the most because it was smaller. It also had its dangers, for as you moved it by hand to change the course of the boat, you had to overcome the strong pull of the wind from the other side. If you were not careful or didn't have the rope well secured, it could pull you right out of the boat. Everyone learned to work hard and work together. After all, their very lives depended on it. When there were good winds, the helmsman could handle the rudder and the main sail ropes together.

There is hardly a more exhilarating feeling than to have a nice tail wind with the main sail extended (sometimes close to 90 degrees) and feel the power of God as His wind fills the sail and propels you across His ocean. At times I could almost see Him smile through the clear blue sky. It was great to feel His power and protection as the tiny boat raced to its destination over the deep blue sea.

Once in a while, when the wind was right and I had some sea legs, wobbly as they were, I would climb the mast (twelve to fifteen feet), hook my leg around the rings and ropes, get into a fairly comfortable position on the small block of wood that kept the top arm of the sail from going any higher, and think, listen, and ponder. The mast would sway back and forth and almost lull me to sleep. The wind would whistle around me and pull at my clothes. At times the deep blue of the ocean and the bright white of the spray would almost merge with the blue of the sky and the white of the clouds, making it hard to tell where I actually was. It was like being suspended in space.

Being on God's errand and sensing His power and approbation in the wind and the sea and the sky put me in such a mood as to understand more how the ancient shepherds felt as they watched their flocks at night, studied the stars, and communed with God. As I watched the prow slice through the water, felt the wind power us forward, and sensed the undulating motion of the mast, I felt very close to God. I doubt anyone could deny Him and His power under those circumstances.

I realized why so many of our early Church hymns had as their theme ocean travel. I feel sorry for those who have little idea what the songs are talking about when they sing: "Master the Tempest Is Raging"; "Jesus, Savior, Pilot Me"; "Jesus, Lover of My Soul"; "Brightly Beams Our Father's Mercy"; or any number of other beautiful and meaningful hymns. There is a lot of emotion involved with the ocean and ocean travel.

I have heard of how some of the astronauts feel when they see the earth as a tiny sphere and sense the majesty and power of God. Maybe if we develop enough technology and get enough people into space, we can eventually get back to some of the important feelings of faith the ancients had as they studied the stars and relied on God's help upon His mighty ocean. I could relate to the scripture: "Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. . . . Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his praise in the islands." (Isaiah 42:10, 12.)

Sometimes we were gone for ten days or two weeks. We tried to return by Saturday and never traveled on Sunday. I remember several lessons I was taught by those faithful people. We would always pray for protection, success, and good seas and wind to take us to our destination. Once I asked the Lord to bless us with a good tail wind so we could get to Foa quickly. As we got under way, one of the older men said, "Elder Groberg, you need to modify your prayers a little."

"How's that?" I replied.

"You asked the Lord for a tail wind to take us rapidly to Foa. If you pray for a tail wind to Foa, what about the people who are trying to come from Foa to Pangai? They are good people, and you are praying against them. Just pray for a good wind, not a tail wind."

That taught me something important. Sometimes we pray for things that will benefit us but may hurt others. We may pray for a particular type of weather, or to preserve someone's life, when that answer to our prayer may hurt someone else. That's why we must always pray in faith, because we can't have true, God-given faith in something that is not according to His will. If it's according to His will, all parties will benefit. I learned to pray for a good wind and the ability to get there safely, not necessarily a tail wind.

I learned another lesson in patience once on a trip to Uiha. We had left Pangai about noon with very favorable winds and made it to Uiha in just a few hours. We spent the afternoon and evening working with the missionaries and had some preaching engagements that evening, so we stayed overnight on Uiha.

Early the next morning, I was anxious to get back to Pangai for some important school meetings. We left Uiha just as the sun was rising, and I felt sure we would be back to Pangai by early afternoon. I had been up late and was tired, so after helping get us started, I lay down in the boat and went to sleep.

I slept soundly. A few hours later when I awoke, I could see an island not too far away. I assumed it was our home island and felt we had made good time, as the sun was still high in the sky. I told the others how happy I was to be so close to Pangai. The captain looked at me and said, "That's not Lifuka [the island Pangai is on], but Uiha [the island we had just left]."

I was very surprised, even upset, and said, "How come? We've been going for several hours. What have you been doing? We must be closer to Pangai than that!"

The captain just replied that that is the way things are. I then showed my palangi background by saying that we needed to do something because I had to be in Pangai soon to attend an important meeting.

When I had finished, the captain looked at me and patiently said, "The winds have been against us. Who are you going to blame for that? Are you going to curse God? Or tell Him He doesn't know what He's doing? He controls the winds and the currents, and we are in His hands. You had better calm down and learn to live within the framework He has set, and not try to force your schedule on Him."

Rather than causing me to become angry, his quiet, correct reasoning had a profound effect on me. I spent the rest of the day thinking about the implications of the truths he had spoken.

Sometime later I wrote home: "It's Friday evening here and there is a big harvest moon out. The wind is a soft South Pacific breeze. I walked down to the seashore, about one-half block away, and could hardly help but be stirred by the beauty of everything. With such a soft breeze and beautiful moon, several ships gliding into the harbor, and the beautiful coconut palms, it really does make a beautiful picture. I do like it here in Ha'apai. I have learned to enjoy sea travel. The breeze is so refreshing and the sea air is so clean. You meet all types of different circumstances on the sea. Sometimes the sea is fairly calm with a good wind, and it thrills me inside to stand on the bow of the ship, raise the sails, and watch the wind fill the white canvas and see the keel begin to cut the water. Man moving under the power of nature. It thrills me as our big sails billow with the power of nature, and we literally glide through the ocean. I never appreciated the romance of the sea before. The reason so many stories, movies, and music are based on the sea is it is a romantic thing, mysterious, unpredictable, gentle, beautiful, harsh, angry, and often a monster stirred by some power that man cannot know. Then the wind-a factor long questioned-its currents, its sudden comings and goings, its strength, its weakness, its unpredictability. Sometimes a good wind and a good sea will take us quickly to our destination. Then with a disagreeable wind and contrary sea, it could take hours, even days. We went to a little town today. We had a fair wind to begin with, but out in the deep it suddenly died, the sail sagged, then motionlessly announced the end of the breeze. Nature rules. No machine to challenge its supremacy.

"We sat leisurely rocking in the deep blue of the warm Pacific. Songs were sung, stories told, a deeper appreciation of why Tongan customs are as they are. If we lived under similar circumstances, we would be the same. Every once in a while a wandering breeze would give the sails a small tug, raise our eyes, then laughingly flitter away and be lost somewhere across the big ocean. The day wore on, the sun became low in the evening sky. Suddenly, a small, rushing sound and all our eyes were on the sails. A wind, first faintly caressing the sails, then straightening the creases, then pushing. All hands on deck-Fakahua (shift sails)! The calm water begins to froth at the sharp nose of the vessel.

"Then there is the day when the wind is a lion, whipping the ship at quite an angle for a quick arrival. It fills you with pride as you feel the power of the elements under your control, but you soon realize it isn't our power when the wind decides to stop.

"I do love it here. I have wondered how much it would change our culture if we had no machines, but had to depend on nature to go to the office, sometimes in forty-five minutes, sometimes in several hours, and sometimes taking days-never predictable. This would make quite a difference in our thinking and acting. Maybe we would learn a few more songs and be a little more talkative and friendly. There's something to learn from everyone and everything."
