John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

37

Preaching the Circuit

The purpose for riding the circuit was to preach. Many of the islands were six to eight hours apart, depending on the weather, so by leaving early in the morning we could arrive at the next island by midafternoon. We would then anchor the boat, go ashore, and tract the island using the Rays of Living Light series and Joseph Smith's Testimony. They were the only tracts translated into Tongan. Most of the islands had fifty to one hundred families, with a few having several hundred families. We delivered a tract to every home, asked them to read it, and invited them to a meeting that evening. Usually most of the population would show up for our po malanga. At first, because so many came, I thought people were interested in the Church, but eventually I realized that most of them came because there wasn't anything else to do, and hearing a palangi speak their language was something different. Some of the islands hadn't seen a palangi for a long time, and many of the children had never seen a palangi, though most of the parents had.

Nearly always we met outside under the trees or in the town square. If it was raining, we met in a schoolhouse or another church, depending on the schoolmaster or the minister. When the people were gathered, we sang a song and had a prayer and I started talking. We had good attention and those who came were quite respectful.

Since I wasn't sure when I would get back to this particular island, I felt I had a responsibility to let the assembled Tongans understand how I felt about the gospel. We normally gave seven or eight discussions, but on these occasions I tried to cover the main points of all of them in one evening as we would leave for another island the next day.

I often talked for two or three hours straight. Often my voice got tired and hoarse from talking so loud for so long. Sometimes my throat hurt so much that tears streamed down my face. At times the audience was in tears as well. My tears usually came from a hurting throat; hopefully theirs came from testimonies borne and truths received and felt.

Sometimes when my throat got too sore, I called on those who accompanied me to say something while I drank a coconut. One reason I couldn't turn the meeting over to them completely, or even use them heavily, was that the audience had come to hear a palangi speak (for some reason they preferred to listen to a palangi). Another reason was that while my companions were great scripturalists and preachers, their method of preaching was to knock the people and their beliefs down. No matter how much I explained to them about not offending people but rather explaining the truth simply and clearly and lovingly, they just couldn't do it. They seemed impelled to knock others down and vigorously call them to repentance, telling them they were liars, cheats, stealers, and belonged to the church of the devil and were all going to hell if they didn't get baptized. This naturally turned the audience off, and we didn't make much progress. For this reason I basically called on them to clarify a single point or to bear their testimony, then I took the meeting back.

I remember one particular evening when I felt we were making progress with the audience. You could tell from their eyes that some of the people were quite interested. I was just to the point of bearing my final testimony, but my throat was so raw I couldn't go on. I felt like I had to finish this particular point and testify of its truthfulness. I prayed with all my heart and asked the Lord to help me. I remember feeling something like a voice saying, "Okay, if you have a desire to bear testimony, I'll give you the strength to do it." I was able to finish. There were many spiritual experiences at these meetings, including holding back the rain, seeing would-be interrupters silenced, bearing testimony using exactly the right words, and sensing testimonies received by honest people.

At the conclusion of these meetings, I would announce that we were going to have a closing song and prayer, after which they could ask questions or return home. I asked them to study the tracts more and pray about what they had heard that evening. If they felt it was right and had the witness of the Spirit (and I testified that they could have it), we would be down by our boat early the next morning before we left for the next island, to baptize any who truly believed. Hardly ever did anyone show up, but once in a while someone would be by the boat and say, "I want to be baptized."

After we baptized them, they would ask, "What do we do now?" For those who had a branch on their island, we referred them to the branch president. For those who didn't, we left them a Book of Mormon and some tracts and said, "Study these and we'll be back in a month or two and tell you what else to do." Generally, they were faithful, and we didn't have to worry about them falling away.

There was a lot of persecution against the Church then, and the words less active and prospective elder didn't even exist. There were a few people who weren't active, but not many. The pressure of society was so strong against joining that when they made the commitment and joined, they were generally good members and stayed faithful.

In a month or six weeks we came back, and if they had other family members or friends who were interested, which they usually did, we would teach and baptize them. When we got a few families as members, we would call a couple on a mission to go to that island and be the branch president and help the new families. If the original convert family had done well, which most of them did, we often called them on a mission to be a branch president on some other island. In this way, they rapidly learned the doctrine and how to lead in the Church. Most of them became powerful members of the Church. Gradually we built up branches in this manner.

When branches got enough members, we asked members from a nearby island to come and help them build a chapel. If we baptized someone on a very small or distant island, we asked members who had dealings on that island to check up on them, strengthen them, and help them, similar to being home teachers, I suppose.

On these preaching circuits, we nearly always slept on the floor of someone's home or on the ground under a tree. Someone usually loaned us a wooden pillow and some tapa cloth as a blanket. Tapa cloth can be very warm. I got used to sleeping on the floor or ground and using a wooden pillow, with tapa cloth for bedding.

We never brought bedding or food with us, but relied on the goodness of the people. I told the people that all we carried with us was the Spirit of the Lord and our testimony. They were nearly always good to us. The only physical things we carried with us were our scriptures, a change of clothing, and some tracts. Usually someone would volunteer to wash for us, and we always found people who were willing to let us use a tub for a shower and help us in other ways. Most of the time we were given food to eat and something to drink.

Pangai Harbor.

Our mission sailboat is on the far right.

The next morning, after baptizing anyone waiting, we would sail to the next island, arriving about midafternoon, and start the cycle all over again. We repeated this process day after day, week after week, and month after month. Some of the strongest Latter-day Saints in Tonga came into the Church from these preaching circuits.
