John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

38

"Ko E Maama E"

As we traveled by sailboat week after week, month after month, from island to island, we learned to rely on the winds and the currents of the usually friendly seas and especially on the love of our Father in Heaven. It was a glorious time, full of the normal challenges of seasickness, becalming, strange situations, different foods, and unusual customs. But mostly it was a time of spiritual closeness to our Father in Heaven, whose love and goodness so far overshadowed any temporary pain or problems as to make the latter shrink into obscurity.

On one occasion, we received word that a missionary was very ill on a somewhat distant island. The weather was threatening, but we felt responsible for the missionary's well-being. After prayer, we left to investigate the situation. Extra heavy seas slowed our progress, and it was late afternoon before we arrived. The missionary was indeed very ill. Fervent prayer was followed by a priesthood blessing, during which the impression came very strongly to get him back to the hospital on the main island, and to do it now!

The weather had deteriorated to the point of a small gale. The seas were raging, the clouds were thick, the wind was fierce, the hour was late, and the sun was sinking rapidly, betokening a long, black night ahead. But the impression was strong-"Get back now"-and we had learned to obey the all-important promptings of the Spirit.

Many on the island expressed concern, and we talked much about the darkness, the storm, and the formidable reef with its narrow opening to the harbor we would be attempting to gain. Some found reasons to stay behind. But soon eight persons-including an ill missionary, a very experienced captain, and a somewhat concerned district president, boarded the boat. The spiritually prompted voyage began.

No sooner had we committed ourselves to the open seas than the intensity of the storm seemed to increase sevenfold. The small gale became a major storm. As the sun sank below the horizon, bringing with it darkness and gloom, my spirit seemed to sink into the darkness of doubt and apprehension. The thick clouds and driving rain increased the blackness of our already dark universe. No stars. No moon. No rest. Only turmoil of sea, body, mind, and spirit. As we toiled on through that fearsome night, I found my spirit communing with the spirit of the father of an afflicted child in the New Testament, as he exclaimed, "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief" (Mark 9:24). And the Lord did, and He does, and He will. That I know.

As we rolled and tossed closer and closer to the reef, all eyes searched for the light that marked the opening-the only entry to our home. Where was it? The blackness of the night seemed to increase; the fierceness of the raging elements seemed to know no bounds. The rain slashed at our faces and tore at our eyes-eyes vainly searching for that life-giving light.

Then I heard the chilling sound of waves crashing and chewing against the reef! It was close-too close. Where was the light? Unless we entered the opening exactly, we would be smashed against the reef, ripped and torn by that thousand-toothed monster. It seemed that all the elements were savagely bent on our destruction. Our eyes strained against the blackness, but we could not see the light.

Some began to whimper, others to moan and cry, and one or two even to scream in hysteria. At the height of this panic, when others were pleading to turn to the left or to the right, when the tumultuous elements all but forced us to abandon life and hope, I looked at the captain-and there I saw the face of calmness, the ageless face of wisdom and experience, as his eyes penetrated the darkness ahead. Quietly, his weather-roughened lips parted, and without moving his fixed gaze and just perceptibly shifting the wheel, he breathed those life-giving words, "Ko e Maama e" ("There is the light!").

I could not see the light, but the captain could see it, and I knew he could see it. Those eyes long experienced in ocean travel were not fooled by the madness of the storm, nor were they influenced by the pleadings of those of lesser experience to turn to the left or to the right. He calmly guided us forward. On one great swell, we were hurled through the opening and into calmer waters.

The roaring of the reef was now behind us. Its plan of destruction had been foiled. We were in the protected harbor. We were home. Then, and only then, did we see through the darkness that one small light-exactly where the captain had said it was. Had we waited until we ourselves could see the light, we would have been dashed to pieces, shredded on the reef of unbelief. But trusting in those experienced eyes, we lived.

That night I learned this great lesson: there are those who, through years of experience and training and by virtue of special divine callings, can see further, better, and more clearly than we can. They can and will save us in those situations where serious injury or death-both spiritual and physical-would be upon us before we ourselves could see clearly.

I sense in the world today an almost exact duplication of that voyage of many years ago. We are in the midst of a major storm over moral values that will get worse before we arrive home.

Just one example: We hear much of the so-called problem of overpopulation and the possible future horrors it could bring. We hear claim and counterclaim, fancied fact and interpolated figures. We hear the call for planned families, for delayed families, for free abortions, for personal aggrandizement in many ways.

It is true that we have a sick world on our hands and that it needs help. But in delivering that patient to help, we must not listen to the calculated plan of this or that professor, or to the pleading of some group, or to the hysterical screaming of some faction, or to any combination of man-made philosophies, but only to the calm voice of the prophet as he says, "Have your families in a normal way; accept all the spirits the Lord sees fit to send you; do not delay your families; always be considerate of one another; have nothing to do with the sin of abortion." Therein is safety. He will guide us through this or any storm.

As I think back, I thank the Lord for that wonderful Polynesian captain who saved my life and the life of the sick missionary. I am eternally grateful for his experience, much of which, I am sure, was not pleasant. I am grateful for his wisdom, for his eyes, for his not yielding to the fury of the moment, but steadfastly holding the true course to safety.

I felt at the time that he was more than himself, more than the sum total of all of his experience. In some marvelous way at the moment of desperate need, he drew upon a power and a strength from generations of faithful, seagoing people that only those who know Polynesians well can begin to understand. My admiration and love for him and all other faithful descendants of father Lehi knows no bounds.

In like manner, and with even deeper meaning, I thank the Lord for our great prophet-leader of today. In our moment of great need, the Lord has provided one tested, molded, trained, instructed, and clothed with divine authority, who in addition to the total of all his experience, which is great, draws upon the strength and power of not only generations of faithful leaders but also of angels and of Gods.

As we moved into that calm harbor and glided through the darkness to the anchorage, I thanked God over and over again for His goodness to us. I thanked Him for that wonderful captain who saw the light in time. I thanked Him for our modern-day prophets whose eyes can see the light that will save us and the world. I thanked Him for the assurance that when all about us are sinking in darkness and fear and despair, when destruction seems close and the raging fury of men and demons ensnares us in seemingly insoluble problems, we can listen as the prophet calmly says, "There is the light. This is the way."
