John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

39

Mud, Horses, and Familiar Voices

When it was time for one of our regular preaching circuits to the nearby island of Foa, our boat was under repair, so five of us sailed to Foa on another boat. When we finished our circuit a few days later, we couldn't find a boat going back to Pangai, so we decided to return by foot. I had promised to attend a meeting in Pangai the evening of the next day, but we felt we could easily make it back by then.

The islands of Foa and Lifuka are close together. At that time, when the tide was out, you could walk from one to the other across a narrow isthmus. But you had to be careful, as the isthmus was full of jagged rocks and deep pools. At one time the government tried to join the two islands with a continuous seam of cement with no breaks. Anyone who knows the ocean knows that can't be done. The sea gets angry and the tide picks up whatever is blocking it and throws it away, which it had done with the cement, making the isthmus even more treacherous. Today there is a causeway that connects the two islands, with arches that allow lots of breathing room for the ocean tides, but back then it was a dangerous crossing.

Normally it would have taken us most of a day to walk to Pangai, but it had been raining heavily and walking was very hard as we were often up to our knees in gooey mud.

After several hours of walking (slogging), we arrived at the village of Fotua near the end of the island closest to Pangai. We were very tired and muddy. Some of the members in Fotua had compassion on us; they gave us food and drink and agreed to let us use their horses for the balance of the journey. We were very happy with this arrangement, but soon found that even horses couldn't handle the deep mud very well.

The tide was still mostly out, so we thought there was enough time to take the horses to the seashore and get to the end of the island along the beach, as the sand was much firmer than the muddy trail through the center of the island. We turned toward the ocean, found one of the few openings in the high wall of coral that protected the fertile island, and descended twenty or thirty feet to the narrow, sandy beach below.

We made good progress along the beach for an hour or so, but then the tide started coming in very strongly. With only a narrow, sandy margin between the ocean and the high coral cliffs and very few places to get up through the coral to the land above, we were in a precarious position. Some of our group said we should find an opening and get back on top because it was too dangerous to stay below, as a large wave could easily dash us against the sharp coral and hurt or kill us.

By now, however, we could see the end of the island and thought that since we didn't have much farther to go, we could probably make it. We knew that if we climbed back on top and tried to go through the mud, it would take us forever to get to the end of the island. We were prayerful about the decision but didn't receive any strong impression, so on a three-to-two vote we decided to make a dash for the end of the island.

The tide came in much faster than we expected, and we came close to losing our lives, or at least suffering serious harm, as huge waves started rolling in and smashing us against the coral, bruising and cutting us and the horses. It was scary.

Our biggest concern was the horses, because if they got mangled, we were out of luck. Horses are pretty strong, but even they can only take so much. Waves are powerful and coral is sharp and not to be fooled with. We had some close calls, but eventually made it to the end of the island. The tide was almost fully in now. How grateful we were to be at the end of the island and away from the relentless pounding of the waves against the treacherous coral cliffs! We offered a deep and sincere prayer of thanks for our safety. It was evening.

Now we had another decision to make:Should we try to cross the isthmus at full tide or wait till morning and then cross? Everyone gave their opinion. Some said to wait; others said, "We have the horses and we need to get to Pangai. Let's go now." We made it a matter of prayer, and by the same three-to-two vote, we decided to move on.

We felt fairly confident, as horses are pretty sure-footed animals, even in water. We got about two-thirds across the isthmus without too much trouble, but the last third was the worst, as that was where the tides and currents were the strongest.

As we looked at the deep section ahead and saw the heavy currents running there, some of us started to have second thoughts about proceeding. We were wet and tired and felt like we were stuck between two bad options. We didn't want to go back, but the section ahead looked dangerous and our horses were exhausted. We counseled together; by the same three-to-two vote, we decided to keep going.

Partway across the last section, my horse suddenly stepped into a loloto (deep spot) and lost its footing. As the horse fell, struggling into the deep hole, I was sent sprawling into the turbulent ocean. All of my books, papers, scriptures, and change of clothes were washed away with the heavy tide, and I found myself flailing away to keep my head above water. The heavy tide pushed me and the horse off the trail into deep water. We were both fighting for our lives now. By some miracle, I was able to grab hold of the horse's mane. It took every ounce of energy the horse had to swim back onto the trail and keep from getting washed out to sea. I felt hanging onto the horse's mane saved my life.

Eventually our whole party made it to the other side. The five of us and our horses were completely exhausted, but the first thing we did was kneel down and thank the Lord for sparing our lives. We knew He had. We also thanked Him for the powerful and faithful horses. We could not have made it without them.

We were now on the far end of Lifuka. We needed to be back to Pangai, in the middle of the island, by that evening to meet my commitment, but we were so tired, we decided to rest for a while right where we were before going on. We moved high enough up the beach to be out of the reach of the tide, lay down in the sand, and slept.

Toward morning while we were still sleeping, someone very distinctly called my name in Tongan. I awoke immediately. I recognized the voice even though it was the voice of someone who had been dead for a long time. I knew it was the father of someone who had helped me a great deal in Ha'apai. I had never met him, but Ihad heard about him and knew he had been a faithful member of the Church in Ha'apai. There was no question as to who it was. I listened intently and heard him say just once, "Kolipoki, kuo pau ke ke alu ki Uiha 'i he vavetaha (Elder Groberg, you've got to go to Uiha right now)."

The message was very definite and very clear. I got up and looked around to see who had called. Even though I knew this man had died some time ago, I still looked, as the voice was so real. I couldn't see anyone and I didn't hear anything more. Everyone else was still asleep, so I said, "C'mon, let's get up. We've got to go to Uiha."

They sleepily said, "What do you mean, Uiha! We're going back to Pangai! Why Uiha?"

I replied, "I don't know why, but that's what we have to do."

What good men my companions were! They did not complain, they simply got up and asked how we were to get to Uiha. I said I wasn't sure, but I knew we had to get there and I knew the Lord would provide. We all knelt in prayer and asked for help. When we finished, we still weren't sure what to do, but shortly after the sun came up, we saw a boat heading south. We hailed the boat and asked where they were going. They said they were going to Pangai and from there to Uiha.

I asked, "Could you change that and take us directly to Uiha first and then back to Pangai?"

They said they would rather not. I said, "Look, I need to get to Uiha right now!"

"What for?" they asked, and I said, "Because there are troubles over there."

"What kind of troubles?" they asked, and I said, "I don't know. But there's trouble and I need to get there right now." Logically that didn't make much sense, but there's something about the power of the Spirit that carries a lot of persuasiveness. Someway, through the influence of the Spirit, along with some strong determination, they responded, "Well, we can only take two of you. But we'll go to Uiha first if that's what you need." So, we sent the other three to Pangai with the horses, and two of us swam out to the boat.

The wind was strong and we made good time to Uiha. As we got close to the harbor, I saw several people along the seashore. I recognized a couple of them as members. Some of the ladies were weeping and wailing. I called to them, "What's wrong?"

They responded, "They're killing the missionary!" As soon as I heard that, I dove into the water and swam to shore as fast I could. Once on shore, I ran directly to the chapel. As I got there, I heard lots of confusion and yelling. I saw a group of men with hammers and crowbars smashing away at an outhouse made of wood and tin siding. It was about ready to come to pieces under the blows of those six angry men.

I ran up and yelled, "Tuku ia!" ("Stop it!"). I guess the shock of someone from outside coming up and yelling at them knocked some sense back into them. It was, of course, really the power of the Spirit. With that same power and authority, I said, "What are you doing? What is going on here? Whatever it is, stop it!"

They all turned and looked at me and started whispering, "Oh, it's Kolipoki." It was like a moment frozen in time. Their eyes got wide and the crazy anger that was there just a second before began to dissipate. They dropped their heads, hands, and hammers, and all of them sheepishly left. I heard some almost animallike whimpering from inside the outhouse. When I opened the door, I saw a young missionary curled up with his hands over his head, making strange sounds. I stood there not knowing exactly what to do.

I reached for his hand, but he jerked away and curled up even tighter. With some help, we eventually got him to a nearby home and had him lie down. I began to investigate to find out what the trouble was. The mission president had previously asked me to work with this young man because of serious problems he'd had elsewhere. Apparently he had been harassing the local workers. They told him to lay off and mind his own business. But he kept needling them, and that morning when some of them reached the breaking point, they took after him. He had run into this outhouse, and they were beating it down to get to him.

How someone's departed father, who talked to me the night before, knew this was going to happen, I have no idea. I guess he could see it brewing and helped get me there as fast as he could. Even at that, there was no time to spare before real tragedy would have struck.

Why did the Lord send someone to warn me to be there? I suppose part of it was that he did not want harm to come to the missionary, but I'm sure that can't be all because some missionaries do die or are killed on their missions. I thought maybe another part was that these were members of the Church, whose anger was out of control, attacking a missionary. It would have been a terrible thing for them, and for the work, had harm been inflicted upon him. I don't have all the answers, but I was very grateful the problem had gone no farther.

We got the offending and offended parties together, and amidst tears, sobs, and apologies, got things worked out. We told the branch members that all was under control, and soon everyone was sitting together having lunch and laughing about the whole thing. I was pretty sobered at knowing how close we had been to real disaster. I knew that this was my responsibility, and I wondered about this sort of thing happening again. We got some pretty strong commitments and worked out specific understandings and agreements, which I felt would be kept.

This whole process took a couple of hours. Just as we finished, somebody came to me and said, "There are people on a boat in the harbor saying you promised to be here only a little while and they are anxious to leave for Pangai." I felt things were okay, so I returned to the boat and we left for Pangai. We had a good wind back, and that evening I was in Pangai in time to keep the commitment Ihad made.

I recorded in my journal that evening: "Had some problems getting back to Pangai from Foa. Had to go to Uiha, but with the Lord's help, I made it home in time for my meeting."

As I reflected on what had happened, I became more appreciative of the Lord's help. I watched the situation with the missionary in Uiha carefully. Fortunately, the agreements worked, and we never had that type of problem again. We continued to work with this missionary, and he was able to finish his mission.

Something happens when you put everything on the line and go through a harrowing experience in the Lord's cause, not for just a few minutes, but for hours and hours. I suppose slogging through the mud, getting smashed around by the waves, being thrown from the horse, and struggling for your very life softens you. You sincerely feel to thank God for preserving your life. I know my companions felt the same way.

I have wondered if one could hear that voice, receive those instructions, or have that type of guidance under other circumstances. It may require this type of softening up to put one in a position to be sufficiently receptive to actually hear. Even though much of the action was physical, it was the Spirit that gave control and power.

As I look back, the whole thing was a miracle. I know for sure that the physical circumstances of getting the boat to Uiha that soon, having the strength to swim ashore, then to run and stop those angry men at the right time, could have only come from God. Only the power of the Spirit could have enabled me to command those men to cease what they were doing and have them obey. Only the power of the Spirit could have caused the people with the boat, who weren't members of the Church, to agree to take me to Uiha, wait there, and then take me back to Pangai in time to meet my commitment. I still marvel at all the other things that had to go just right, but which did.

At the time, it all seemed fairly natural and logical, and my main concern was getting back to Pangai in time to keep a promised commitment. I still don't know why it happened the way it did, but for some reason it seems this faithful, departed brother had been given some responsibility to handle that particular situation. I guess the Tongans beyond the veil have as much faith as their counterparts here. How grateful I was it turned out as it did. Not much was said by the others about the events. They take things like that in stride, not questioning, just doing.

Missionary conference in Ha'apai. Most of the missionaries were couples with families. Elder Groberg is standing second from the left.

We asked some members going to Foa to take the horses back to Fotua the next day. A while later I was in Foa and again thanked the members in Fotua for the use of the horses. I told them I hoped the horses weren't too beat up. They told me they were fine and said that anytime I wanted to use them, just let them know.

As I was leaving, one of the members said, "I heard you had a hard time getting back to Pangai. I'm glad it worked out for you. But I shouldn't wonder. Things work out for missionaries." I hoped that statement would always be true.
