John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

40

Forms and Substance

While I seldom saw my mission president, I had great respect and admiration for him. We all tried to do what we felt he wanted us to do. We worked hard in the school, in the district, in missionary work, and with the branches. We were constantly on the move, teaching, preaching, baptizing, building, interviewing, and the like. I remember thinking, "If I'm this busy, imagine how busy my mission president is!" I never questioned not being able to talk to him much.

After several months, I received a telegram saying the mission president was going to Vava'u, and on the way the boat would stop overnight in Ha'apai. He wanted to meet with me and hear a report. I was happy and excited to report on the things we were doing.

When the boat arrived, we met him at the wharf and took him to the guest house where he was staying. He asked me to sit down. After a few pleasantries, he asked, "Well, what are you doing?"

I enthusiastically replied, "I believe we're doing what you asked us to. We are working with the school, teaching as much as possible, traveling a lot to the outer islands, preaching the gospel, baptizing people, strengthening the Church, building up branches, and constructing chapels . . ." I was rather general, but soon could see that he wanted specifics.

"Who have you baptized? What chapels have you constructed? What branches have you formed? Who have you put in as branch presidents?"

"Well, we baptized Sione, Mele, and Vika . . ." I responded.

"I have no records of them, nor any reports on your work."

"What records? What reports?" I asked.

"When you baptize someone, you are supposed to fill out a baptismal slip. And you're supposed to send in weekly reports telling me what you've done." I could tell he was a little irritated.

I was quite taken aback, because no one had told me about any reports or forms to send in. I reminded him that his instructions to me were to "clean up the mess in Ha'apai, start a school, get the missionaries going, and generally build up and strengthen the Church." I told him I thought we were doing these things.

He acknowledged that those were his instructions and said he appreciated what we were doing, but he repeated that he needed forms and reports with names and dates. I told him Ihad kept a journal and I could create that information for him if he wanted. He said he needed the names and dates of all those we had baptized, ordained to the priesthood, and set apart to various positions, and a list of all the missionaries we had called-and he needed the lists now!

I said, "Fine. I'll get started and have them for you in the morning, before you leave."

I had mentioned a good branch we had in Felemea, and before I left he looked through some papers and said, "Another thing. We don't have a branch or a chapel in Felemea."

I said, "Oh, yes, we have a good, strong branch of thirty-two members and a nice chapel there."

"Who authorized you to organize a branch in Felemea? Who authorized you to build a chapel? Where did you get the money, and whose property is it built on?"

I detected some further irritation, but responded:"I'm sorry, but I thought when you asked me to build up the Church in Ha'apai, that was my authorization. We baptized a lot of people in Felemea, and they needed a chapel, so together with some other members we built a chapel. It didn't cost us any money. We all worked together and built it. I am not sure whose land it is on, but everyone in Felemea knows it is our chapel. We've been holding meetings for several months and have had no problems."

He gave me a lecture and said it was against Church policy to form new branches or build chapels without prior approval. He seemed upset and kept talking about money and authorization. I repeated that there was no money involved, and I guessed we didn't have any authorization. I apologized and asked what we should do.

He said, "Well, you've got to list all these things down on paper- all the branches you've organized, all the chapels you've built, and all the branch presidents you've set apart-and I'll see if I can get approval for them. And another thing, don't do any more of this without prior authorization from me!"

I assured him I wouldn't. I was worried and thought, "What if he can't get approval for what we've done, what will we do then?" I wanted to ask but didn't feel it was appropriate.

I don't want to give the wrong impression-he was a nice man whom I greatly respected. He might have had a bad ride up, or maybe he had been reprimanded by someone in Salt Lake City, or perhaps he felt the pressure of other major problems. But at this time he was quite stressed and seemed very concerned about authorization. I wondered if I had gotten him in trouble by baptizing a lot of people, forming several branches, and building a few chapels. I hoped he wouldn't be too unhappy when he saw the fairly long list I would bring in the morning.

I stayed up all night with some of the nearby branch clerks and others, using their records and my journal and gleaning the information on whom we had ordained, whom we had baptized, whom we had called as missionaries, what branches we had formed, who the branch presidents were, and what chapels we had built. After an all-night vigil, we had quite a list of information on several sheets of paper.

The guest house and our quarters were both close to the wharf, but on opposite sides of it. The boat was to leave at 8:00 a.m. and we finished our lists at about 7:30 a.m. I ran as fast as I could to the wharf so I could explain the sheets to the mission president. I got there and waited and waited and waited. No one came from the guest house.

The captain, whom I knew, was pacing back and forth. He said, "Look, we are leaving at eight o'clock. I don't care whether your man is here or not!" About then, we saw the mission president coming down the path with some other people. He got to the wharf a few minutes before eight, just as they were starting to pull up the gangplank, but they waited for him.

I said, "President, here's the information you asked for. I'm really sorry that I've apparently done things out of order and caused you some problems. I hope this is all right. In the future, do you want me to put this information on a sheet of paper and send it to you, or are there specific forms to use? What do I do from now on so that I don't get you or me or the Church into trouble? I won't move ahead without authorization from you. Just let me know and I'll do whatever you say."

There then followed one of those never-to-be-forgotten experiences. With a saintly smile, he took the papers and without even looking at them put his hand on my shoulder and said, "Elder Groberg, I've spent a sleepless night. Forget about everything I said yesterday. Just keep doing what you are presently doing. God bless you." He turned and got on the boat and was gone. That was all there was to it. I never asked for any more explanation, and he never offered any.

You can leave it to your own interpretation whether he had a sleepless night because he had eaten something wrong, was tired from the trip, or had been disturbed for some other reason. Whatever it was, I will always be grateful for the kindly look in his eye and the love in his voice as he responded to my concerns by saying, "Just keep doing what you are doing; forget about what I said yesterday."

We kept working hard, but we also filled out forms, made lists, and sent them to mission headquarters. There was no more discussion of this issue.

I learned that it is important to keep your superiors informed, and it is important to fill out the proper forms and get the necessary authorizations, but I also learned that substance is more important than form. I was glad to know Heavenly Father was aware of what we were doing and that He was pleased (at least He continued to bless us with success) even if we had not filled out the right forms.

I was also glad to have a feeling that forms, as we know them now, probably apply only to this world. I suppose when we have a better way of communicating, such as sensing substantive personal changes rather than just reading reports (as we hopefully will beyond this world, and maybe even here during the Millennium), we can focus more on things that really make a difference. Using paper and keeping records was not a part of Tongan culture then. The heat, humidity, and lack of storage, as well as the cost of pens and paper, made it basically impossible. More than that, however, I wonder if they didn't understand better than we do that substance is much more important than form, and the Spirit always measures substance and justifies action.

Of course, forms and records are important, at least in this life and probably beyond. The Lord has placed great emphasis on records-witness the brass plates, the gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was taken, the Bible, other sacred records, patriarchal blessings, records of ordinances, and all sorts of historical and family history records that are kept with such great care.

But sometimes I wonder if the other Book of Life isn't the actual substance of what we are, our character as formed by our thoughts and deeds, permanently encoded into us. I have a feeling that in the eternities outward signs of power from any source-a document from a university, stripes from an army, or wealth from gold or silver-will be meaningless. The only power that will have any validity will be the power we possess within ourselves. That's why the Savior's prayer for us-that we may be one with Him as He is one with the Father-is so important. Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ do have all power and are willing to share it with the humble, the meek, and the obedient.

That may seem a deep doctrine, but it appears fairly simple to me. I am confident that many of the good Tongan people understood it better and lived it better than many of us palangis do. I learned that just because something is "legally" possible doesn't necessarily make it right in God's eyes, nor does it imbue it with any eternal power or authority. Only obedience to God's will does that.

In the meantime, I learned that while forms and records are important because they provide valuable information, substance is still the essence of all true progress.
