John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

41

The Lord's Wind

Finding someone willing to listen to the discussions was like finding a piece of gold, especially if a member had referred them. One day we received such a referral. We were told that if we would be at a certain harbor on a particular island when the sun set the next day, a family would meet us there and listen to the discussions.

What joy such news gives to missionaries! I quickly found four members who were experienced sailors to take me to the island.

Early the next morning, after prayer, the five of us started out in our sailboat. There was a nice breeze, and we moved swiftly along the coast, through the opening in the reef, and out into the wide expanse of the open ocean. We made good progress for a few hours. Then as the sun climbed higher in the sky and the boat got farther from land, the wind played out and soon quit completely, leaving us bobbing aimlessly on a smooth sea.

Those familiar with sailing know that to get anywhere, you must have wind. Sometimes there are good breezes without storms and heavy seas, but often they go together. An experienced sailor does not fear storms or heavy seas, for they contain the lifeblood of sailing-wind. What experienced sailors fear is no wind, or being becalmed!

Time passed and the sun got higher, the sea calmer. Nothing moved. We soon realized that unless something changed, we would not arrive at our appointment by sundown. I suggested that we pray and plead again with the Lord to send some wind so we could get to the harbor. What more righteous desire could a group of men have? We wanted to get to a family to teach the gospel. I offered a prayer. When I finished, things seemed calmer than ever. When it was obvious nothing was happening, I said, "Okay, which one of you is like Jonah? Who lacks faith? We'll throw you overboard so the Lord can send the wind and we can get on with our journey." No one would admit to being like Jonah, so we just drifted.

Then one of the older men suggested that everyone kneel and all unite their faith and prayers, each one offering a silent prayer at the same time, which we did. There was great struggling of spirit, but when the last person opened his eyes, nothing! No movement at all. The sails hung limp and listless. Even the slight ripple of the ocean against the side of the boat had ceased. The ocean seemed like a sea of glass.

Time was moving, and we were getting desperate. Then this same older man suggested that everyone kneel again in prayer, and each person in turn offer a vocal prayer for the whole group. Many beautiful, pleading, faithful prayers ascended to heaven. But when the last one finished and everyone opened their eyes, the sun was still burning down with greater intensity than before. The ocean was like a giant mirror. It was almost as though Satan was laughing, saying, "See, you can't go anywhere. There is no wind. You are in my power."

I thought, "There is a family at the harbor that wants to hear the gospel. We are here and we want to teach them. The Lord controls the elements. All that stands between getting the family and us together is a little wind. Why won't the Lord send it? It's a righteous desire."

As I was thinking, Inoticed this faithful older man move to the rear of the boat. I watched as he unlashed the tiny lifeboat, placed two oars with pins into their places, and carefully lowered the lifeboat over the side.

Then the old man looked at me and softly said, "Get in."

I answered, "What are you doing? There is hardly room for two people in that tiny thing!"

The old man responded, "Don't waste any time or effort. Just get in. I am going to row you to shore, and we need to leave right now to make it by sundown."

I looked at him incredulously, "Row me where?"

"To the family that wants to hear the gospel. We have an assignment from the Lord. Get in."

I was dumbfounded. It was miles and miles to shore. The sun was hot and this man was old. But as I looked into the face of that faithful brother, I sensed an intensity in his gaze, an iron will in his very being, and a fixed determination in his voice as he said, "Before the sun sets this day, you will be teaching the gospel and bearing testimony to a family who wants to listen."

I objected, "Look, you're over three times my age. If we're going to do it this way, fine, but let me row."

With that same look of determination and faith-induced will, the old man replied, "No. Leave it to me. Get in the boat. Don't waste time talking or moving unnecessarily. Let's go!" We got into the boat with me in the front and the old man in the middle with his feet stretching to the rear of the boat, his back to me.

The glazed surface of the ocean was disturbed at the intrusion of this small boat and seemed to complain, "This is my territory. Stay out." Not a wisp of air stirred, not a sound was heard except the creaking of oars and the rattling of pins as the small craft began to move away from the side of the sailboat.

The old man bent his back and began to row-dip, pull, lift, dip, pull, lift. Each dip of the oar seemed to break the resolve of the mirrorlike ocean. Each pull of the oar moved the tiny skiff forward, separating the glassy seas to make way for the Lord's messenger.

Dip. Pull. Lift. The old man did not look up, rest, or talk. But hour after hour he rowed and rowed and rowed. The muscles of his back and arms, strengthened by faith and moved by unalterable determination, flexed in a marvelous cadence like a fine-tuned watch. We moved quietly, relentlessly toward an inevitable destiny. The old man concentrated his efforts and energy on fulfilling the calling he had from the Lord-to get the missionary to the family that wanted to hear the gospel. He was the Lord's wind that day.

Just as the sun dipped into the ocean, the skiff touched the shore of the harbor. A family was waiting. The old man spoke for the first time in hours and said, "Go. Teach them the truth. I'll wait here."

I waded ashore, met the family, went to their home, and taught them the gospel. As I bore testimony of the power of God in this Church, my mind seemed to see an old man rowing to a distant harbor and patiently waiting there. I testified with a fervor as great as any I have ever felt that God does give power to men to do His will if they have faith in Him. I said, "When we exercise faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, we can do things we could not otherwise do. When our hearts are determined to do right, the Lord gives us the power to do so."

The family believed and eventually was baptized.

In the annals of Church history, few will be aware of this small incident. Hardly anyone will know about this insignificant island, the family who waited, or the obscure, old man who never once complained of fatigue, aching arms, a painful back, or a hurting body. He never talked about thirst, the scorching sun, or the heat of the day as he relentlessly rowed uncomplainingly hour upon hour and only referred to the privilege of being God's agent in bringing a missionary to teach the truth to those who desired to hear. But God knows! He gave him the strength to be His wind that day, and He will give us the strength to be His wind when necessary.

How often do we not do more because we pray for wind and none comes? We pray for good things and they don't seem to happen, so we sit and wait and do no more. We should always pray for help, but we should always listen for inspiration and impressions to proceed in different ways from those we may have thought of. God does hear our prayers. God knows more than we do. He has had infinitely greater experience than we have. We should never stop moving because we think our way is barred or the only door we can go through is seemingly closed.

No matter what our trials, we should never say, "It is enough." Only God is entitled to say that. Our responsibility, if we are faithful, is to ask, "What more can I do?" then listen for the answer and do it!

I'll never forget the example of that old man.
