John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

42

Totally Exhausted

The mission president basically let us operate on our own in Ha'apai. Once in a while he came up or I went down, but not often. My counselors, the members, and the locally called missionaries were wonderful! Because we were more united now, in one sense we were indeed left alone, but in a bigger sense we were not alone but were directed by the Spirit of God. What a wonderful director the Spirit is!

We were constantly going on preaching circuits. They were arduous, both by land and by sea. We traveled long distances over trails of mud and ocean. There is a scripture that says that we should "waste and wear out our lives" in the service of God (see D&C 123:13). Great joy comes as we try. I remember many times being so tired that I could hardly move. It is exhausting to teach families, particularly when you go so far to reach them, put forth so much effort to bear testimony, and try to help them all you can. There were no cars or bikes, so we walked or rode horses. To me it was hard work riding horses, especially for long distances. We always rode bareback or with a burlap sack because no one could afford saddles. Horses are pretty bouncy, so most of the time I walked.

It was always good to return home from preaching circuits, whether by land or by sea. I remember returning from long sea voyages and entering the calm harbor at Pangai, called Fanga Ko Paluki, with deep feelings of gratitude and appreciation. It is rough out in the open sea, but once you are inside the reef, it is calm and you know you are nearly home. What a wonderful feeling to be home, to be in the calm of a protected harbor after a rough voyage, and to feel the calmness of soul that comes from knowing you have done what the Lord wanted you to do. The same principle of gratitude held when we returned by land from preaching in distant villages.

I remember one particular time when we had some families to teach on the north end of our home island. Three of us were ready to go when a good member family brought us some salted whale meat to eat before we left. We were hungry, so we ate quite a bit and then started on our journey. Within just a few hours we knew we were in trouble. The meat hadn't been properly cured, and we paid the price: diarrhea, throwing up, and all that goes with eating bad meat. We continued anyway, as there was no way to get word to the families that we were sick. We taught all the lessons and then started back.

It was very late and we had "had it." I think I know what being totally exhausted is. Perhaps I haven't fully experienced it yet, but being ill and having miles and miles to walk in mud, sand, water, and the heat of a hot night must come close.

Generally, I was in good health on my mission, but this was one of the few times when I had no strength. I began to realize that a few steps from a sick person may require as much internal effort as a one-hundred-yard dash from a skilled, young runner. I learned that everyone at every age and under every condition can have his or her determination tested fully!

I wanted to get home that night because I had school to teach the next day, but it was hard just to put one foot in front of the other. I wondered if we would ever make it. We rested often and finally got to within a mile of our home when our strength seemed to leave us completely. We all fell down in a heap in the middle of the road and slept for ten or fifteen minutes. We got up, went a few yards, and fell down again.

Although I was absolutely exhausted, I was still determined to get home that night, so we continued on, alternately moving a few yards and then resting in the middle of the road. We never worried about sleeping in the middle of the road, because the only things that came down the roads were people, horses, or carts drawn by horses, and horses can smell pretty well. We must have stopped and rested twenty times to cover those last several yards.

A few young Tongans were called on proselyting missions. They carried everything with them in mat rolls and baskets. Painting by Clark Kelley Price.

We finally dragged ourselves up to our house, which was built on cement blocks a few feet above the ground. There were three steps to the floor of the house. How many times had I skipped up these steps effortlessly, but that evening crawling up those three small steps was a formidable task.

When we finally got to our mats, we wanted to sink down and sleep, and sleep, and sleep. Before we did, however, we looked at each other and in near unison said, "Let's say a prayer of thanksgiving. We're home." We always did that when we returned. I gave our prayer of thanks. I don't know when I felt more sincere in expressing gratitude and letting God know how good it felt to be home.

After the prayer, I collapsed on that familiar mat and seemed to sink into oblivion. Yet as I sank, I seemed to enter another element-a buoyancy, a calmness, a beauty that is beyond description. I didn't see anyone or hear anything, but I felt a peace and calmness such as I have seldom felt before. It was as though I was totally enveloped in peace and beauty, love and calmness, certainty and softness, and every other good and beautiful thing. How well I rested!

That buoyant feeling stayed with me for a few days and then gradually faded. Even now, at times, I can remember how it felt and sometimes longingly wish to feel it fully again. I know there is a correlation between how much honest effort we put forth, particularly in building God's kingdom, and the good feelings we experience. When life is through, I am sure those who have worn out their lives in the service of others, which is serving God, will have a feeling that is impossible to describe but will include a feeling of total love. Those who have not sacrificed for others simply cannot experience it, not because someone is angry with them but rather because they haven't done what is necessary to experience it.

The Lord said something about our needing to experience the bitter to know the sweet (see Moses 6:55; 2 Nephi 2:15). I know we must work hard in the Lord's cause to feel good, and I know God can and does give us deep feelings of love, peace, and comfort. Being totally exhausted in the Lord's cause isn't all that bad.
