John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

43

Who Will Help?

As a district presidency, we called many couples on missions. They were very good to accept and then go wherever and whenever we asked them.On one occasion I got word that a missionary couple was very ill on an outlying island. We left immediately to investigate and indeed found them extremely ill. We brought them back to Pangai where the hospital was.

When the doctor saw them, he was alarmed. They had typhoid fever and had deteriorated to a point of being basically helpless. He didn't want them around any of the other patients. At that time the only way they handled typhoid fever was to put the afflicted people in a barbed wire enclosure, away from everyone else, and hope they got well. They weren't treated badly, but they were isolated.

At that time in Tonga, the hospitals furnished medicine and other medical treatment, but each family was responsible for feeding their own patients, providing a bed for them, and caring for them in every other way. Since we were the "family" of this missionary couple, it was our responsibility to care for them. We gave them a priesthood blessing, during which I felt the assurance that they would be all right but that it would take time. We made arrangements for someone to watch their two small children. Then I helped nurse the couple and had some of the missionaries trade with me in providing for their needs.

The law then was that the couple could not leave the compound until they were well. We couldn't hire anyone to help them, because people generally were pretty scared that they might catch the same fever. I assigned a couple of missionaries to the job; they were pretty obedient, but scared also. Caring for this missionary couple became a major challenge.

I knew we needed someone more permanent, so I walked to the nearby branches, then took the mission boat and went to the various outlying branches, everywhere asking members, "Who will help? Is there anyone who will stay with these missionaries to nurse them back to health?" I knew the Lord wanted them to live. After visiting many branches, I found that no one was willing. I didn't put pressure on them, I just asked. They all had excuses.

Finally, on the island of Uiha, there was a young girl of about sixteen who, after we had explained our need, looked at her father and said, "I'd like to go." Her father, on the spot, said, "If you want to, you can." So she came back with us.

What an act of love! Here was a young girl in the prime of her life, willing to come and, in effect, give her life (because she might catch the disease) to help a missionary family in need.

She asked how long she would be there. I told her I did not know and neither did the doctor. She went straight to the hospital compound. When I closed that barbed wire fence behind her I thought, "What have I done?" In effect, she was a prisoner with them. Yet someway I knew things would be all right because she had such a beautiful attitude.

It took several months for the couple to fully recover. The girl stayed with them day and night and nursed them back to health. She did her duty even though it took a long time. By the time the missionaries were well, I had a deep feeling of love and admiration for her.

She came from a poor family. The only thing I could figure out to do to help repay her kindness was to enroll her at the Liahona College on Tongatapu. However, she didn't qualify, because she hadn't done well in school. I pulled rank a little and explained to the mission president the sacrifice she had made. We got her into school, and she did well. She ended up marrying a returned missionary, and they then went on a mission together. They had a large family, nearly all of whom served missions and married in the temple. Her husband has been faithful and held almost every responsible calling in the Church, and she has not been one whit behind.

Every time I see her, I realize again the blessings that come after we have proven our love for others. I have asked her how she felt when we came looking for volunteers. She says, "I was as scared as anyone, but I had a feeling that someone needed help and it was my duty to give that help."

She learned to love that family just as she loved the Church, her husband, and her family, because she served them. I was impressed by this young girl and by many others who willingly served unselfishly. I wrote home:

"Pangai, Ha'apai, 29 September 1956

"After conference, one of the older ladies invited me over to her house for a meal and to bless her mother. I found that her mother was about ninety-five years old and had been blind and lying on her back for over five years, with this woman caring for her. This woman was also taking care of a little girl of her sister's after her sister had separated from her husband. There she was, just assigned to that little house. For over five years she had gone no further than to the church house and to the store; she just watched her aged mother and the little girl. There is no such thing as government care for the aged in Tonga. The family does it all, and they do it willingly. I think that this woman is doing the Lord's will a lot more than some of us who run around in circles trying to accomplish some good along so many lines that have been assigned us. I guess the main thing is to do that which is given us to do and do it well and not worry about the job that has been given to another to do. I am sure it is not so much the work we are assigned to do or where we work that is the saving factor, but rather the kind of heart we do our assigned work with. I have seen some great examples of willingness to forget self for the good of others. I think the basis of all spirituality and the means of exaltation is to just forget about oneself and help others.I wish that I knew how to serve better. I guess all of these things will come with time and experience.

"When we come into closer contact with the Lord, the importance of true love and service comes to the front. I'm sure when my work in Tonga is over, all that will be remembered is how much love I had in my heart for the people. Maybe all that will be left when we leave this earth is how much we have loved others."

I learned that feelings follow actions. I learned how important it is to do good and unselfish things so we can have good, godlike feelings.
