John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

44

The Trumpet

My trumpet played a fairly significant role on my mission. I had played the trumpet in high school and had been asked to bring it to Tonga. I wondered why, but soon found that it was a real hit with these musically gifted people. I didn't play it a lot, but when I did, there was always a crowd. I was asked to play at rugby games, flag-raising ceremonies, and a few other events. I learned several British bugle calls.

Everyone wanted to play the trumpet, and I let them try. I guess it is a miracle that no one caught diseases, because I only had one mouthpiece. I tried to wash it out before I played. My trumpet became so popular that everywhere I went I was branded as the palangi with the trumpet. I used it mostly in our school and on public holidays.

I remember one day teaching my students the Idaho state song, "And Here We Have Idaho." I put the words on the board and played it once for them on the trumpet. Then something came up, and I was called away on an emergency. When I came back an hour later, the students were all smiles. These were children from six to sixteen years old. I wondered what kind of mischief they had been in. "Listen," they said. Then in absolutely perfect four-part harmony they sang the whole song-all from hearing it one time! They have an unbelievable musical ability. Music is a big part of their lives.

On the seventeenth of March I led a parade of Saints from our branch in Vaipoa, on Niuatoputapu, to a big rugby match in the next village. The game was the big event of the day, but Church members came with banners celebrating the anniversary of the founding of the Relief Society. No one would have paid much attention to us if it hadn't been for the trumpet. Leading that small group with a trumpet got everyone's attention, and from then on the whole island knew that the Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized on March the seventeenth.

More than once people told me that they might forget me and my sermons, but they probably wouldn't forget my trumpet! I hoped they would remember my testimony as well.

Queen Salote was the queen of Tonga while I was a missionary. What a regal lady she was! She visited Ha'apai a few times. She was a very nice woman and very strong in the Methodist Church. She was not against our Church, but as the titular head of the Methodist Church in Tonga she felt she had some major responsibilities to her church. Over the years there had been some anti-LDS decisions made, but they were more in the context of not wanting competition than in anger.

When Queen Salote visited Ha'apai, we were always told we weren't invited to the big feasts or to any personal visits with her, despite the fact that we had a fairly large school. That all changed when, on one of the queen's visits, the government leaders in Ha'apai wanted to have a flag-raising ceremony with all the schoolchildren in their uniforms. It was arranged that the queen would stand at attention as the flag was raised and then walk by all the schoolchildren, who would line her route.

I told the local government officials, "We have a school. We ought to be part of this."

They replied, "We just can't include you." I reminded them that we had official permission for our school from the Commissioner of Education in Tonga, so they shouldn't exclude us. They still refused.

Then I said, "I'll play my trumpet for the flag raising." Their eyes lit up and they said, "Maybe we could arrange it." And they did.

They put us at the head of all the schools so we would be closest to the flagpole. That was a big thing because up to then our school had not been included in anything official. I'm sure the trumpet made the difference.

We practiced and practiced. There were hundreds, even thousands, of schoolchildren, all in uniforms.

Finally, the big day arrived. It was beautiful and clear and we all lined up according to the plan: the Mormons in green, the Catholics in red, the Methodists in blue, and so on. Everyone was excited. The queen came by, smiled at us, and shook hands with some of the children as they stood at attention. You should have seen their smiles! I played the trumpet while they raised the flag. It was the British equivalent of "To the Colors."

When we got through, the queen turned and said, "I understand you are the headmaster of the Mormon school." I said, "Yes." She said, "I would like to have you come to tea," which is a meal, not a drink. So I had the opportunity to sit next to her and visit for a long time. She was wonderful and gracious and made sure her servants brought me orange punch. She was very complimentary, asked many questions, and thanked us for what we were doing.

She made it very clear that she was interested in our school and what we were doing for her people, but not in talking about religion. The event was probably more symbolic than anything, but it was an important turning point. From then on, there was a great increase in the stature of our school and our Church among the people generally, as well as an increase in righteous pride among the members. They told their friends and neighbors, "Did you know our missionary was sitting next to the queen, and our school raised the colors?" The Mormon school was well established now, and many subtle problems we had been experiencing seemed to melt away. We still had our detractors, but things were moving in the right direction. I wrote home:

"I just received four new missionary couples and families, so I have lots of work getting them acquainted with missionary work. The missionaries who had typhoid are better now so they will be more help, too. Keeping the branches working is a real job, and this schoolwork is an enjoyable job, over 100 students now. I'm still trying to convert some people to these schools, but it's fun because I'm pretty sure of the ground I stand on. My trumpet has been helpful in the school."

I recalled all the times I had balked at lessons and practicing. Now I was glad Mom had pushed me. I've heard it said that behind every boy who plays any musical instrument, there is a pushy mom. I don't know if that is universally true, but it probably was in my case.

I enjoy good music. I remember as a child sometimes waking in the morning and hearing Mom playing Grieg's "To the Spring" or "Morning" on the piano and thinking to myself, "How could anything be prettier?"

I was glad I had my trumpet, as I am sure there were several occasions when it was a decisive factor in favor of the Church.
