John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

45

My Aching Back

We had many opportunities to preach the gospel, and we consistently had baptisms. All of the baptisms in Ha'apai were performed in the ocean. As we baptized people and built up branches, the Saints often outgrew the homes they were meeting in. When this happened, we proposed to the members that they build a separate chapel of their own. In every case, they were supportive and excited. We asked them to furnish all the material, all the labor, and a piece of land to build on. No Church funds were used. As a district presidency, we checked attendance, evaluated the future, decided on the size of chapel to be built, called for a vote of the branch, and then gave our official permission. We usually worked along with the members as they began the buildings, which were generally small, thatched fales.

It normally took several weeks to complete a nice chapel of about fifteen by thirty feet. They were nearly always built on some member's land and never cost any money because everything was donated. Building chapels was a positive experience for the branch members. Those who worked hardest on the chapels were invariably the best attenders and the most active members. Many who had not been very active participated in the building process, and many became active again. Lots of nonmembers helped too, and a few of them joined the Church, but not many.

On one occasion, I went to a small branch to help them start building their chapel. We had previously agreed on a certain size for the chapel. When I got there, they had already put the four corner poles in and were starting to build the roof structure. I saw that one of the corner poles was too small for the size of building we had approved.

I got a little upset and said, "Look, we agreed to build this chapel so big and that post will not support that size, so it must be removed and a larger one put in." They were not happy with that suggestion because the poles had all been set and filled. They said the other three poles were larger and would be strong enough to support the roof. "Absolutely not!" I replied. "That pole must come out and be replaced by a larger one."

They refused to help and sat down. I was really perturbed now, so I grabbed a shovel and started digging the undersized pole out. One or two started to help me, but most of them refused, saying, "If you want it out, take it out yourself." They were not exactly angry, but strongly disagreed.

I was determined to get that pole out. It was hard work as the wet dirt seemed to cling desperately to the pole. We would dig for a while, then twist and pull to loosen it, but it was difficult to get any movement at all. In the process of straining at this obstinate pole, I felt something pop in my back and fell to the ground writhing in pain. I knew I was in trouble. The others came over to see what had happened. They carried me to some mats and apologized. They said they were sorry and asked what they could do to help.

"If you want to help, get the pole out," I said. They quickly rallied and in no time had it out. I could tell they were scared, and so was I. I was experiencing intense physical pain and they felt their disobedience had caused it. They hoped by getting the pole out, the pain would stop, but it didn't.

They gave me a blessing. In the blessing, they said they felt I should go to Tongatapu. I was afraid I might pass out as I was starting to lose my grip on exactly what was going on. I could tell they were very concerned and wanted to help. I was aware of faces looking at me and heard someone say there was a small sailboat just leaving for Tongatapu. They hailed the boat, and as it came closer to shore they explained to the captain what had happened and asked if he could take me to Tongatapu. He agreed, so they carried me out in the ocean and put me on the boat. They told me to lie still, remember the blessing I had been given, and all would be well. I was in no position to argue.

There were about ten people already crowded onto the small sailboat, but they quickly shifted around and made room for me. They even got some nice mats and tapa cloth and made as comfortable a place for me as they could. None of them were members of the Church, but all of them were kind and helpful. One of the older men had a bottle of special Tongan oil and asked if he could rub my back where it hurt. He said he was sure he could make it feel better. I didn't think I had anything to lose, so I told him to go ahead. His skillful hands began to work their miracle-and before long, the intense pain began to subside, and I started to feel that at least I wouldn't faint.

I was still in a lot of pain, but part of it was apprehension and wondering what had happened to my back. I knew something was wrong but didn't know what, or how serious it was, and I seemed helpless to do anything about it. I had experienced broken bones in high school and knew they were broken, but this was different. I didn't know what was wrong.

It was midafternoon and the seas were fairly heavy, but there was a strong wind and I could tell we were making good time. The undulating motion of the boat, along with the warm afternoon sun and the warmth of concern I felt from everyone, eventually lulled me to sleep. I slept for a few hours.

Suddenly I was awakened by a dash of cold ocean spray as a wave crashed across our bow. I started to jump up, but firm hands held me and kind voices assured me all was well. They said they were sorry the sea was getting a little rougher, but I should not worry. "Just try to rest," they said. I tried, but found I was fully awake now. My back still hurt, but not as much as before.

It was nearly sundown and I was able to think more clearly. I began to realize I was somewhat alone in a small boat, among strangers, in the midst of God's great ocean with no land in sight. I trusted the experience of the captain but realized we were all relying on the goodness of God and on the winds and the currents He controls. I thought of something I had read in the Book of Mormon about "being wanderers in a strange land" (Alma 13:23).

I was quite melancholy and not very comfortable with the boat going up and down, and turning and twisting as I tried to hold on. The people were helpful, but they could do only so much. I was still feeling pain and wondering what was happening.

This was probably the first time I had thought much about good health. Like many young people, I took good health for granted. I felt I could do anything. I thought my body was strong and agile and always would be. I suppose I felt my body was impervious to physical problems. Now I hurt badly and couldn't do what I wanted to do. It was a rude awakening and I was forced to think about the gift of good health, the gift of strong bodies, and our responsibility to treat this gift from God with more respect and care.

The sun was almost down now. I raised myself a little and looked into the friendly, concerned faces of faithful people as they prepared to spend the night on the open ocean, trusting their lives to the skilled hands of the captain and to God.I could tell they had deep faith in God-faith that they would not overturn or be washed away during the night, and faith that they would eventually arrive at their desired destination.

The captain told me that on their previous voyage, three people had been washed overboard during the night, and they had only been able to recover two of them. The third, a young girl, was now in the "Lord's hands," as they put it.

They seemed happy as they sensed I was feeling somewhat better. They knew I was a missionary and asked if I would be willing to give the evening prayer and commend our souls into the hands of the Lord for the long, dark night ahead. I agreed.

They sang several beautiful hymns of praise and pleading, such as "Jesus, Savior, Pilot Me" and "Brightly Beams Our Father's Mercy." I thought of all the hymns that have water travel as a theme: "Master the Tempest Is Raging" came to mind, especially the phrase, "they all shall sweetly obey thy will: Peace, peace, be still" (Hymns, no. 105).

I wondered if anyone could fully appreciate the words and the pleading of these songs until they had been on "a tempestuous sea." I sensed that it is probably beyond the grasp of most who have not been in a small boat on a dark night to understand fully the great value of a beacon light on perilous waters. For some reason I felt sorry, not for myself but for those who have never been in a small boat on a stormy sea, where they can feel the truth and beauty of the pleading verse. "Wondrous sovereign of the sea, Jesus, Savior, pilot me" (Hymns, no. 104).

After the songs, I offered the prayer. It was a moving, spiritual experience. Words of gratitude came easily and many scriptures came to mind, such as "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time" (1 Peter 5:6). Words of praise and words of pleading seemed to flow into my heart and fill that darkening evening with the fluid Tongan tongue, so rich in phrases of praise and metaphors of gratitude. For a while it was almost as though I was lifted above that small boat and could see God's hand covering us for the night, His face smiling in appreciation for our heartfelt hymns of praise and prayers of gratitude. It was a strong, spiritual confirmation of His goodness to all people, as well as the goodness of honest people everywhere who try to help others and who humbly submit themselves to God. I know He hears sincere prayers.

As we finished that subdued devotional, there were many tears-tears of gratitude, tears of pleading, tears of love, and tears of simple emotion as a small group of believers felt deeply their need for the Lord's help. God was very close to us that evening.

During the long night, the wind howled, the spray flew, the boat creaked, and the sails and ropes moaned as we alternately rode the crests of waves and plunged into valleys of darkness. There was no intense fear, however, for we all knew we were in God's hands. Many times during the night I heard people whispering, "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me" (Psalm 23:4). Faith and love were our covering that night, and what a warm, wonderful covering they were!

I was awake most of the night, partly from physical pain but mostly from awe, wonder, and a desire to help others as they had helped me. I talked to the captain and a few others and tried to express my love and gratitude to them and to God. We had some good gospel conversations. I can truly say I was filled with the Spirit.

I had been on many boats but none quite like this, because I didn't feel whole physically. Something happens when you know you don't have much physical strength and you must rely totally on others and on God for your life and your future. The circumstances are not necessarily pleasant, but the feelings of love and appreciation surely are.

Sometime during the night, it dawned on me that I had nothing with me. Usually when I traveled from island to island, I carried my scriptures, a few tracts, a change of clothing, perhaps a little food, and had at least one companion. Now I had nothing: no change of clothing, no scriptures, no watch, no food, no wallet, no money, no passport, not even good health. I had nothing but the clothes on my back.

At first I shuddered and wondered what I would do. Then I realized it didn't matter. Money, clothes, tickets, passports-all these things of the world were not important. Even physical health was not critical. I had what was important. I had a testimony. I knew God was my Father. I knew I was a missionary, a witness for His Son, Jesus Christ. I knew He knew who I was, where I was, what my needs were, and where I needed to go. I knew with certainty that He was the "Master of ocean and earth and skies" and that through Him, everything would "sweetly obey His will" until the fulfillment came: "peace, peace, be still."

I thought of Moses in the wilderness as he left Egypt. He likely had no passport, money, or maybe not even a change of clothes. I thought of Abraham and others as they traveled through the deserts and waste places, and of the pioneers among sagebrush and sand. It may actually be easier to find God in places and circumstances like these-at least there are not so many worldly distractions. I was grateful for that night. I was also grateful when it ended.

As the eastern sky began to grow light, everyone gathered again and sang songs of praise and thanksgiving. They asked me to offer another prayer of gratitude for the protection during the night, for being on course, and for not losing anyone. In the prayer I praised God and thanked Him for His help and asked for His continued protection through the coming day. Words from the Psalms came easily and seemed natural in meaning and setting. They were felt by every heart, including many above. I thought of the sweet little girl from the last voyage now in the "Lord's hands."

The seas were heavy, but we were making good progress. I noticed how large one of the women close to me was. I remember thinking, "She is huge." I suppose I was thinking a little negatively. Not long afterwards, I tried to get up and was hit by a sudden pain in my back. I started to fall just as the boat hit a large wave. I went flying off balance and could easily have gone over the side. I felt something strong en-circle me and found myself securely held by very stout arms. I realized I was in the lap of this heavy woman, and all the seas in the world could not rip me loose from her grip or shake her from the deck of that boat. When the danger was over, she let me go and cautioned me not to stand again but rather to sit, crawl, or just lie down. I was sorry I had felt even slightly negative towards her.

During the day the old man massaged my back for hours, using special ointments. I felt much better. Others shared some boiled bananas and coconuts with me. They tasted good. How solicitous they were of my needs! What wonderful people!

Late in the afternoon we sighted land; just before evening, we pulled into the harbor at Nuku'alofa. I felt so much better, I was almost ashamed I had come. As I stepped ashore, my spirit literally soared with gratitude and deepened understanding. We had arrived safely, and the pain in my back was almost gone.

I thanked everyone for their help. They refused any payment, for which I was grateful as I had no money. I assured them they would be richly rewarded for their goodness. They thanked me for my prayers and said they had felt the Lord's protection with a missionary on board. The old man with the "magic fingers" assured me I would be okay. I embraced him in a heartfelt hug of gratitude. We parted with tears of joy and appreciation for one another. It had been a good experience. I am aware of two in that group who later joined the Church.

I was able to walk now without too much pain, so I headed towards town. I was hungry, tired, and thirsty, but I felt great. I still didn't know what had happened or what would happen, but I remembered I had been given a blessing and a promise. I reflected on the blessing and on the assurance from the old man on the boat that I would be okay. I felt I would, but I still had some concerns.

Eventually I found the mission president and explained what had happened. He took me to the hospital. It wasn't much, but it was more than anything we had in Ha'apai.

A TMP (Tongan Medical Practitioner) checked me and did a few tests. He knew I had come on a boat from Ha'apai in fairly stormy seas and asked if I had been hit by the side of the boat or been struck by anything during the trip. I told him I didn't think so, but I couldn't remember for sure.

He said my back was all black and blue and had gone through some major trauma. I also had some badly torn muscles, but there were no broken bones or damaged discs. "Whatever it was it's okay now," he said. "You're free to go back; just take it easy and don't lift anything heavy or do any hard work for two weeks."

The mission president wanted me to stay for a few days and make sure things were all right. I assured him that I felt fine and that I wanted to return to Ha'apai as soon as possible. He sighed, but then agreed. I stayed overnight at the mission home and left the next morning. I have had no trouble with my back since then.
