John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

47

Conversations

We continued to have new challenges with the members, the missionaries, and the school, but they were mostly minor compared to what we had already been through. Every day there was something exciting and challenging to accomplish, and we tried to go about our work with enthusiasm. There was little time to rest. I remember feeling that there is no greater blessing than to have challenging and important work to do, with the authority to do it and good people to help you. These were glorious times.

The days evolved into weeks, and the weeks into months. There was a little progress here and a little better feeling there. The new missionaries at the school made a huge difference. The branch president missionaries and the proselyting missionaries were more in tune with one another and with the members, and more people were attending meetings. The feeling of unity was starting to become a reality. Occasionally an argument or a nasty problem came up, but by and large, progress towards achieving the goal the mission president had set for us "to get rid of the bickering and quarrelling and achieve more unity among the people" was gradually happening.

Nowhere was this more evident than in the school. The spirit of helpfulness, love, and unity among the teachers was nothing short of marvelous. I don't know how it would be possible to have better feelings. No one complained. Everyone went out of their way to help one another. Everyone worked hard, and there was lots of hard work to do.

The teachers constantly told me they would take on more of the load if I needed them to. They wanted me to feel free to perform my duties as district president. They knew of my responsibilities to the other missionaries and members on the far-flung islands. "When you need to leave, just let us know; when you return, you'll have no regrets. We'll work twenty-four hours a day if necessary," they said. Gradually I turned more and more responsibility over to the missionary teachers. I felt the school improved as I did.

This same feeling of unity seeped over to the district presidency, the district council, and the other missionaries and members. Each person took their own responsibility more seriously, and as they consciously tried to help others, a feeling of unity and oneness started to pervade the whole district in a manner that brought great joy to me and to everyone.

About this time I went on a preaching circuit to Lulunga (a southern group of islands) for ten days. When I left, the feelings among the members and teachers were very positive. As we visited the outer islands, the feelings among the members and missionaries there were also very positive. It seemed that everyone wanted to help. They all wanted to do their part, and more. What a wonderful change!

As we finished that preaching circuit and started home, the winds were somewhat against us, so we had to make long tacks with the sailboat to make any forward progress. That is, to move a mile forward, you had to go several miles sideways at a small angle and several miles back at a small angle, just to get a little closer to your forward destination.

The seas were not overly rough, but because of the head winds, what could have been a half-day's journey took over two days. I was past the immaturity of complaining about the wind, so as we sailed back and forth I had lots of time to think and contemplate.

As I did so, a spirit of wonder came over me.I felt so good about what I had left at home, what I had found in the outer islands, and what I felt among my companions. I felt sure I would find good feelings when I returned home and could sense that unity and its blessings were starting to become a reality.

As I sat there in this contemplative mood, I reflected on the great contrast between how good things seemed now and how bad things had seemed just a few months ago. There were only five of us in the boat, and with the brisk wind coming straight at us and the ocean being fairly strong, there was lots of work to do to keep us moving forward. I offered to help, but they were sensitive and could see I was studying and thinking. They said they could handle it and just left me alone with my thoughts. Never once did they complain about my not helping. With their skillful hands and cooperative attitude as a backdrop, I leaned back and fell into a state of deep pondering.

Without realizing it or even thinking about it, I started a type of conversation with God. It was not a real conversation in the sense that I might now have with my wife or children, but nevertheless a conversation. To me it was very real. It was basically a one-sided conversation as I asked the questions and also gave the answers. I had been reading the scriptures a lot and had been thinking about the changes that had come to pass in Ha'apai. Even though I gave the answers to my own questions, I felt good about them and felt they were at least somewhat prompted by a divine source.

I hope it is not sacrilegious to give just a few thoughts from that conversation. I started out saying: "It's marvelous to see and feel the change that has come over the Ha'apai District. How did it come about?"

Through faith in My Beloved Son. All good things come to pass through faith in Him.

"But there was so much chaos, so much quarrelling, so much dissension. Things seemed to be in such disarray. And now they seem so peaceful and orderly, and there seems to be so much unity of purpose. How does that change actually happen? It's like a miracle."

I've had a lot of experience bringing order out of chaos. I've done it lots of times. I can bring love from quarrelling and order from chaos in individuals or families, branches or districts, even worlds or universes. It's just a matter of obedience to eternal law.

I work with people and all my creations until they obey, and then peace and order replace anger and chaos. Chaos comes from disobedience; peace comes from obedience. Some elements and some people take longer, but they eventually learn.

"It seems so wonderful, so desirable to have peace and unity and oneness. Why is there disharmony or lack of unity, and why would anyone do anything to bring that result?"

There is a principle of moral agency that must be kept intact. Some learn faster or better than others, but all learn. Eventually the realities of eternity become apparent. Truth eventually prevails. Light always overcomes darkness.

"But what about those who seem bent on doing evil and deceiving and lying? How is that handled?"

I've had plenty of experience with that also. You teach correct principles and bear fervent testimonies, but you also learn to love with all your heart and develop patience as deep as eternity.

"How do you develop that love and patience?"

You develop love by loving, and you develop patience by being patient. But remember what was said first: All progress comes through faith on My Beloved Son. Follow Him. Study His life and teachings. Learn of Him. All things in the Church and even in the earth and in the heavens testify of Him. Sense Him and see Him and His life and teachings in all things. Rely on Him. Be patient and accept His tutoring, and you will learn.

"I still don't understand how to work with those who seem to be unwilling to change, who in effect seem to want to disobey. How do you do it?"

Follow what I've said before.

Sometimes I would ask questions and feel no answer. Yet sometimes my questions were answered with, "Not now," "Not yet," "It's not time," or "You can't understand yet." Mostly it was a wonderfully fulfilling experience of reading scriptures and sensing answers that, while not necessarily hidden, I had at least not understood before.

These conversations went on for hours and hours. Maybe I have said more than I should, but I don't think I have said anything that can't be found in the scriptures. It was a wonderful time for me. I felt like a child looking into a lake and marveling at its beauty, depth, and width, and wondering at all that was going on in it, yet sensing there was a whole ocean, even an eternity of oceans, beyond the next mountain range. I was happy for the conversations but knew I had hardly started.

Two days later as we finally pulled inside the reef and made our way to home port, I was still contemplating and reflecting, marveling and thanking. I wondered how people understand these things if they don't have a few days to sit and contemplate in a sailboat in the South Pacific with a faithful crew who never complain. I assumed that people find their own days and places of reflection, but I was glad we had a head wind and it had taken us two extra days to get home.

As I returned to the school, the branches, and the missionaries, I was not disappointed. In fact, my most optimistic expectations were surpassed. The school was running smoothly, even beautifully. The members and missionaries were united and were very close to being one in heart and purpose. What a blessing!

What marvelous things the Lord gives to those who obey him and help others, who are humble and united, and who do not seek their own good but constantly seek the good of others.

I learned that language, culture, physical surrounding, technology, time, place-none of these things make any real difference. Only unity, obedience, love, helpfulness, hard work, patience, humility, willingness to allow agency its full play, and then developing deep faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, make any real difference. These are the important things to learn in this life. Only these things bring blessings.

I learned that God is intimately involved in our lives, that the more faith we have in Him the more we can comprehend that involvement and the less faith we have in Him the less we can comprehend that involvement. I learned that no matter how things may seem, God is always there. We must obey, endure faithfully in Christ, and always remember that for us the last chapter has not yet been written.
