John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

48

Auhangamea

Unlike Niuatoputapu, there were lots of boats to and from Ha'apai. I doubt a week went by without some type of boat arriving. Some carried mail, but most of the little ones didn't. After boats from Tongatapu arrived, I always checked the mission post office box 6 for mail. Like all missionaries,I was very happy when I received mail. Letters now came and went much more regularly, and I was sure my family felt a little more at ease.

One day a letter came from the mission president saying that he had received permission to build several brick chapels in Tonga, including two in the Ha'apai District-one in Pangai, and one in Uiha. We were excited! The word spread fast. After years of rather shabby chapels, the Mormons were finally doing something first class!

Stories circulated everywhere, among members and nonmembers alike: "I hear the Mormons bought a motor launch and it's coming here." "I hear the Mormons are going to build with cement, which is hard like coral." "I hear builders are coming from America." On and on went the rumors and questions. I couldn't say much because I didn't know much.

In his letter, the mission president said we must get long-term leases in Pangai and Uiha before we could build. He also said we should raise a considerable sum of money (£500 or about $2,500 U.S.) and furnish several able-bodied men as building missionaries. He asked me to let him know when we had accomplished these things, and then one of the builders from America would come up, make a survey, and tell us what to do next.

I was a little concerned about someone who didn't know the language or understand local ways coming to Ha'apai and telling us what to do, but I had faith in my mission president and tried to do everything he asked.

We did our part, and before long the first builder arrived. He was a kind and understanding man. While he was required to do certain things, he was also willing to listen and make changes to better accomplish what needed to be done. Thus, the Church building program began to unfold in Ha'apai, and before long we started construction of two block chapels. For good or bad, things would never be the same again.

It is hard to imagine how far-reaching the new ways were. The biggest impact was the introduction of a new way of thinking. Motor launches were used instead of sailboats. Lumber, cement, tin roofing, and nails were all introduced as building materials. Electricity (through generators) provided power to do jobs formerly done by hand. Using schedules, paying people to work, following a written plan, keeping records, expecting people to work so many hours or get so much done in a day or a week-all were concepts basically foreign to the normal way of doing things in Ha'apai. These concepts took on great importance and reached into almost every facet of our activities.

It was interesting to watch two cultures clash. The Tongan culture was largely oriented towards moving with nature. The Western culture was largely oriented towards moving despite nature. The Tongan culture seemed to bend to the will of nature. The other seemed to bend nature to its will. It was often sad and sometimes painful to see many aspects of a centuries-old culture swallowed up by a more powerful one led by advanced technology, new ideas, and different ways of doing things, a culture that seemed to run roughshod over seas, storms, rain, darkness, and sometimes even people's feelings.

For a while there was a lot of confusion, even in my mind. However, I quickly learned that the basic principles of the gospel were not changed at all. Even though we now often traveled by motor launches rather than sailboats, there was still need for faith. Even though people were paid wages, there was still need for honesty. Even though people were given specific assignments, the opportunity to go out of their way and help others was still there. And even though a schedule was now required, this did not need to keep anyone from performing those basic acts of kindness of which Christianity is made. No matter what the new technology brought, the need for faith and kindness would never be outmoded.

The builders brought a motor launch to Ha'apai. They cautioned that it was to be used for "building purposes only," as the Building Department (whoever that was) was paying for it. They made it clear that the launch was not to be used for branch or proselyting work, but they wanted me to be responsible for it.

I was confused now. I thought branch work, proselyting work, and building work were all the same. I could see no way of separating them, but I told them I would do my best.

When the builder left, he promised to send a mechanic to keep the launch in good repair as I knew nothing about diesel engines. He also said that since the only wharf in Ha'apai was in Pangai, they would send a double load of cement there and asked if I could get half of it over to Uiha. I said I would. I didn't know what I was getting myself into!

When the shipment of cement drums arrived in Pangai, it was so heavy no one knew what to do.It may well have been the heaviest load ever delivered to Pangai. We could tell it would take us forever to get the dozens of heavy, waterproof barrels of cement to Uiha using our small sailboat or even the motor launch.

The copra board had a big lafa lafa (barge) they used to haul loads of copra (dried coconut meat) out to large British ships that were too big to come into the harbor. With some negotiation, we soon had an agreement to use the barge to haul the cement to Uiha.

On the appointed day, the members came down to the wharf and loaded those heavy drums of cement onto the wooden barge. By the time the barrels were in the barge, it was so low in the water that I thought it was going to sink. But it stayed afloat.

We bought a lot of strong rope. (It seemed a miracle that the Building Department could always come up with money to buy those things. We could never buy enough good rope for our old sailboat.) We hooked the barge to the motor launch with a long length of heavy, new rope. We started the launch moving forward and as the rope tightened and came out of the water, the launch tried to move forward, but couldn't. The heavy old barge just sat there laughing, as though to say, "Try and get me to move."

This was terribly frustrating. Many of the members were jumping back and forth from the wharf to the barge, yelling and laughing and having a great time.I enjoyed seeing them have fun, even at our expense, but I couldn't help feeling that maybe we were getting into something beyond our ability. There were five of us on the launch, and the situation wasn't very funny to me.

After lots of effort, the barge began grudgingly to move, at first only a few feet, but eventually with a more steady rhythm. When I realized we were really under way, I signaled that everyone, except the ten men we were taking to help us unload in Uiha, had to jump from the barge and swim ashore. There was lots of laughing and running about-and a great game of cat and mouse as the young boys ran from the older ones, who were trying to throw them off. Eventually only ten men were left. By now we were close to the opening in the reef that separated us from the protected harbor and the open sea.

Once we got into the deep ocean, the swells started lifting us and the barge up and down-often at different times. Even though we had made the venture a matter of prayer, that latent sense of foreboding I had felt earlier returned. Occasionally the barge was pushed back by a large wave, which would pull the launch backwards, no matter how fast our motor was running. It was scary. The barge must have weighed 100 times as much as the launch. I was grateful we had as long a rope as we did. With time we learned when to move forward, when to slow down, and how to play the ropes and the waves to achieve the maximum forward movement.

We had started early in the morning under broken clouds. The seas were fairly strong with whitecaps all around. The launch had been to Uiha once before on its own and made it in four hours, but with this heavy load, we anticipated it would take us most of the day to get there.

The place we were most concerned about was the auhangamea (the destroyer of things). This was an area where parts of separate islands come relatively close together. The currents and tides got deflected and channeled by the islands into a fierce multidirectional force so powerful and unpredictable that the auhangamea is a major danger zone.

On a previous voyage I had thrown a long stick like a spear into the auhangamea with all my force. Down, down it went and then surfaced one hundred feet away. A little later I threw another one, and it surfaced seventy-five feet away in an entirely different direction. I could only imagine the giant battle going on between opposing currents down there.

It had taken us till early afternoon to get to the auhangamea, which was about three-fourths of the way to Uiha, but we all knew the last part was going to be the hardest. We had been relaxing and singing but as we neared the auhangamea, all of that stopped and a tenseness gripped everyone. Would it be smooth? Would we find riptides? How would it affect the launch, the ropes, and the heavy barge? We all knew it was unpredictable, but what would it be like today? Many heartfelt prayers ascended to heaven.

When we entered the destroyer, we could feel an eerie tug and pull from the powerful currents. The launch would careen to one side and then would shoot back as though being whipped by a sinister force.

We moved slowly forward, but when the heavy barge got into the auhangamea, we knew we were in trouble. The heavy currents seemed to grab it and move it at an angle away from the launch. The rope tightened, and we could actually feel the launch being pulled backward. Then another current took over, and the barge moved rapidly to the other side, dropping the rope deep into the water. Then just as the launch moved forward to take up the slack, the barge would move in a different direction, and we would be pulled backwards or sideways. It was crazy and scary.

The engineer revved the motor but said it couldn't take this much strain for long. Working with his lookout man, he tried to coordinate the various movements of the launch and the barge. For a while, things would seem to go better, then unexpectedly a shift would come, and the launch would be jerked to one side or the other. The waves seemed to grow bigger, and we were all soaked from the constant breaking of the ocean over us. But the worst part was the unpredictability of everything.

The strong currents were forcing us in a course we did not want to follow, and the barge was bobbing up and down with ever greater force. Sometimes the barge would almost sink out of sight, then ride high above us. We seemed to have no control over it! The launch was at the mercy of the heavy, aimless barge, which at times nearly pulled us underwater.

Tongans are generally calm in tight situations. It takes a lot to frighten them, but before long I sensed some real terror in the eyes and voices of those around me. It was obvious we were in deep trouble, and none of us knew what to do.

The swells deepened and the winds blew harder. Often we could not see the barge, but we could certainly feel it! Without warning, we would be partially submerged or whipped to one side or the other. The engineer kept the motor at full throttle but reminded me that at that rate it would soon burn out. Yet when we slowed the motor, we were jerked around even more, so there seemed to be no alternative but to keep it racing at top power.

I couldn't see the ten men on the barge very clearly, but I could sense the deep concern among them. Breaking waves were filling the flat bottom of the barge with water; because the barge was so loaded, it was almost impossible for them to bail it out. The added weight of the seawater was sinking the barge ever lower. The men were bailing as fast as they could, but ten men with small buckets were no match for the large waves. It seemed this sea of terror was trying to rip us to pieces. We knew something had to change, but what could we do?

There are times in our lives when nothing seems to go right, when nothing seems to make sense, when we feel there is nothing we can do. Perhaps we feel our prayers are not bringing any inspiration or direction, or the turmoil about us is ready to engulf us and we want to scream in agony. Yet while we often don't know what to do, we generally know what not to do. God sees to that. This was such a time.

I could see the panic in those about me, feel the fear in my own heart, and sense the same was going on in the hearts of those in the barge. The engine began to cough and sputter a little. We were taking on too much water ourselves and could hardly keep it bailed out fast enough. All of us were working as hard as we could. Finally, the captain shrugged his shoulders and said, "We can't get any more power, and soon we will have none. Something must change." He looked at me as though he was sure I knew what to do.

I had no answer. I had been praying as hard as I knew how, but had no impressions at all, only mounting fear. Suddenly one of the most terror-struck young men screamed, "The next time the rope loosens up, release it. At least that way we'll be able to escape."

"What about the people on the barge?" I asked. "Without the rope pulling them, the barge won't last a minute."

"Maybe they can swim when it sinks. Then we can swing around and pick them up."

"But what about the cement?"

"Forget it! Release the barge now!"

I didn't feel good about that. Just then the rope tightened and we were jerked into a wave that totally engulfed us. As the water subsided, this same man yelled, "If they go down, they'll drag us with them! Release the rope now!" I looked. The rope was taut. We couldn't release it. The young man brought out his machete and said, "I'll cut the rope. Just say so. We have to save ourselves so we can try to save them!"

I was immobilized. I couldn't talk. I couldn't even think. I just stood there staring back and forth at the rope, the barge, and the launch. Everyone was waiting.

I continued staring. Why aren't my prayers being answered? Why is there no direction? Another wave smothered us. I looked back. The barge seemed to be listing heavily, and the men were gathering on the side highest out of the water. I could feel their fear. It seemed to resonate with mine.

The young man with the machete yelled again, "Cut the rope! Cut the rope!" In my mind's eye, I could almost see the barge sinking and pulling us down with it. I sensed that if I didn't act, we could well lose the barge, the cement, the launch, and our lives. I knew I must say something, but for some reason I couldn't. Another man frantically yelled at me, "You're a missionary. You can't be a good missionary or do missionary work if you're dead! Cut the rope now!"

Their arguments made sense. No one knows how badly I wanted to tell them to cut the rope. Time was moving, but I just stood there. Why can't I answer?

Finally an impression: no voice, no manifestation, no calming of the seas, just a feeling to speak-and even I was surprised at the words that came from my lips as I said, "I can't be a good missionary or do missionary work if I value my life more than others. Don't cut the rope. Keep the engine at full speed."

There was dead silence. Everyone was shocked, including me. They looked at me in disbelief. I stood transfixed. It took a few moments for me to realize what had happened, to realize I had received an answer to my prayers. I was not particularly calm, but I was certain what was right. I knew it didn't matter whether we lived or died, it only mattered that we were loyal to God and to others for whom we were responsible.

Slowly the young man lowered his machete. The lookout man climbed back to his post. The captain started tinkering with the motor. The rope man made sure all was secure. I stood and stared at the barge. It was over. I had no idea how it would end, but the decision was made. It was out of my hands and into much better ones.

Almost imperceptibly we began to move forward. The fear, the wind, the jerking, and the crashing sea were all still there, but now the entire scene seemed to take on a slightly different hue. I knew whether we made it to Uiha was not really important. We had already made the important decision, and all were obedient.

We tend to fuss so much for our lives, maybe because it's natural, or because we haven't fully repented, or because our lives are not yet full of love and compassion and charity, or maybe because we haven't unselfishly helped others sufficiently. It may be that our faith in God is not as full as it should be, so we don't yet realize that when our lives are filled with these and other Christlike qualities, it doesn't really matter whether life continues here or there.

In the middle of that raging sea, I pondered these things. The tenseness in my eyes and heart began to soften. I signaled as best I could to those in the barge that we were making progress. I saw several clasped hands moving back and forth in a sign of encouragement and gratitude. I even thought I detected smiles on some of those weary faces. We all redoubled our efforts at bailing water. It kept us busy.

Before long it became clear we were moving forward. The motor was running smoothly, the currents seemed more subdued. The barge was not twisting and bouncing quite so much. Soon we were beyond the auhangamea.

One could explain this physical turn of events in many ways. Maybe enough time had passed so the tides were starting to equalize each other, or maybe some vagrant current had tipped the balance of power. The simple fact was, regardless of how He did it, God allowed us to move forward. He caused the powers of destruction to loosen their grip. He is all-powerful, kind, and loving. I know that!

Slowly, foot by foot, we moved toward Uiha. We pulled into the relative calm of the harbor just as the sun sank into the sea. After we secured the launch and the barge, we swam to shore. The Saints had a great feast prepared for us. How good it felt to be on firm ground and see the smiles and feel the happiness of those who had committed their all to getting the Lord's cement to Uiha. Not much was said about the trip. When people asked, the response was simply, "God protected us. He helped us bring His cement safely here." It was almost like, "What else is there to say?"

I tried to be as calm as the others, but somehow my palangi nerves were jangled. The men from the barge were all laughing, eating, and asking for help to unload the cement in the morning. None of them talked much about the ordeal. However, in a quiet moment just before we retired, one of the older men from the barge came over and whispered, "Thanks for not cutting the rope. We knew God would help us. Thanks for listening to Him."

I knew it was the power of such faith that had allowed God to bring us safely through. I sensed that God had as much concern for their faith as for their lives. I rested well that evening knowing both had come through unscathed.
