John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

49

The Granddaughter

It is warm in Tonga at Christmastime, the weather is hot and humid, but the spirit of the season is beautiful. People tend to think more about others and less about themselves, and what a blessed thing that is! I reflected on my first Christmas in Liahona waiting for a boat to Niuatoputapu, the second on Niuatoputapu, and now the third in Pangai, Ha'apai.

There was not a lot of physical gift-giving in Tonga because there were simply not a lot of things to give. People were poor in terms of worldly possessions, but they gave marvelous gifts of love, service, and kindness. During the warm evenings around Christmas, many singing groups and assorted bands went around serenading. Even with the oppressive heat, the feeling of peace and good cheer seemed to permeate everything.

A few months earlier we had been asked to raise £500 so we could start our new brick chapel in Pangai. We made an assessment of £50 each to ten separate families, and everyone was to have the money in by 1 January. Most of the families had completed their allotment, but one older couple, who lived close to our home, was still struggling. They were a faithful grandparent couple, all of whose children were married and gone. Most of their children were active in the Church, but some were not.

The grandfather originally thought he could get his money from other sources, but one by one those sources failed. At last he realized he must go to his plantation on another island and make copra to sell. Making copra was done by gathering coconuts, cutting them open, extracting the meat, drying it in the sun, and selling it to the mataka (copra board) to get the needed money. (Copra is used commercially for soap, oils, etc.) He was determined to meet the deadline, so two weeks before Christmas he left for his plantation. He planned on being back by Christmas, but he wasn't.

Shortly after he left, a nine-year-old granddaughter came from Tongatapu to spend the holidays. Her arrival was unannounced, but welcomed by her grandmother as the girl's mother was one of their more wayward children.

The grandmother and her granddaughter had a good time together, but a few days before Christmas the granddaughter became very ill with a high fever. Even though her grandma put her to bed and cared well for her, the fever seemed to get worse. The grandmother asked us if we would administer to her granddaughter, which we did. I felt she would be all right, and we continued about our other activities.

The day before Christmas, one of the missionary schoolteachers and I visited families and wished everyone the season's best. As we concluded our visits, I asked my companion where else he thought we should go that Christmas Eve. He replied, "I've heard the granddaughter is still doing poorly and that the grandfather has not yet returned. I'm sure the grandmother is very tired from the constant care she has been giving her granddaughter. Why don't we go to her house and volunteer to watch her granddaughter tonight and let her get some rest?"

"What a great idea!" I thought. "Why don't I think of things like that?"

It was early evening when we arrived at her house and explained what we proposed to do. Seldom have I seen more grateful eyes or felt more sincere appreciation. The grandmother looked at us a long time, I suppose studying our seriousness, and then said, "She is very ill. I have been up day and night with her for the last three days. I am very tired, and I'm not sure I can make it another night. Thank you. Thank you! I have been using this cloth and bowl of water to cool her brow and this woven fan to give her some air movement. She has not talked at all the last few days, but only moaned. I'm not sure if she will get well or not. Maybe I should try to stay up and help."

My companion said, "No, you go and rest. Kolipoki and I will fan her and cool her forehead, and she will be all right. Now run along and sleep." She looked at us again for a long time, then left. I imagine she was asleep the second she got to her room.

We were on the front veranda of the house, where it was a little cooler. We immediately started fanning the granddaughter and cooling her forehead with the wet cloth. She seemed in a bad way. Her breathing was strange, her fever was high, her eyes were closed, and her moans were pathetic. We devised a system where one would hold the wet cloth and the other fan air through it to get some cool air moving around her mouth and head.

It doesn't sound like much work, but the anxiety of the situation, the sultry evening, the exertion to get water, rinse the cloth, and constantly wave the fan, caused us both to tire quickly. I appreciated the grandmother and her constant care for the last several days more than ever.

There was an old wind-up clock on the porch, and at around 11:00 p.m. we realized we must do something different to make it through the night, as we were both very tired. My companion again came up with an idea, "Why don't we take turns?" he said. "You sleep for an hour while I care for her, then I'll wake you and you care for her an hour while I sleep, then you wake me and so on. At least we'll get through the night that way."

"Fine," I said. "Who should start?"

"I'll start," he replied. "You rest first." So I lay down, and he started caring for her alone. At midnight he woke me and I fanned with one hand and sponged her forehead with the other until 1:00 a.m., then I woke him. He woke me at 2:00 a.m. and I again woke him at 3:00 a.m. I knew he would wake me for my next turn at 4:00 a.m. Even though I was very tired, I knew this was fair.

The next thing I remember is sunlight streaming into my eyes. I awakened, jumped up, and said, "What time is it?"

"It's six o'clock," my companion replied.

"Six o'clock! You were supposed to get me up at four o'clock! Why didn't you wake me?" I asked.

He had a broad smile on his face, which was intensified by the bright rays of the early morning sun. That smile seemed to come from deep within his soul and encompassed his whole being as he replied, "Oh, you looked so tired. I decided to let you sleep. It's my present to you. Merry Christmas!"

I couldn't say anything. I just looked at him in admiration and wondered, "Why don't I think of things like that or do things like that? My companion is a great man. God loves him. He stayed up for me. Why am I so weak?" I thought of the Savior coming to His sleeping disciples and asking, "Could ye not watch with me one hour?" (Matthew 26:40.) The Savior stayed up most of the night performing the greatest work of love in the world, while those close to Him slept. Yet, as He returned again and saw them sleeping, He merely looked at them and quietly said, "Sleep on."

I felt ashamed, yet I also felt happy as I could see the joy in my companion's face. He had such a radiant smile-it was almost angelic!

Sometime during those early morning hours, the girl's semi-delirious moaning ceased, her fever broke, and before long we could tell the crisis had passed. She stirred and opened her eyes. While she was still very weak, we knew she would be all right. We waited till midmorning, then knocked on the door to wake the grandmother. She answered the knock quickly, possibly expecting the worst. As she came out on the porch, her granddaughter was sitting up. We were all smiles as we said in unison, "Merry Christmas!" It was good to have her and her granddaughter both feeling so much better. We had many other things to do, so we left and went about our regular missionary activities. It was a wonderful way to start Christmas Day.

Over time I largely forgot about this experience. Many years later, however, I was asked to speak at the funeral for this faithful Tongan brother. He had lived a good life and had died of cancer. While speaking in Tongan, I suddenly received a flash of understanding which, while totally unsolicited, made a deep and clear impression on me. I emphasize that this was not a vision, revelation, or dream, but rather a feeling and an understanding wherein I sensed the following:

I saw a beautiful place with throngs of people anxiously waiting to get to a certain area. There was no pushing or shoving but rather a respectful and excited pressing forward to this particular place.

I saw a young man in the throng smiling and patiently moving along with the others. Suddenly his name was called, and someone in authority came, took him by the arm, and led him past the waiting crowds directly to the desired area. His guide said a few words to someone who seemed to control the entrance, and this person smiled and ushered the young man through the entrance.

Even though there were huge numbers of people waiting, everyone seemed to be aware of what had happened. People turned to one another and began to comment, not in anger or jealousy but rather in wonder and happiness for the young man who had gotten to that desirable place so quickly.

The guide came back and began waiting patiently with the throngs of people. Someone leaned over and asked him about the young man. The guide whispered something to him and immediately the questioner's face lit up with a deep smile. He nodded his head approvingly and turned and told his neighbor. Almost instantly everyone seemed to know the answer. I strained to understand and finally heard someone say, "Oh, he let his companion sleep when he was very tired."

I offer no more explanation than what I have related.I learned that deeds of sacrifice, deeds of selflessness and honesty, deeds of effort in sincerely trying to help others, especially at the expense of one's own comfort, never go unnoticed by the powers of heaven.
