John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

50

A Different Way of Thinking

In Ha'apai everyone worked hard. There was no welfare as we know it today from either church or state. Everyone helped whoever needed help, but this was done almost exclusively through the family. The term kainga (family) means a much broader, extended family than we usually think of. Everyone seemed to be related to everyone else and often claimed the privileges of that relationship. Of course, to claim the privileges on one side meant you were obligated to perform the duties on the other side, so there was a wonderful balance to the system. The thought of having someone just give you something was foreign to everyone. You worked for what you got, and you worked for what you gave to others as well.

Life was hard in one sense, yet fairly easy in another. I remember going to another island one time in our small sailboat with several men. Just before we got to the opening in the reef, we noticed a movement under some canvas at the front of the boat. It turned out to be the ten-year-old son of one of the men on the boat who had stowed away, hoping to come with us. I recalled trying to do the same (only in a car) as a young child and now felt some admiration for this young fellow for being so quiet for so long. There was certainly no turning back now as we were a long way from shore. I wasn't sure what his father would do.

Imagine my concern when the father picked the boy up, scolded him, and told him he couldn't miss school. He told him it was wrong to stow away, spanked him once, and then threw him into the ocean and yelled, "Now swim home and hurry up about it."

I tried to protest that it was a long way to shore, and he was a very small boy, but the father would hear nothing of it. "How will they learn if you give in?" he said. I mentioned that there could be cramps or dangerous fish and that we could go back if he wished. He steadfastly held course and didn't even look back as he said, "He'll be just fine, don't worry."

I did worry, but when we returned a few days later, the first person to greet us was this young boy. He was all smiles, especially for his dad, as I'm sure he was proud to show him he had made it. The father only briefly winked to me but said nothing. I should have learned more from this, I suppose, but it is hard for some of us palangis to not give in more.

On our sailboat I forbade ever carrying a harpoon. I explained that we were fishing or hunting for men, not whales. We often saw whales and sometimes went right among them and got very close to them, but we never chased or hurt them. In return, we were never chased, hurt, or even threatened by a whale. Whales are beautiful mammals. My respect for God's handiwork in the seas increased greatly.

Many of the island men did hunt whales-not for the blubber, but for the meat. When they harpooned one, it started a wild ride until the whale eventually tired and came to the surface. They would then finish it with a killer stick, a harpoon with a long, spearlike end. When the whale quit struggling, they would quickly dive in and try to sew up its mouth so it wouldn't swallow too much water and sink. They would then raise a flag as a signal, and someone with a motorboat would come out and haul the whale in. It hurt me when I saw a whale being hauled in to the reef closest to shore. They are such magnificent creatures!

On the other hand, it was always a wild and happy time when someone caught a whale, which didn't happen often. They pulled it to the reef and started butchering it. They cut the blubber away to get to the meat, which was sold by the pound to the anxious islanders. After a few hours, when most of the meat was cut out, the owners complied with the government requirement to haul the remains beyond the reef for the sharks to finish the disposal process.

Whales are so large that most of the meat was either salted, dried, or both. Of course, a lot was cooked and eaten right then, but salting seemed to be the main means of preservation (although I learned from experience that that form of preservation was not always very good). To me, whale meat had a rather bland taste, more like beef than fish, but not much like either. I didn't like it and ate very little, except when there was no other option, such as when eating with a family.

I didn't learn any good whale recipes. In fact, I didn't learn any recipes at all, because the Saints wouldn't hear of me cooking my own meals. Food was always brought in, or I was asked to eat with other families. The same was true of washing and mending clothes, so I'm afraid I didn't become very self-reliant in those areas.

We wore short-sleeved white shirts, ties, and heavy-duty slacks. The native missionaries wore a tupenu and a ta'ovola (skirt with a woven sash) and went barefoot, but my first mission president told me I should always wear socks and at least sandals, so I did. Washing was done with strong lye soap and stones or corrugated washboards, so clothes wore out rapidly. The knees of my trousers always seemed worn. I had three or four patches on patches before I got out a new pair.

I remember when one of the sisters put a fourth patch over one knee, she told me she felt the trousers were so worn that I should get a new pair. They still looked fine to me, but when she said, "If you can't afford it, I and a few others will buy some cloth and sew you a new pair."I quickly got a new pair on my own.

I found that attitudes about clothing in Tonga at the time were much different from what they were back home.I remember talking to one of the wealthier men on the island who, though not a member, had donated a nice shirt to me. I thanked him for the shirt and commented that it was a nice, new shirt, but I seldom, if ever, saw him in new clothes. He asked me to sit down and talk for a bit. He told me he had plenty of means to buy new clothes, but explained, "If I wear new clothes, how do you think that would make the rest of the people feel? They would either try to get more new clothes, which they can't afford, or they would dislike me. I think both options are bad."

He then explained that even though he had the means, he felt that part of his duty to his people was to dress like they did so they would not be offended or jealous or try to do what wasn't really necessary. The people, though poor, were neat and clean, and he thought he should help with the tried-and-true theory: use it up, wear it out, make it do, or do without. I thought, "He is a good man."

This conversation had deep impact on me, and I tried to follow his theory and literally wore almost everything completely out. Ever since then it has been difficult for me to buy new shoes or clothes. Even when people suggest my suit is quite shiny or my shoes are pretty worn, I hesitate to replace them because I feel there is still wear in them.I guess I remember too well how happy people were in Ha'apai with old but clean clothes.

Sometimes we hear the phrase, "Clothes make the man (or woman)." In our society there may be some truth to it. But at that time in Ha'apai, the Tongans realized that clothes did not make the man or woman-character did. They were not fooled by the ways of the world and realized that no amount of finery-clothes, makeup, rings, or jewelry-could compensate for something that wasn't actually there.

It made me think of the account in 3 Nephi 11:8 where the Savior, the greatest of all, appeared to the Nephites wearing a simple white robe. I suspect we ought to get used to simple clothing, as it appears to be the way of life after this one.

There were many other impressions made on my mind in those days. I remember coming back from a preaching tour and arriving in Pangai just at sunset. There were some people at the wharf and others on shore waiting. We got the boat tied up, and I went to our house. I put my things away and heard a quiet tapping. One of the neighbor ladies whispered that there was hot food and drink waiting for me at her home. I was hungry and thirsty, so I went to eat.

As we ate, I asked, "We have been gone a long time.Your husband was in the boat with us. Why weren't you at the wharf to meet us?"

She said, "Elder Groberg, listen carefully. You have much to learn. There are good reasons for some people to be at the wharf to meet you, but remember that people generally fall in three classes.

"There are those who will be at the wharf with broad smiles to meet you. If you do not know them well, beware of them, for they may take advantage of you. Then there are those who wait on the shore. They may help you if you ask, but often they are just looking for a chance to make money. Then there are those who stay home and cook a good meal for you to eat. They are your true friends. Many will appear to want to help, but few will actually be found helping. Trust them the most."

It may not be too profound, but it made a deep impression on me. I have found it to be largely true. Friendship or loyalty can only be measured by what we do for others, or what they do for us, not by what is offered only. Jesus not only offered his life as a ransom for all but also gave it.

I remember being very hungry at one time and being given a banana to eat. I peeled it and started to eat while standing. Someone quickly asked me to sit down. I did, and later asked why. They explained that in Tongan culture one of the worst breaches of etiquette was kaitu'u (to eat while standing). The idea is that food is from God and is often fixed by others after much effort. The Tongans feel that to show respect to God and to the preparers, we should take the time to sit down and enjoy the food. If we are in such a hurry that we feel we must eat standing-or as we say, "eat on the run"-then according to their customs, we shouldn't eat. In other words, if we haven't time to show respect and enjoy the food, we aren't worthy of it. I suspect there are some health overtones here as well. That Tongan custom is at the other extreme of our "fast food" concept, which seems such a part of Western culture. I grew up in a large family, and I learned to eat fast, more out of self-preservation than anything, so I have appreciated the ameliorating influence of this Tongan custom about food and eating.

In Western cultures we give offense if we burp during or following a nice meal. In Tonga, at least back then, you showed respect or appreciation for the meal by burping. That was the sign that it was good and you enjoyed it. Some say the louder and longer the burp, the greater the show of appreciation, although I never found that to be the case. A simple heartfelt (stomachfelt?) burp did the job nicely.

Some of the things Tongans valued most were grace and loyalty, usually expressed in singing, dancing, and speaking. They were great orators, dancers, and singers. Many have said that Tongans are born with perfect pitch, graceful movements, and silver tongues. I doubt that, but they were born into a society where they grew up learning those things. Both men and women danced, sang, and even preached with the same vigor.

I often watched laka laka (line dancing) practice, performed by residents of a particular village where literally the whole population participated. I saw small children and teenagers imitating the graceful movements of their parents. Behind the line of active dancers was a group of singers made up of older people, nursing mothers, or others who for whatever reason were not dancing, at least at that time.

I looked at those small children and even the nursing infants and realized that from their earliest days they were hearing music, harmony, and rhythm, and watching and participating in graceful dance movements-it just became part of them. Under those circumstances, you could say it did come naturally or at least was second nature.

Group dancing and singing like this laka laka was an all-community event. Stories were told and praise given through this medium.

I remember late one evening seeing a mother dancing gracefully, and singing beautifully with a village group. Her whole body was swaying in perfect coordination. One arm was following exactly the outlined routine, fingers curling, then extending in a symphony of beauty that would be hard to duplicate. Her other arm was cradling a newborn infant, who was nursing with closed eyes and bearing a look of perfect contentment.

As I watched for a few moments, I realized where those Tongans got their natural instinct for music and graceful movements, and how loyalty to family and community were part and parcel of living. There is much to learn from this island people.
