John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

51

The Governor

I had not been in Ha'apai very long when people started asking if I had met the governor. I had not met him and actually was a little afraid to do so. I had been told he was a fine man but, along with others, was quite anti-Mormon. I had seen him from a distance a few times and noticed that one of his legs was somewhat withered, so he walked with a limp.

Before long it became evident that I would have to eventually meet and talk to him, so I made an appointment and decided to get it over with. I arrived in the best clothes I had. As I met him, I realized how much he outshined me in his brilliant white outfit with brass buttons, and elaborate ta'ovola, and his many well-dressed aides who moved quickly at his slightest request.

I was duly impressed and somewhat intimidated by the finery of the setting and the formality of all that went on. Fortunately, over and above all of that, I had a feeling that he was basically a good man and that I liked him. I knew that feeling came from God, and I was grateful for it.

He asked me to be seated and soon had his servants bringing biscuits and drinks. He said, "I am having tea, but you'd better not as I am sure someone would report you." Though he said it rather matter-of-factly, I sensed a slight smile.He asked the servants to bring me orange juice. Now I knew I was going to like him. The initial "ice" of formality was broken.

We visited quite easily for a long time. That first meeting turned into a continuous series of conversations, during which I felt I had been given a good friend. Even though he disagreed with the Church and could even in some ways be considered anti-Mormon, he was kind and helpful to me.

He often called me over "just to visit." He was very pro-Methodist and quite open about being opposed to the proselyting program of the Mormon Church. His opposition was not based on doctrine but on history. He explained to me that the first Wesleyan (Methodist) missionaries to arrive in Tonga were killed by the natives, then the next missionaries were run out, and others suffered a great deal before they finally got a foothold. He felt that "his" church had paid the price, and they ought to get the rewards. He felt we were sort of interlopers; as he said, "You come in and take away our sheep, and what price have you paid?"

I explained that several of our missionaries had died in Tonga, not from being killed but from illness. I mainly tried to explain that with religion, it isn't a question of finder's rights but rather a question of truth.

Almost every time I would approach an issue from a doctrinal or scriptural point of view, he would counter with a historical fact, and since he was so much smarter in history than I was, I didn't get very far. I often bore my testimony, but it didn't seem to affect him much.

He was a good teacher, and I almost felt like I was taking an advanced Tongan history class. During one of our conversations, he brought up a historical situation that I was not familiar with. When he saw I didn't know much about it, he said, "If you don't know history, you don't know much." For some reason that triggered a thought, and I responded, "I know more about the history of your forefathers than you will ever know!"

That got his attention. He asked what I meant and how I knew anything about his forefathers. Up to that point I hadn't said much because I didn't know much about the history of the first kings in Tonga or the first missionaries, or the interesting interaction between them that he had so carefully explained to me.

I told him about the Book of Mormon and explained some of the history of the real "first kings" of the Tongans. It turned out that someone had given him a copy of the Book of Mormon years before, but he had never read it and had no idea what it was about as it was a deluxe gift-type book, and he didn't want to get it dirty, so I gave him another "working copy" and we started studying it together.

We spent many evenings, sometimes long into the night, reading and discussing the Book of Mormon. His advisors sometimes got a little perturbed and came in and said, "We must go over this case or this bill or this proposal with you now. We have a court date tomorrow." I tried to leave, but nearly always he would tell them, "Can't you see I am talking with the Mormon missionary? Leave me alone. I'll get to those things when I am through here."

He gave me no quarter and argued about some of the things we read. I tried not to argue back but bear my testimony and explain that the book speaks for itself. He was a good student of culture and history, and every once in a while he would acknowledge, "Yes that makes sense. That's probably right."

While he was friendly to me, I felt he was quite hard on the Church. He defined this opposition as being "correct" and didn't allow us any extra privileges. For instance, he had an official government boat, but he wouldn't allow us, as missionaries, to ride on it, since it was only for official government use. When I told him I noticed some of the preachers from his church riding on it, he just changed the subject.

The captain of his launch also felt it was unfair not to allow us to ride, so when he knew the government boat was going someplace we wanted to go, this captain would leave the wharf and send word to tell us to be down the island a ways. He would pull in close to the shore there, and we would paddle out in a canoe, get on board, and go with him. Before long people told the governor what was happening, and the captain got reprimanded and warned severely. The governor never said anything to me about this, so we continued to ride on the boat occasionally. Our schedule seldom coincided with the government boat schedule, but when they went to distant islands, we often tried to go with them.

As unofficial passengers on these trips, we had many hours, even days, to talk to the captain. He asked us, "Why do they hate you so much?" I told him I didn't know, but maybe if I explained to him what we believed, he could see for himself what they didn't like. He agreed so we gave him all the discussions and used those hours of travel to answer his questions. Eventually he began to believe and asked us to visit him and his family in his home. The word got around that he was pretty friendly with the Mormons, and he was warned again to stop visiting with us, but he continued.

We baptized the captain and his family one Saturday and confirmed them members on Sunday. Monday when he went to work, there was a package containing his personal belongings and a note saying he was fired and not to come to work anymore. He told me about this and said he felt it was coming, but it did not matter as he now had the truth, and with God on his side, he would be okay.

I told the governor how unfair I thought his firing of the captain was, and he basically told me to mind my own business, so we dropped it. In some ways I thought the governor was a hard man, but I still felt he was basically a good man. We maintained our friendship. The captain struggled for a while, but remained faithful, eventually got another job, and things worked out well for him.

At that time, nearly everyone we baptized remained faithful-mainly because there was so much pressure against the Church that there was no turning back once you made the commitment. Some think it is great today to not have so much persecution against the Church, and I suppose it is. But I can see the other side, such as having so many "less-active" now, whereas back then, there were virtually none. I have a feeling that everyone must endure testing or "persecution" sometime, someway, in their life, either before baptism or after or both. Only the faithful will make it, and I guess it does not matter a lot when that persecution or test comes. What does matter is that we remain faithful.

In those days when the government passed laws, they would disseminate them by sending them to each governor, who in turn would take his boat and go around to the different islands and read the laws to the people. It was like the old town-crier system. Each district and each little village had a pule fakavahe (district officer) and pule fakakolo (town officer) who called the people together for the governor and who was expected to enforce the laws.

Not long after firing the captain, the governor's boat broke down. It was bad timing for him as he had just received a set of new laws from the palace and needed to read them right away on the various islands under his governorship. He called me over and asked if he could use our Church launch to go around and read these laws.I reminded him how he hadn't let us ride his boat, how he chastised the captain when we rode with him, and how he had fired the captain when he joined the Church. "Yes, I know, I'm sorry," he said. "That wasn't my doing; those were directions from above me."

I assumed he was telling the truth, and I still had a good feeling towards him but nevertheless said, "No, the boat is strictly for Church work, I am sorry, but those are my instructions," which was true. I left his office and returned home feeling a little sorry for the governor, but also a little like justice had been served.

I felt uncomfortable that evening. As I said my prayers, I wondered what kind of bread I was casting on the water. I seemed to hear the Savior talking about returning good for evil, but I thought, "Who am I to change the policy?" I couldn't figure out why I continued to feel uncomfortable. The whole situation smacked so perfectly of poetic justice. Still, I didn't sleep well that night.

Fortunately, the next day he sent for me again and said, "Look, I'm desperate. I've got to get these laws out. I'll lose my job, and if they assign someone else up here, that will be worse for you than anything. At least we're friends. Can't you please make an exception? I'll pay whatever you ask."

I didn't think I should make an exception, but I felt I had better do some explaining. As I started to explain the policy, a flood of light came to my mind, and I knew exactly what to say, "Look, your Honor, I'll make you a deal. The boat has to be used for Church work. I can't rent it out.But just now I have decided to make a preaching tour to the very islands you want to go to, and you can come along. You can't pay rent in money, so here's what the rent will be: when we get to the islands, you call all the people together and tell them that there is a lot of business and they have to stay for two hours, instead of the normal one hour. Tell them the first hour will be the faifono (reading of the new laws), but then they must stay another hour and listen to the Mormon missionary, because it is his boat and you must comply with his regulations. Tell them if they don't stay and listen, I won't take you to the next island and you will be in trouble." He swallowed hard, but I suppose because he had no other choice and was desperate to read the laws, he agreed.

We left the next morning for the first island. Through the town officer, the governor called all the people together and told them exactly what we had agreed. When he finished his hour, he repeated, "Now it's the Mormon missionary's hour. None of you leave, and I'm not leaving either." I got up and explained what I felt were the most important principles of the gospel. I bore testimony of the Savior, of Joseph Smith, of the Book of Mormon, and of living prophets and priesthood authority.

I sensed that some people were angry and not willing to listen, but they stayed. Others, however, listened intently. While we didn't baptize anyone on that trip, many members have since told me that they probably never would have listened to the missionaries had it not been for that introduction. The Lord does move in mysterious ways.

We continued our rounds, and on island after island the governor, as well as the people, sat through the preaching. He set a good example and kept his word. We concluded with a big feast on each island. We basically ate the same type of food over and over and never tired of it as we were hungry each time. I realized that we, including the governor, were also having a spiritual feast and hearing the same principles and testimonies over and over and not tiring of them either, because we hungered spiritually each time.

Sometimes we forget that the basic spiritual food we need is composed of the first principles and ordinances of the gospel-faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ; repentance through Him; baptism by His authority; the gift of the Holy Ghost to testify of Him; and enduring faithfully in Him to the end of our lives. These are the most important things, just as taro, rice, potatoes, or bread sustain life and also allow us to enjoy some of the desserts, which may be pleasant but which without the nutrition of the basics have no power to sustain life on their own, physically or spiritually.

We had only visited a few islands when the government sent up another boat from Nuku'alofa for the governor to use. I don't know if they found out what was happening or just had an extra boat. The governor didn't say anything and I never asked him. We had, however, been to several of the most difficult islands, and I felt we had been able to do things we could not have done any other way.

After this trip with the governor, I noticed our conversations became a little less frequent, but also a little deeper. He had heard truth enough times that he was wondering. Soon after this, he told me he had diabetes quite badly and knew he was dying.

He came close a time or two to acknowledging his understanding but could never quite make it all the way. He did tell me he felt the Book of Mormon was the correct history of his forebears. One time he told me that he would be fired immediately if he ever joined the Mormons or even showed too much sympathy for them. He felt for his health's sake and for his family's sake, and even for tradition's sake, he must stay where he was.

It was interesting how the roles changed during the year and a half that I knew him. I first came to his office scared and overwhelmed with his dignity and power. He was an official who could grant or withhold favors, and I was the outsider wondering what to do. But as I prepared to leave Ha'apai, I had a good friend. We talked openly and with a degree of friendliness that belied the big difference in age.

At times he in effect asked for help to understand his feelings and to have the strength to do what he ought to do. I pleaded with him to act on what I felt he knew was true, but he was always the governor and had the pride of generations of fierce warriors and rulers in his veins. He never took additional steps, but when I left Ha'apai, I had a good, loving feeling toward him. I believe that feeling was mutual.

He died shortly after I left Ha'apai. I feel sure he at least had a testimony of the Book of Mormon. He never would admit it publicly but told me on more than one occasion that Tongans were descendants of Israel and this was the record of their forefathers. It was hard for him to acknowledge things publicly, but he was still a good man and a good friend. I wish I could have helped him more. Maybe I still can. I hope someone is. I sometimes wonder how they get around in the hereafter. I'd love to go on another law-reading-preaching circuit with him sometime.
