John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

52

"The Best £10 I Ever Spent"

We continued working hard each day and always felt there was more to do than hours to do it in. It is a good feeling to be busily engaged in important work. One evening I received a telegram from the mission president stating that he would be staying overnight in Ha'apai on his way to Vava'u and he needed to hold a Church disciplinary council for one of our prominent members. He asked me to contact this man, tell him of the charges, and ask him to be present with any witnesses he wanted on the designated evening.

A few days later, we met the mission president and one of his counselors at the wharf and helped them get settled in the guest house. After supper we all went to the chapel where he was to hold the disciplinary council. He did not ask me or his counselor to take part, but decided to handle it by himself. I asked no questions as I knew he was in charge.

There was a fair amount of excitement about this case as the person involved was well known and basically everyone knew what was going on. It was next to impossible to keep any event like this from both the members and nonmembers. In these small islands, it seems that everyone knows everything about everyone else.

We all waited outside and visited with the many people who were milling around the chapel that evening. Occasionally the mission president would ask someone to come in and tell what they knew about the situation. Speculation was abundant. The man in question was in the chapel for a long time with the mission president. Finally the woman involved went in, and we felt it would soon be over. We were all aware of the charges and what had actually taken place.

After what seemed like forever, the door opened and the mission president, the man, the woman, and a couple of others came out. I asked what had happened because I needed to know what to do with this man.

I was shocked, as was everyone else, when the mission president said I could use him any way I wished as he had been found "not guilty." I asked the president why, and he replied, "There was insufficient evidence. You probably should leave him and this girl and the whole situation alone. I have handled it and, so as far as I'm concerned, it's over."

I couldn't figure out what had happened, because the evidence seemed so clear. I was afraid this would be a setback to the forward momentum in terms of proper living that was occurring in Ha'apai. However, since he was the mission president and his instructions were very clear, I decided not to worry about it and go on about my duties. I was confident the Lord would continue to help us.

The mission president left for Vava'u the next morning. Almost immediately after he left, several people came and told me what had happened. It seems this man knew he was guilty, as did everyone else, so he went around and pleaded with people to not testify against him. The girl involved came from a poor family, and he gave her £10 (about $50, which was a large sum then) if she would reverse her testimony and say he was innocent. She did and he was not disciplined, at least not by that council.

The man made the somewhat boastful comment, "That was the best ten pounds I ever spent." He knew he was guilty and knew that everyone else knew he was guilty, and he felt he had really "put one over" on the mission president.

Several people came to me and said, "He can fool a palangi, but he can't fool us. Why don't you talk to the president and tell him what happened?" I told them the mission president had asked me to leave it alone, so that was what I was going to do.

"But he can't just get away with it," they cried.

"Of course he can't," I responded. "God is the ultimate judge. He knows the truth. This man knows the truth. He is trying to deceive the Lord. He will not be successful. You can fool other people, but you can't fool God. Watch him and learn a great lesson. You cannot lie and be successful, at least not in God's ways, and those are the only ways that count." So everyone dropped it because I asked them to, as I had been instructed. It did not seem to affect our forward progress, in fact, it probably helped because the deception was so blatant.

I watched that man, not only for the balance of my time in Ha'apai but also later as I served as mission president, then Regional Representative, then as a General Authority. He eventually moved from Ha'apai and then left Tonga altogether.

He stayed active in the sense of coming to meetings but never was able to do much in the Church or in a profession. He seemed so ca-pable, but each time he was about to accomplish something, a strange twist would occur, things would fall apart, and he'd be right back where he started. It was as though there was a lid above him that he kept hitting against and above which he could not rise.

We talked occasionally, but he refused to acknowledge his problems as having any other cause than "bad luck" or "someone else interfering." I tried from time to time to explain that it was not "bad luck" but his own bad performance that was at the root of his problems.

"You can't try to cheat God and still think straight," I told him. I tried to help him understand that his bad performance was not only what he did first but possibly even more his refusal to properly repent from it.I told him, "We all make mistakes, but we should not compound those mistakes by trying to hide them. The greatest mistake any of us make is to not repent and acknowledge our errors to God, to ourselves, and to others when necessary."

Some people look upon repentance as a negative thing or something used only when we do wrong things. I remember a story I heard of a Mia Maid teacher who asked her students what the first step of repentance was. One of the girls on the front row quickly responded, "The first thing you do is commit sin, so you have something to repent of." I suspect a lot of people have that feeling, and hence they look upon their leaders' constant call to repent as a negative, judgmental call. The fact is, we all do wrong things and need to repent from our negative actions. But if the celestial kingdom is our goal, and all we do is cancel out our negative behavior through repentance, how will we ever make our goal?

I tried to explain to him that repentance is improvement. It is positive change. It is coming closer to God.I drew the following chart.

Ttt

I told him that if we only use repentance to go from negative behavior back to point zero, we're still a long way from our goal. He once asked me, "Are you telling me we can repent from good things?" I responded, "Yes, if we can do them better. If we are doing anything either good or bad, and can improve, we need to do so. That is repentance. The gift of repentance comes from God, and He is just as anxious to help us improve on the positive side of the equation as He is to get us out of Satan's side."

He still refused to accept my counsel and said I was "judging." I tried to explain that this was not true and that by asking people to repent we are just inviting people to improve their lives, no matter where they are. It is easy to tell we still have improvement to make, for we are still here in mortality. Those who feel they don't need to repent, just don't understand. To say we don't need to repent is to say we are perfect, and that isn't true and won't be true until we have repented fully. We can never cover sin, only repent of it. There is no other way of getting rid of it.

He listened and thought for a while, but finally repeated again that he had been cleared by the mission president so I should "leave him alone."

He was never successful in anything. Right to the end of his life, he felt he had fooled someone, not realizing he had only fooled himself. There were times when he seemed almost ready to open up and acknowledge the truth, but he never quite got around to it and eventually he passed away. I imagine he is in the process of "getting around to it" now and realizes that you can't fool God. I was not available to attend his funeral, but as I heard about it, I thought what a sad underutilization of talent this man's life had become. That old devil called pride seemed to have carried off another victim.

All meaningful progress is based on honest repentance. The more sincere the repentance, the greater the progress made. As I thought of his vastly underutilized life, I thought of the scriptures that tell us we are to preach nothing but repentance to this generation (for example, see D&C 6:9; 11:9).

I guess I wasn't too effective, for as far as I know, he left this life never acknowledging the real problem. I hope he has by now. I have often felt that his statement, "That was the best ten pounds I ever spent," should be, and maybe now is, "That was the worst ten pounds I ever spent."
