John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

53

Baby-sitting and Other Activities

The Queen of Tonga had two sons. The oldest, Tungi, was the crown prince. He and his wife, Mata'aho, occasionally came to Ha'apai and stayed in the royal summer home by the harbor. Normally they were on vacation retreat and stayed about a fortnight (two weeks).

When they heard there was a palangi missionary in Ha'apai, they invited me over to visit. They were very kind, helpful, and supportive, and I enjoyed visiting with them. We eventually became good friends and had many meals and discussions together.

Sometimes they asked me to help with their children. I didn't really baby-sit in the sense of feeding them or getting them ready for bed, because they had servants who did that. But I played games, read stories, and generally entertained them several times when their parents went out for various functions.

Princess Mata'aho jokingly told me that there is no "free lunch," so reading stories to her children was how I paid for the meals they gave me. I became quite attached to their lovely children, particularly the two oldest, Tupouto'a (now the crown prince) and Pilolevu (the king's oldest daughter).

Nine years later, on the death of his mother, Tungi became King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV and, of course, Mata'aho became the queen. Tupouto'a and Pilolevu have grown, and Pilolevu now has four children of her own. We have maintained a good friendship throughout the years.

I remember once telling them the story of "Goldilocks and the Three Bears." I had told it many times before, but this particular time Pilolevu stopped me at a certain place and said, "That isn't right."

"What do you mean it isn't right? I'm the one telling the story."

She surprised me by saying, "I know that isn't right because that's not the way you told it yesterday! Here's how it should go . . ." She then repeated almost word for word what I had said the day before.

I thought, "She's a sharp girl! These are smart children! I'd better write things down so I tell them the same way each time." It was a fun association and has been helpful to all of us on many occasions over the years. Their kindness to me, as all kindnesses shown to anyone, will never go unnoticed or unrewarded by the powers of heaven.

Once the mission president sent me a local missionary who had been dubbed as lazy. He requested that I try to use him in the school or someplace where he didn't have to do much, and see if I could salvage his mission. I came to like this young man, who seemed to want to try but tired easily and was short of energy. He worked as well as he could and helped some in the school.

After a few months, I received a note that he should be transferred to another district. He cried and said he didn't want to go, but was faithful and obedient and left for his new assignment. I'll never forget the look in his yellowish eyes as he bid me farewell and clearly said, "I'll see you in heaven." He died of yellow jaundice two months after leaving Ha'apai. Regular health care was not very advanced at that time. How glad I was in this particular case that the Lord never allowed the term lazy to cross my mind!

We had very little in Ha'apai. There were stores, but their shelves were mostly bare. Whenever we got a package from home or from mission headquarters, we untied the string, undid the various knots, and wound it into a ball for future use. We never considered cutting the string or tearing the wrapping. The brown paper was always carefully taken off, folded, and saved for future use. There were no magazines or newspapers, and every scrap of anything that looked like it might be useful was saved.

I remember watching young children having great fun with a stick and some rocks or a coconut shell, which they pushed through the dirt and sand. If they ever got a can or a bottle to push around, they squealed with delight as though they had received the latest toy craze. They laughed and ran and pushed and smiled in such heartfelt glee that I wondered if we, with our doll houses and computer games, can even come close to their joy.

In Ha'apai much of the tithing and fast offerings was paid "in kind," i.e., coconuts or chickens or pigs or ufi. Some was paid in coin also, and we tried to sell what produce we received for coin. It took considerable time to account for everything paid as tithing, fast offerings, budget, and building funds. We had very little problem with stealing, but still we generally took the money to the post office the Monday after we received it.

One evening we returned quietly and unexpectedly and found one of the older students rifling the tithing and fast offerings funds. It was a shock to me. He put it all back and I assigned one of the good schoolteachers to work with him. He became a model student and, as far as I know, overcame that terrible problem of taking things that weren't his. How grateful I was for the teacher who willingly took the challenge and saved a boy.

I had many opportunities to be involved in a variety of activities, from legal work to real estate negotiations to building supervisor. At various times I wrote home:

"The mission president can't come and has asked me to be his official representative for the ground-breaking ceremony next Tuesday. It will be a big occasion as the whole island will be there. The mission president has also given me the money and the authority to make a deal on some other land so I am going to get some practical real estate business experience. I like that kind of work. Land is very valuable, even on these remote islands, especially if more than one person wants it. There are many factors to be taken into consideration, but the main one is fairness.

"I think that I have been blessed with much valuable experience here and I feel that the times that weren't so pleasant have been some of the most valuable.

"As the work gets harder and more prolonged, more and more of the people I trusted fall out until there are very few whom I can really rely on. But they are the very best. The business of leading in the Church is really hard at times."

Later I wrote:

"One of the Tongan missionaries jumped on an old Ford tractor without permission and started to bring things from the wharf to the Church for the building project. It has a hydraulic lift with a scoop in the front, which someone jumped in and was hoisted up to pick some coconuts to drink. We were eating when all of a sudden we heard a cry from about a block away. I jumped up and ran down there as fast as I could, and sure enough there had been an accident. The scoop had come loose and dropped the fellow that was riding in it and he had been run over by the tractor. The driver, who had tried to get out of his way, had run into a store and torn off part of the veranda that had fallen on him and knocked him out. The driver was just stunned and shocked, but the other fellow looked in pretty bad shape. Accidents are sure unpleasant things. I thought that the fellow who had been run over was dead, as he looked pretty broken up and bloody, but we rushed him to the hospital where he first gained consciousness and asked for administration and was quite miraculously found to be free from any serious breaks or fractures, only bad bruises. It turned out that the driver had no license, so he will have to go to court. I, being the official Church representative in Ha'apai, will have to handle the Church's case. I have also had to make the adjustments for the damages done to the store and have really had a good experience out of it all. These two new missionaries that just arrived bring the total up to 40 missionaries in the district, and it is a full-time job looking after them."

The Royal Family

Queen Salote in the center, Prince Tungi and Princess Mata'aho on the left, and Prince Tu'ipelehake and Princess Melenaite on the right
