John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

54

Emotions at Sea

There is a tremendous amount of emotion involved whenever you deal with the sea or with ocean travel. I remember one day assigning a group of seven priesthood brethren to go to a small island and get some special sand for some building we were doing. I stayed home as I had to teach school. The day started out fine, but by afternoon it became very stormy. About the time the boat was due back, a huge storm hit. The winds shrieked, the clouds thickened, and darkness hid the sun. Six of the seven men were married, and their wives and families were very concerned.

I went to the shore with the wives and mothers and other family members to see if we could see the men, but we could see nothing. The weather seemed to be getting worse, and the boat was long overdue. We looked and listened so hard our eyes and ears actually hurt, but despite all our efforts and prayers, nothing happened. The emotions I felt from those women and children were indescribable. I tried to comfort and encourage them.

Another hour or two went by, and still no boat. Some were resigned to the worst; others maintained hope; all prayed fervently. Seldom did boats come in after dark, and it was now pitch black and hard to see anything. Some suggested that we return home, but most said they would stay through the night. I felt I should stay. I was the one who had asked them to go.

I can't fully describe the sinking feeling of helplessness I had.It was as though I was hollow inside. Even though nothing was said, I sensed the feeling among some of those women: "You're God's servant. If there was danger, why did you ask them to go?" I didn't know what would happen but tried to calm and assure them that all would be well. I prayed fervently and felt a heavy responsibility. Had I acted rashly? I hoped not. I pleaded with God not to hurt those families for my mistakes. I wished I had gone with them. I was very torn emotionally, but eventually, after deep wrestling of the spirit, I began to feel a peace that things would be okay.

For that whole night, we jumped at every unusual sound as a possibility of hope, only to have it fade away to nothing. Finally towards morning a distant shout was heard. It was a long way off, but every ear strained and every person perked up. Several minutes passed . . . nothing. Then again a distant cry, "Oku 'ife'ae uafu?" (Where is the wharf?)

Everyone was up now-eyes peered into the darkness, hearts pounded in anticipation and love. A chorus of voices went up-some crying, others yelling, some almost hysterical, others calmly calling, "The wharf is over here!" Kerosene lanterns flickered brighter as wicks were raised and chimneys cleaned. Again a voice, somewhat closer now, "Oku 'ife'ae uafu?" Then came back and forth communication and identification. It was them-they were back! In the understatement of the year, their leader said, "We had a bit of a hard time getting back, but we have the sand for the Lord's chapel."

As the sailboat was tied to the wharf, the men came ashore and were greeted by their wives and other family members. I'm not sure I have ever felt a stronger feeling of love, faith fulfilled, and gratitude to God for His help. Needless to say, everyone was relieved at the close of that nearly all-night vigil.

I can relate to the all-night vigil in the final scene of the opera Madame Butterfly. Fortunately, this vigil in Ha'apai had a happier ending, but the emotions felt have something in common. I guess we need to experience those types of feelings to even glimpse what God might feel as so many of His loved ones seem so lost in the darkness of evil. I can understand a little the feeling in the scripture that says, "How great is his joy in the soul that repenteth" (comes out of darkness and returns back home) (D&C 18:13). I felt this great joy in Pangai when husbands and sons came out of the dark into the arms of their loved ones and returned home safely.

Emotions are powerful things, and deep feelings are not soon forgotten. I learned that emotions need to be directed in the right way, but anyone who says he needs to go outside of religion to express his emotions has never felt the full power of true faith and pure love for God that is completely within religion. It is all-encompassing.
