John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

55

"Tahi Kula"

One day I woke to the cry, "Tahi kula, tahi kula" ("Red tide, red tide"). I had never heard this before and wondered what it meant. One of the islands in Ha'apai is a fairly active volcano, and earth tremors were a common occurrence. Some of the tremors were quite strong, but most were mild. The people explained to me that once in a while a seismic movement sucks the tide way out (red tide), and everyone runs to the shore. For the islanders, a red tide is a food hunter's paradise as the tide goes out so fast and so far that it leaves pools of water full of fish and other sea life ready for the grabbing.

I noticed, however, that no one went out very far. I was told that if they went out too far, they might get caught, because when the tide comes in, it does so very rapidly. I was amazed at the discipline I observed: they simply did not go beyond a certain point no matter how tempting the next pool was. I was also amazed at how quickly the tide came roaring in and realized that had they not stayed close to shore, some would surely have been lost. The young people stayed close to their mothers and other family members, and I realized again what a different way of thinking was being inculcated into them because of the circumstances of their upbringing.

Many times I was reminded of the advantages and disadvantages of these rather small, close-knit societies where everyone knows everything about everyone else. One of the advantages was the almost total absence of crime, for if someone did something wrong everyone knew about it. Another plus was the feeling of loyalty to, and identity with, family and community. Another positive was the clear understanding of what was expected of you and exactly how you fit in. Everyone fit into the picture someway or another. Some liked it, some did not. I suppose all people have these same feelings to some degree.

One negative was the frustration felt by those whose personalities didn't seem to fit the mold they were placed in. Some felt very oppressed by everyone knowing everything about them. This group often desired to get away and be on their own.

Occasionally a Tongan would return to Ha'apai with tales of the outside world, of cars and big cities, of working and getting lots of money, and of living in places where people don't know you and even ignore you and leave you alone. To some that seemed terrifying, to others it seemed like paradise.

I suppose one of the reasons some Tongans have problems when they go to big cities is the lack of the close societal structure that is so effective in the islands and so lacking in big cities. To be nameless and unknown is foreign to their background, so gangs and other forms of false closeness loom large for some.

As I read the scriptures, the eventual society we are striving for appears to be much closer to the Tongan society I knew in the mid-50s than our aloof, secretive, everyone-do-their-own-thing society of big-city life in the 1990s. If God knows our thoughts, actions, and even the intents of our hearts (see Alma 18:32), which He does, then we ought to get used to being open in our dealings and not try to appear to be something we are not.

I can understand why Jesus spoke harshly against hypocrites, not only in His day but in all days. When any of us try to cover our sins, mask our vain ambitions, or exercise control, dominion, or compulsion on anyone in any degree of unrighteousness, including deceit in any way (see D&C 121:39-42), we have no chance of getting any real power, for true power comes only from God and is given based on faith and obedience, not on appearances or smooth talking. He wants us to have this power, but it is only available as we position our lives in perfect harmony with His commandments.

This positioning comes a little at a time. This "line upon line" process may appear to be frustrating and slow-at least Satan tries to convince us it is-but if we have faith (recognizing God's hand in our lives) and humility (willingness to acknowledge our errors and our need for help) and constantly repent (improve), we can adjust to that celestial society here and hereafter.Again, I feel that when this ideal is achieved, it will be closer to the Tongan model I knew than the models we seem to espouse today.

I felt so good as I heard the Tongans sing in such beauty and watched them dance with such joy and unity. I had the feeling that what we are striving for will contain more singing, dancing, grace, and loyalty than many of us are used to. Maybe they will feel more at home and these things will seem more natural to the Tongans-and to all Polynesians and others who have been raised under the circumstances I have mentioned.

The Tongan outlook on the human body was also interesting to me. Those born with deformities or mental problems were considered part of the overall society and accepted for what they were. They were generally treated with respect and loving care.

People's weaknesses (especially of the body) were accepted quite openly. There were plenty of sins committed, just as there are in any society, but I noted much less hypocrisy or attempted covering up of these sins among the Tongans. Some say the Polynesians generally are more lax morally than people in our western culture. I don't believe it. I feel that when all the truth comes out, which it will eventually, in these things the Tongans will compare very favorably to other cultures. My experience was that living God's moral laws had much more to do with the individual than with the culture.

The Tongans look upon the body not only as the housing of our spirits but also as a means of expressing gratitude to God for all he gives us. Thus, their skillful and beautiful dancing and singing, done with such grace and finesse, can at times become another testimony and means of praising God. They are also great orators and wonderful poets, and no Tongan is worth his salt who cannot quote several poems. Of course, some are much better than others.

Being heavy was considered a plus rather than a minus. I remember some friends asking me to go to a movie so I could interpret for them. The mission president had not said anything about not going, and the movies were high class then, so I went along with nearly everyone on the island.In those days going to a movie was a big event that seldom occurred. There was never a movie on Niuatoputapu, and I remember only this one in Ha'apai, which was shown outside with a generator for power and a sheet for a screen.

My friends were interested in this movie as they had heard it featured a lovely American movie star, who was supposed to be very beautiful. As the movie proceeded, they kept asking me where the beautiful lady was. I kept pointing her out, but they thought I had made a mistake. When the movie was about half over they finally accepted that she was the "beautiful" lady, but they felt deceived. They turned to me and said, "She's not beautiful. She's skinny!"

I tried to explain that in our society, this lady was the ideal model of desirability for American men. They were aghast. A rough translation of what they said is: "Surely American men are smarter than that. Surely they want a wife and not a doll! Surely they are smart enough to know that dolls are a 'dime a dozen,' but a good wife and mother is worth her weight in gold." I couldn't say much, so I just listened.

As a missionary I had little to do with romance and marriage, except for performing a lot of marriages and giving some counsel when asked. Often young men would ask me what I thought of So-and-So as a possible wife. Those who were members of the Church looked for strength of testimony first, but a close second was the perceived ability to bear children and remain healthy. Being thin was a definite drawback to them.

I remember listening with sadness several times as a young man would say, "Oh, I couldn't marry her, she's too thin," or "She appears unhealthy." I tried to persuade them that other qualities were more important and that thin girls could have babies too, but the mind-set was pretty strong and my reasoning didn't make much of an impression. I suppose they were reflecting some of their Israelite background. I recalled a passage from the Old Testament-Proverbs 31:30: "Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised."

Having children and families was very important to the Tongans. Most families were large and united. It was common to have six, eight, ten, or a dozen children. I know several families with more than twenty children from one mother. There were no unwanted or uncared-for children. Even those born out of wedlock were taken in by the extended family and cared for as any other.

Often children were "given away," but in a different way than it sounds. Many Westerners look on this practice with horror, but when you consider the circumstances it is easier to understand. For instance, if a couple could not have children, some of their relatives who had lots of children would "give" them one or two to raise as a pusiaki (sort of like adoption). Being a pusiaki was no different than being any other type of child.

Once I mentioned something a little negative about giving a child to be raised by someone else, and the couple giving the child said, "But you don't understand! We're all together. We trust our sister, who can't have children naturally. Our son will be raised right." Then they put me to silence by saying, "Would your culture actually be so cruel as to allow a couple to go through life without children when it's so simple to fulfill that need for them? God wants us to help one another and take care of our own, and that includes all our family!"

I could not answer, or at least didn't feel like I should. I tried to do as the Prophet taught-teach correct principles and let the people govern themselves. Eventually, they will have to face their Maker and give an accounting, as will we. If desire to help and lack of selfishness are major criteria towards perfection, I have a feeling some of them may be much further along that path than others might think.

Another interesting custom was having grandparents do a major part of child rearing. Often a young couple would live with the grandparents, or the grandparents with them, and the division of responsibilities was such that the mother and father would work in the garden while the grandparents raised, taught, trained, played with, and disciplined the children. When I questioned such a situation one time, the grandmother involved told me she felt that when her daughter (the mother) was older and more experienced, she could do a better job of raising the children. She then caused me to think a lot when she asked, "What is my experience and life for if I can't help raise my grandchildren?"

There was deep respect for grandparents by grandchildren and deep love by grandparents for grandchildren. I suppose this came largely from the great amount of interaction they had; this interaction didn't seem to reduce the love and respect between parents and children either. There were lots of advantages to this extended family type of living.

The Church teaches the correct concepts that families are important and that families are forever. We need to do more than understand the concept-we need to practice the principles that allow the concept to become reality. We have heard the phrase: "the future belongs to those who are prepared." I have rephrased that to say, "the future belongs to those who are there." You don't have to look far to see which cultures are not keeping their families intact and thus not reproducing themselves to know what people are going "to be there" in future generations.

There were very few tourists in Ha'apai. But one day a tourist yacht came in for a few days. Several of the members asked me about a "poor lady" on the yacht who didn't have much protection from the sun and was obviously sick as she was lying on the deck of her boat when the sun was high with hardly any clothes on. They wondered what they could do to help her. I could not convince them that there actually were people in the world who wanted to lie out in the sun. It was inconceivable to them that anyone in their right mind would do so.

I guess to white people, getting darker or more tan seems more important than the risks. Despite my explanation, the Tongans still thought the lady must be crazy, or sick, or both. The Tongans try to protect themselves from the sun as much as possible. To them being lighter rather than darker is the preferred skin color. I have heard of Tongan parents having their children play in caves and under roofs all day so they would grow up with as little sun exposure as possible. I suppose most of us value that which we don't have and undervalue that which is common to us.

The Tongans were very class conscious, and everyone tried to make some connection to the king, the nobles, or others of high birth. While I was there, the feeling of loyalty to royalty was very deep and heartfelt. The queen was loved by all, and everyone had a reverence and an awe for the royal family that permeated nearly every aspect of life. The only negative I was aware of was when people believed in the true Church but couldn't quite pull themselves away from "the queen's church" out of loyalty to her. As hard as I tried, many people could not see the difference between loyalty to an earthly monarch and loyalty to a heavenly monarch. There was, and still is, religious freedom in Tonga and many people joined the Church when they obtained a testimony, regardless of peer pressure.

In the Tongan village, everyone seemed to know their role. If people were unhappy with their role, they seldom showed it. Everyone's role was respected, and each person had their "day in the sun." In our society, we respect those with wealth, training, or position, such as company presidents, doctors, or mayors, but in the Tongan village hierarchy, the punaki (most respected and talented poet, singer, choir director, dancer, or choreographer) was on top. They love a person with these talents, and if someone is good, he has no need to worry about food, clothes, or other necessities of life.

I remember once calling a man to be a branch president. He asked if the job of choir director was already filled. When I told him it was, he sighed and accepted the "lesser" calling as branch president. The Saints loved to sing in choirs, and it was not uncommon to have more people in attendance at choir practice after church than at sacrament meeting.

Choir competition and festivals drew large crowds and were somewhat akin to sporting events in our society in terms of interest, participation, and so forth. The members sang the hymns almost exclusively from memory and with great force and feeling. There were no pianos or organs, and the perfect harmony of the congregation and choirs (which were virtually the same) helped me feel that I was listening to the most majestic sound on earth-that of a human pipe organ.

As an outsider and a missionary, I am not sure how the Tongans perceived me, but I felt I had their love and respect. All missionaries were looked up to. It put extra responsibility on us to be circumspect in all we did. One role I played in Ha'apai that I neither sought nor particularly liked was to calm down one of the perennial drunks. Most people couldn't afford liquor and were afraid of the side effects of bush beer and other cheaper forms of intoxicants, which occasionally caused blindness and other physical disabilities, including death. But there was one nonmember who seemed to have enough money and who drank to excess fairly often. For some reason, when he got "soused" he started wandering the streets and yelling loudly. This disturbed the people, and they asked me if I'd talk to him. When he was sober, I did talk to him, but made little headway, as he kept on drinking.

For some reason, the next time he got drunk, he started wandering the streets yelling "Kolipoki, Kolipoki!" I tried to ignore him as I felt I couldn't talk to a drunk and do much good, but eventually he got so loud that I went out and said, "I'm here, come on it!"

He came in, calmed down, and started to cry. We had a nice visit. I am not sure how much he understood, but he was quiet and soon went to sleep. The people were so happy (including his wife) that I automatically had a new role. When my being in town coincided with his drinking too much, maybe once every month or two, I had the responsibility of talking to my friend until he started crying and went to sleep. I am not sure what I learned or what good I did because things didn't seem to change much, but I felt okay about at least trying to help. The other villagers were grateful also.
