John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

56

My Ocean

By now, I felt so at home with the people and the islands that I wrote to my family: "There are times as we ride the rolling seas that I feel I own this part of the ocean-own it in the sense that I can come and go at will and usually find the ocean cooperative. It is like a second home."

I had deep respect for the ocean and its various moods. Along with many others through the ages, I compared the ocean to a lady. I wrote home: "The sea is like a lovely lady-beautiful, mysterious, powerful, deep, moody, unpredictable, loving, helpful, and life-giving. I realize that at times both can be fierce and angry, and at other times soft and caressing. I love the ocean. I hope I will love my wife as much. I'm sure I will."

In Tongan the word hala means road or path, but it is incomplete by itself and needs to have a modifier, such as hala uta (path on land) or hala tahi (path on sea). I became convinced that many of those old captains were as sure where they were on their sea paths as we are on our land paths. The ocean is home to them and they develop a feel that is hard for us to comprehend. Let me give an example:I remember returning home from a long voyage in very contrary weather with heavy seas, strong winds, and a cloudy, rainy sky. We were out of sight of land all afternoon, all night, and into the next morning. I became a little concerned and asked the captain if he knew for sure where we were.

He looked at me rather quizzically and then gazed at the shape of the sun through the heavy clouds for some time, felt the wind as he moved his head slowly back and forth, then put one hand in the water while holding the rudder with the other hand. After several minutes, he withdrew his hand from the water, pointed partway across the sky and announced, "When the sun is there, the island of Lofanga will appear there."

His statement was strictly factual and nonemotional, and when he saw I accepted his word, he went back to concentrating on moving the sail and the rudder just so, feeling the currents, and intently watching the sky.

Several hours passed, but when the outline of the sun was right where he had pointed, the mists and shrouds seemed to lift and, almost like magic, the island of Lofanga "na'e kite mai" (appeared). It was as though it materialized out of nowhere to fulfill his words.

I looked at the island and then looked at the old captain. He just smiled and nodded and continued concentrating on the sky, wind, and current.

I marveled and thought, "We spend years going to school, getting an education in astronomy, weather forecasting, navigational engineering, or electronic maneuvering of various kinds, and then we say we know something. Yet encapsuled in this old man is more knowledge of celestial navigation than all the degrees the world can give." I realized that his eyes, his hands, his face to the wind, his sense of sight, sound, smell, and temperature were so refined that he knew exactly where we were and exactly how to set the sail, use the wind, and move the rudder to get us safely to our destination.

We arrived home that evening and I thanked the captain for the safe journey. I asked how he knew where we were. He talked of the warmth and strength of the currents, of sun and moon and stars, of the feel of wind and waves, but basically said, "I just knew." He couldn't really explain it to me, or maybe he knew I couldn't understand. I was glad I had "my captain" to take me over the sea paths of "my ocean."

I thought of how we honor our great scientists and engineers and mathematicians for their intelligence and understanding, yet that old man who had no degrees was more knowledgeable about currents and directions at sea than anyone I have ever known.

It was a sad day for me when he died just before I left Ha'apai. I have watched rather wistfully as his compatriots one-by-one have left this existence. I am unaware of any of that old group who are left. I imagine they are charting beautiful courses through the endless realms of space and eternity. I have the assurance that true knowledge gained here, especially that used to help others, is never lost and is ever useful.

I remember another time returning to Pangai when the winds completely quit on us and we just bobbed around for a couple of days. There were ten of us on the boat, it was hot, and we soon became very thirsty and hungry. One man had a fishline that he patiently dangled in the placid ocean hour after hour. In the afternoon of the second day, his line suddenly pulled tight and everyone jumped up with excitement, yelling encouragement. The fish ran with the line and it took a long time to bring him in as there was a lot of fight in this good-sized tuna. After a long time, the tired fish was brought alongside and several sets of strong hands quickly flipped it into the boat.

The men were so hungry and thirsty that rather than taking the time to properly kill and clean the fish, they gave him one hard knock on the head, which stunned him sufficiently to quiet his frantic flipping some, then they just started eating him raw. As the fish was passed from one man to another, someone mentioned that they should save some for me as I was probably hungry and thirsty too. I told them, "Just cut me off a piece and go ahead and finish him off." They gave me a nice piece, which I ate and enjoyed greatly. They continued eating the fish until there was nothing but bones left. I was not shocked or amazed, just interested. As I watched this process and saw the smiles on their faces, I remember thinking how nice it was that they could catch the fish and get some nourishment, and how wonderfully well man, nature, and the ocean could work together. That evening a good wind came up and we were in Pangai by early the next morning.

I remember that one of my counselors always brought a rectangular sealed can with him on our journeys. It was about nine inches square and twelve inches deep. I asked what it was and he told me to never mind. After a while Iforgot about it until on a particular voyage I noticed him hiding the tin can, and I insisted on knowing what it was. He finally showed me a letter in English that was ingeniously sealed to the side of the can. I read the letter and found that the can was a hermetically sealed tin containing a temple burial outfit in which to dress any American Elder who died of disease or other causes and had to be buried in Ha'apai.

I was aware of some Elders who had died in Ha'apai, as our branch kept up their grave sites. I asked if he knew what to do if anything happened to me. He replied that he could not read English, but he knew he would know what to do if the occasion arose. I asked if he had ever dressed anyone before, and he said, "No." I asked again how he would know what to do and he gave me that look of "Why do you always wonder about such things? The Lord would tell me through an angel or some other means. Why do you palangis always worry about such silly details?"

Typical sailboat coming into the calm harbor of Pangai from the outer islands.

It was a constant learning experience to see the degree of faith these wonderful people had. I was comforted when he smiled at me and said, "Don't worry. You won't die here. I know that. You have much work yet to perform." I wasn't sure whether he was speaking qualitatively and meant I had much more to learn now and he needed to teach me better, or whether he was speaking quantitatively. I hoped he meant both.

After the temple was dedicated in New Zealand many Tongans went there and temple clothing became more available, so the need for these hermetically sealed tins became less and less and I doubt they even exist there now.

There were times when I didn't want to go on the boat, especially when the winds and the seas were boisterous, but except in the worst situations, we went anyway. There were other times when I rode those beautiful silver seas, felt the breeze filling the sails and powering us forward, sensed the rising and falling of the solid, curved wood beneath me, listened to the whistling of the wind, marveled at the many beautiful shades of blue and green and white all about me, and realized I was falling in love with the sea. To me, at that time, it really was "my ocean."
