John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

57

Letters Home

Even though I was busy, I felt impelled to write regular letters to my family and loved ones.

How grateful I am to my mother, who retyped and saved all these letters. I include a few selected samples, written mostly toward the end of my mission.

"Pangai, Lifuka, Tonga.

"I think that being able to have your plans thwarted and not letting it upset you is a mark of maturity. I think that this mission has matured me in a lot of ways, although I don't say that I have learned to take disappointments as I know I must learn to take them.

"I often wonder if I'll let delay frustrate me anymore, but I suppose as soon as I get back into the fast swing of things at home, I'll probably be upset by delays.

"Already most of the mission seems like just a dream, especially that year up on Niuatoputapu. There is more meaning to that year than any of us will ever realize, I am sure."

"Pangai, Ha'apai.

"One of the reasons a mission is such a happy time is because by its very nature it requires one to seek out only the good in others and this makes one happy all of the time. Seeing good in others and trying to develop those qualities of goodness, and trying to take the bad things from one's own life so that one can become a good example to the people-these are the elements of happiness. Anyone can be happy under any set of conditions, if only he makes up his mind to be. Before I learned the Tongan language, I felt that was the key to happiness in the Tongan mission. When I learned the language, I found the degree of happiness that went along with that particular accomplishment, but that was not the key to happiness. The key to happiness is to serve others.

"We all seek happiness in this world, and I am sure that there are many thousands of volumes written upon it and many years of totaled lectures on it. But still, above all, the real elements are: to 'love the Lord with all your heart and to love your neighbor as yourself.' Nothing else can be said, no more elaboration given. That is the summation of it all. If we want to be happy, we must make up our minds to be happy, and we will if we have lots of love in our hearts."

"Pangai, Ha'apai, Tonga.

"Many of the missionaries have been sick. I myself have been touched a time or two-nothing serious, but enough to make me realize the value of good health. Ihope that you don't worry about me. All is well. I appreciate Dad's blessing before I left for this mission. If we could all keep our spiritual health and our physical health up to top peak by constant exercise, we would indeed be much happier. I hope we make enough time to be friendly and kind and considerate of those who do not have good health, either physical or spiritual. We do need to visit and help the sick and the afflicted in spirit or body. I am grateful for the good example of Mom and Dad."

"Pangai, Tonga.

"I hope I can always remember the great lessons I have learned from these wonderful people. Their humility and faith are wonderful. I have learned to love them and have had to humble myself among them to do so. The Lord has been with me in these adjustments, and He will help me adjust to home. The Tongan language is a part of me. I appreciate more and more the various languages and their place in the world. The language of love is the most important language of all. If one learns that language, he can speak to every heart. Love is the only lasting thing in the world. When everything else is done, our value might be summed up by 'how much did he love?' Love is deeper than we know. I think that by being kind and considerate and never being angry or cross, we can keep love more of the time. I'm sure anger drives love from our hearts. Cross words and bad tempers check and starve the seeds of love within us. Love, trust, and sacrifice for others are the greatest forces in the world. Love is shown by how much we are willing to deny ourselves for the good of others, how much we are willing to go through that others might benefit. We need lots more of it. When all else is done, they will only remember, 'How much did he love us?' When all else is done, we will only remember how much one loved us. The Savior set the example; it's deeper than I know, but I hope it goes to its full depth of meaning as I say 'I love you all.'"

"Pangai, Lifuka, Ha'apai, Tonga.

"To all of my loved ones at home, I just want you to be assured that that great bond of love, which will always tie us, is felt by me here, way off in the uttermost bounds of the earth. Also, there is another love in my very soul now. A love for a people, a love for a culture, a love for a way of life, a love for a language-a beautiful language that is as much a native tongue to me as the tongue Ispoke as an infant. It is the tongue which I began to speak as an infant, a spiritual infant, and the tongue with which I have grown up from the infancy state in spiritual things to maybe, possibly, just a little above the infancy state in those great spiritual things of life. A love for songs, a love for nature, a love for the sea-the sea with all of its enchantments, the sea with its overpowering influence on men, the sea with its mysteries urging men on to greater things, inspiring some of the greatest poets to pen words which, though deep in meaning, scarcely begin to fathom the depths of the source of their inspiration. I am among my loved ones here as well as back in America. Here is my second home, my second language, my second love."

"Ha'apai, Tonga.

"I would sum up the Savior's words in Matthew 5:43-48 as follows: 'It is said of old to love those who love you but despise your enemies, but I say unto you, love everyone.' Thus, all limits were taken from this great fountain of love; whether any limits existed or if they were only in the clouded minds of the men of those days is beside the point, but now the new law had been given. That was it, the new commandment, 'Thou shalt love.' Love with all of your hearts. Love God and His children, wherever they might be and however they might treat you. How you are treated is of little consequence; the important thing is to learn to love everyone. Can we really love sinners? It seems to me that that is one of the requirements for our eternal progression. If we expect to be where the Gods are today, and they have love for all mankind-sinners as well as Saints-then certainly if we aspire to such a height, we must learn to love sinners as well as Saints, dark-skinned people as well as white, foreign tongues as well as our own native tongues."

"Ha'apai, Tonga.

"If God is love (which He is) and if the purpose of life is to become more like Him (which it is), then the greatest blessings in life are the opportunities to develop more godlike love.

"God must dearly love women as He gave them the sacred power to bear and rear children. Doing so develops more love than almost anything I am aware of. In one sense, Isuppose God gave men the priesthood as partial compensation, so if they use it properly it can help them become the servants of all and thus have a better chance of developing the love needed for eternal life.

"I suppose both men and women can prostitute their sacred God-given opportunities to develop love and use them for selfish purposes, but they will never have the power of God with them if they do so. Only as they use His powers according to His will can He bless and magnify them.

"I occasionally hear people talking about roles and arguing about authority, and sense anger in some people's hearts over this. I feel that Satan has really put one over on those people by diverting their attention from concentrating on that which brings love (and thus is important) to concentrating on worldly position (which is not important) and thus stirring them up to anger one against another (3 Nephi 11:29), and blinding them from His stated purpose to help us become characters full of love."

"Pangai, Ha'apai, Tonga.

We do not develop love with anger or jealousy or selfishness or unrighteous dominion, or in trying to second guess God and His ways-we only develop it in serving (loving) others with all of our hearts. To love God with all of our hearts, and our fellowman as ourselves, has always been and will always be not only the best way but the only way for achieving the love we need to eventually enter the celestial kingdom.

"The principle seems so simple: when we do selfish things, we become selfish people. When we do unselfish things, we become unselfish people. Satan tempts us to do selfish things; God tries to help us do unselfish things. The Church, the ordinances, the covenants, motherhood, priesthood, and our callings are all calculated to develop deep love as the very essence of our beings. We need God's help to do so.

"We all need the strength and saving grace of the Savior's atoning sacrifice in our life. It is the ultimate in love. We simply can't have sufficient love in our lives without it. It is always available and always needed, but we must recognize that need in our individual lives before we are able to allow Him to be the central part of our lives He needs to be to help us 'change our hearts' to hearts full of love."

"Pangai, Ha'apai, Tonga.

"If there were any eternal value to earthly wealth or position or title or income or physical beauty or prowess, then God would be a partial God, which He specifically says He is not. But there is no value to these things.

"What then is the common denominator that covers all men and all women over all time and all circumstances? The amount of love they choose to develop in their hearts! Everyone is on equal footing to achieve that, to whatever degree they desire. All they need to do is first love God with all their hearts, minds, and souls, and then move on to its earthly expression by loving their neighbor as themselves (see Matthew 22:35-40).

"It is interesting to me that Jesus was talking about how to love as the prelude to His great command or request to be perfect" (see Matthew 5:48).

Ithought I had learned a few things since my mission, but in rereading these letters I'm not so sure. Maybe I've forgotten as much of real value as Ihave learned over the ensuing years.

I do know we need to have more love in our hearts for all people. I am grateful for the Tongan people in helping me understand this great truth better.
