John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

58

Islands upon Islands

While never a huge number, baptisms in Ha'apai continued to increase each month. I didn't think about going home but I knew it would happen someday. About this time, my mission president wrote and asked how I would feel about staying on my mission a few months longer. Ienthusiastically replied that nothing could please me more. He wrote back and said he felt it would be good if Icould stay and help take the first group of Tongan Saints to the New Zealand Temple, which was to be dedicated in about a year. He said he would write to the authorities in Salt Lake City and make the request for me to stay. Iassumed this extension would be granted, so I adjusted myself psychologically to that end. I even wrote a few letters home explaining what the mission president and I hoped would happen, even though I knew it was not for sure.

You can imagine my shock and amazement when two months later Ireceived a telegram from my mission president saying: Request for extension denied. Stop. You must report to your draft board within two months. Stop. The SS Tofua leaves Nuku'alofa in one week. Stop. Be in Nuku'alofa at least one day before this. Stop. If you agree Ipropose [Elder X] as the new district president. Stop. Send reply including return costs and details soon. Stop.

I was stunned, and I left the telegraph office shaking my head. Telegrams were supposed to be private, but whoever thought that didn't know Tonga or Tongans! The word spread like wildfire, and I was inundated with all types of responses-disbelief, love, tears, congratulations, requests for feasts, desire for details, and, I'm sure, relief on the part of some.

I thought, Elder X as district president? What a joke! I'm glad the presi-dent asked my opinion. I'll let him know right away. But maybe I'd better find a boat going to Tonga first and save one telegram. Leaving Ha'apai? How can that be?

A feeling of melancholy came over me. Part of it was the suddenness of the announcement, especially when I had been so ready and anxious to stay longer, but part of it also was the realization that this was final. It was hard to realize that my mission to Tonga was actually going to end. I shuddered as Ithought that I would soon have to leave these people, these islands, this language. How could I leave the wind, the seas, the sails, the school, the Saints, the children, the love, the faith, the challenges, and the testimonies-all that seemed important and precious to me?

It took me a day or two to come to grips with the fact that I must not wonder any longer but rather be obedient and move on with the rest of my life. For several days, however, each time I thought Ihad faced the facts, I seemed to relapse, move back into the protection of the familiar, and try to put off the unknown future.

I started inquiring about boats going to Tongatapu and found there were none readily available. I asked everyone but was told they had all either just left or just returned, and no trips were planned in the near future. There seemed to be no way to get to Tongatapu. Maybe this is my answer, Ithought. I would never be openly disobedient, but if I didn't show up because there was no boat, that was a different matter! My fleeting hope lasted but a few minutes as I realized if worst came to worst, I could press some of the good Saints into taking me to Tongatapu in our old mission sailboat. It was leaking badly, and the sails and ropes were in terrible shape, but if we had to, I knew the Lord would bless us with a safe trip.

I talked to the best captain I knew and was surprised when he said it would not be wise to even think of taking the mission sailboat. "That boat is in very bad condition, and we should not tempt the Lord when we know things are bad and we have other alternatives," he told me.

"What other alternatives?"

"Have you been to Ha'ano? There is a good boat there."

I was running out of time and we had to get a boat, so he agreed to take me to Ha'ano to check on a better boat to Tongatapu. That last voyage for me in the old mission sailboat was very nostalgic as well as revealing. We had a good wind and made excellent time to Ha'ano. We also had to expend enormous amounts of effort to keep the water bailed out. I was convinced the old sailboat would not reach Tonga-tapu in the shape it was in.

At Ha'ano, I spoke to the captain and owner of the only sailboat available. The word of my pending departure had already reached Ha'ano, and he knew I had to get to Tongatapu in the next few days. He was not a member and was poor, as most everyone in Ha'apai was, so he drove a hard bargain. It is difficult to negotiate when others have the upper hand. We reached some compromises, such as making the voyage a charter and giving me the right to collect and keep any money from passages or freight space sold. Still, when we finally shook hands, I felt I was paying far too high a price. But as I could see no alternative, I decided not to press for more but rather to leave the captain feeling good to help ensure his coming.

He agreed to be in Pangai in two days and get us to Tongatapu before the fourth day was up, which would be the day before the SS Tofua sailed. The wind continued fair and brisk, and we made good time back home. Even so, when we arrived in Pangai harbor, we had several rips in our sail, a couple of extra knots in our ropes, and a large amount of bilge in the bottom of the boat. I thought, "It's good we are not testing the Lord by trying to take this boat to Tongatapu."

When we returned to Pangai, there was another telegram from the mission president stating: Send approval and plans now. Stop. You must be here in four days. Stop. Passage on Tofua secured. Stop. I was embarrassed to tell the president how much it was going to cost us to get to Tongatapu-£40 (nearly $200). I was also concerned about how to tell him my true feelings about Elder X being district president. I decided to pray about it again and send a telegram the next morning.

With all the feasts and farewell parties, and heart-tugging visits from many friends, I realized I would not be able to do all I wanted to do and spend any time sleeping. I thought, "Well, I can sleep on the boat down," so I started that evening packing, praying, thinking, and visiting with people around the clock.

One group would come, then another, then another, then a timid knock, and a schoolchild and her family with some bananas and a pineapple, with a desire to visit for a while. "We're going to be baptized, you know," the parents said. "As soon as our daughter goes to Liahona, we will go to Tongatapu and be baptized. Thanks for teaching our daughter. Thanks for getting her into Liahona. Thanks for teaching us the gospel." On and on went the visits. Before the night was over, I had more food than I could eat in weeks. But no matter, it represented love and appreciation, and that never spoils.

I was now down to two days left in Ha'apai, with the third to get to Tongatapu. Just before sunrise, I dozed for an hour or so. I knew I must send a telegram to the mission president that morning, but was still unsure of what to say. I had prayed sincerely about my feelings, but I felt uncomfortable counseling my mission president.

When I woke that morning, I experienced one of those wonderful, warm feelings that we all have from time to time. I felt words and thoughts coursing through my soul in an unexplainably beautiful symphony: "Listen. This is not your work, it is my work. I will see that it moves forward. Support your leaders. Support your mission president with all your heart. Do not worry about the charter fee. It will be returned. Be obedient. Be supportive. Be loving. Be kind. Be forgiving. Be diligent. Bless these people. It is my work. You can help, but do not worry. It is my work." It was not a voice or a revelation, but a beautiful, peaceful feeling.

I ran to the telegraph office and fired off the following message to the mission president: Elder X will be great as district president. Stop. Wire £40 for boat charter. Stop. It will be returned. Stop. Will arrive Nuku'alofa Thursday evening ready for Tofua passage on Friday. Elder Groberg.

I immediately made arrangements for Elder X, who was working on another island, to come to Pangai. I went through the school schedule with him and introduced him to my two counselors, whom he would use at least until the mission president came to Ha'apai and made the official change. I would be gone, but that didn't matter. I took him to meet the postmaster, the telegraph man, the governor, and everyone in between. I was happy because I knew things would be all right.

The boat from Ha'ano arrived. It was small but sturdy, and it had strong canvas sails, new ropes, and a solid hull. What a pleasure to ride in such a boat! The sea and the wind were about normal, but even so, we knew we would have to leave before noon the next day to ensure making it to Nuku'alofa by afternoon or evening of the following day in order to catch the Tofua the next day.

Since there had been no boats going to Tongatapu for a while, I was able to sell quite a few passages and had contracted to take a fair amount of freight. Sailboats always travel better when they have some weight in them as opposed to being too light on the water, so the captain was happy.

I made arrangements for people to load their things that day, and we agreed with the captain to leave shortly before noon the next day. As people paid for their passages and their freight, I stuffed the money into a small bag I had and didn't bother to count it then.

I now had only twenty-four hours left in Ha'apai. What could I do? What should I do? I had turned as much as I could over to Elder X. I had very little to pack as I gave most everything away, keeping only a bare minimum to get home. I made a few visits, attended several more farewell feasts, and met with and encouraged several investigators and wayward members. By this time I was so tired I could hardly keep my eyes open, so in the early afternoon-after another feast-I crawled into the back of a member's house and slept for a couple of hours.

When I awoke, Iwent back to my home. Some members had a big kava ceremony going in the central room, and I joined them for a few hours. Some of the missionary schoolteachers had written a farewell song for me, which they sang beautifully (a translation is on page 285). It talked of a white bird that flew away but eventually returned. There were lots of tears. People kept coming and going for most of the night. Finally, at what I would judge to be about 2:00 a.m., I excused myself and went for a walk alone on the beach.

The moon was full and the seashore alternated between softly lit and rather dark as the clouds moved by, obscuring the moon for long periods of time and only temporarily allowing it to shine forth in its fullness. A soft, warm breeze was blowing, which gently lifted and lowered the coconut palms, and occasionally whipped them with a quick, strong breath. The sand was warm, and the whole scene was conducive to every emotion basic to man. I reflected, "I am actually leaving Ha'apai. When the moon, the wind, and the clouds play out their nightly act and the sun again takes control and sends the moon away, and disperses the soft mantle of coolness that fills this night, then I will leave Ha'apai. When the sun sends forth its searching rays and causes reality to reign again, I will get in a boat, wave good-bye, and soon drop below the horizon until I can see Ha'apai no more." I accepted these thoughts, but at the same time I fought them.

For a few more hours I could stay in this wonderful world of softness, moonlight, and shadows, and be alone with my thoughts and feelings. I could think, pray, and ponder, and try to understand my swirling emotions.

Translating a Tongan poem or song into English is very difficult if not impossible. Many Tongan symbols have such deep background meaning that it would take a paragraph in English to begin to get the feel of just a few symbolic words in Tongan. Two Tongan who speak English well attempted to translate the song into English. This is their best effort:

Siu'e Tavake

As the soft wind from the north begins to blow, we stand, our hearts full with the secret of it all. The fragrance of your spirit lingers in the isles. We feel deep in our hearts your feelings as you take leave, and we try to understand.

You came across the great waters, sending forth the light of truth in these islands. You gave us the true understanding of God and us as His children, set the standard, and raised us above the common man

You were called by the prophet, and everything in you went out to us. You have finished your work in a blaze of glory, but as the old Tongans say: "When one gives his whole self to others, he becomes a part of them and a shadow of the future."

Through you we have seen the work of the Master Sculptor. We have done many things wrong, but always you have smiled, showing us that to have that precious inner burning we must love others, smile at them, and hold to the rock of truth.

Your being here has been a beautiful dream. Like a vision of a cloud in the west that is crying. Our hearts are full and weeping as you leave. The flowers blooming about us are bare. The plentiful fish are meaningless, for you are gone.

CHORUS

Like the legend of the dove, it was here, it is gone, but it will return. There is a higher power that rules-you came to us, you must leave, but you will return. We of the islands must prepare and keep on as you have taught us, so we may be ready for your return and for His also. Only those who overcome will inherit the kingdom.

For some time I had been bothered by the fact that I had only physically gotten to sixteen of Ha'apai's seventeen inhabited islands. The instruction to leave came so quickly and unexpectedly that a trip to that last island had to be cancelled. I felt bad. I felt I had failed in that area. I had not made it to all seventeen islands, even though I had been district president for nearly a year and a half. "I should have made it," I thought. "How could God be happy with me? How could I be happy with myself? I have missed visiting one island in my charge."

I began to feel worse and worse. All the good feelings and farewells became somewhat muted, or held in abeyance, as I fretted over part of an assignment unfulfilled. I could tell that powerful forces, almost beyond my control, were working on my emotions. Why had I not gone to that last island? I prayed for forgiveness. I prayed for understanding. Iknew it was no excuse, but I pleaded, I intended to visit there, only I was cut short. Was it really my fault? I reasoned. Of course it was. Don't try to make up excuses; you didn't do your full duty.

The battle between light and dark, peace and disturbance, good feelings and bad feelings, raged on. I must have some peace, I thought. I can't leave feeling this way. I have felt so good up to now. Why at this last hour have I been shown my failures? Why such focus on one island? Oh, why didn't I go there?

I poured out my soul for peace. I had tried, and I would have made it had others not made decisions over which Ihad no control. What should I do? I pleaded for understanding through bitter tears of remorse.

Then, quietly, a soft covering of peace began to enter my heart. It increased in clarity and intensity until suddenly, like a light turning on, a new and overpowering force took over and dispersed everything else. I felt a voice in my heart that said, "Look." I opened my eyes and looked out across the beautiful, sandy seashore, out across the vast, open expanse of magnificent, rolling ocean. I could see very clearly the outline of the one island I had not been to. I recognized it without question. That same warm feeling I had experienced a few days before returned, and the voices in my mind and the visions of my soul continued.

I watched as another island rose behind the first, then another behind it, and another, and another, each larger and grander than the one before. I found myself marveling and saying, "Islands upon islands arise."

The voice in my mind went on, "Yes. Islands upon islands arise, and more. Look."

I looked again and saw more islands and behind them grander scenes, even worlds rising in splendor. I felt the words, "Worlds upon worlds arise, and more."

I was totally caught up in the whole experience. The feelings or words of my mind continued:"The physical goal of visiting all seventeen islands is not the most important. Had you accomplished that goal, there are more beyond it. What is important is following the Spirit, obeying, loving, serving, blessing, teaching, healing, testifying, and explaining that God is over all, that He is all-powerful, all-loving, all-kind, that Jesus is the Savior of the world, that Joseph Smith is the Prophet of this last dispensation, and that living prophets and priesthood authority are on the earth today. With these things in place, it matters not the number of islands, worlds, or universes, for these truths are eternal and control all islands and worlds and more."

I was satisfied. While I know that much more will be required of all of us, I am confident one of the greatest feelings we can experience in this life is to know that God is pleased with our efforts. Nothing can compare to that. We should strive to know that our efforts are acceptable and that faith, love, testimony, and proper actions will always bring eternal blessings. What more could anyone desire?

I also learned another great lesson. I knew I could have done better and was painfully aware of my faults. But a kind Father in Heaven allowed me to leave with good memories and a feeling of approbation for the things I had accomplished rather than a feeling of self-incrimination for the things I had not accomplished. I knew I must do better and accomplish more, and I was determined to do so. But in it all I sensed a shadow of things to come in the total forgiveness and acceptance I felt. I understood that as I dealt with others, especially family and friends, I needed to give much less criticism for failures and much more praise for accomplishments. It is God's way. I knew that.

This reverie must have occupied the balance of the night because I soon found the sun was, in fact, chasing the moon away. The day of my departure had arrived. I returned to my home, gathered what few things I had, and put them on the boat. There were lots of people at the wharf-some going with us, others sending things, and many gathering to say good-bye.

I cannot describe those last hours of embraces, tears, and deep feelings-feelings of unparalleled joy, of certainty, of blessings, and of deep understanding. It is simply beyond mortal description.

The boat finally left. There were songs, tears, and waves of good-bye; heartfelt sobs; and testimonies of assurance that we would meet again sometime, somewhere, somehow. I knew it to be true. I knew that meeting our loved ones-sometime, somewhere-is inevitable for all of us. And while the time of the meeting itself is largely beyond our control, the feelings we will have at that meeting are largely within our control. If we have been faithful, it will be a glorious meeting, but if we have not been faithful, it will not be as glorious as it could be. I knew and loved those faithful Tongan people and knew that these, my brethren and sisters, were faithful and would remain so. What an incentive that is to remain true! I determined again to be faithful always. I hoped I was ready for the next step.

I knew for sure that the most important thing in life is to remain faithful to God and his cause so that when we meet our loved ones, we can experience the same type of joy I was feeling then, only in its fullness. I knew that if we remained faithful, we would have a glorious reunion and know even more surely that islands upon islands and more will arise-forever!
