John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

59

The Trip Back

I had been awake almost constantly for the last several days and nights and was so physically and emotionally drained that shortly after leaving Pangai harbor and getting into the open ocean, I collapsed into a deep sleep. I slept for most of that day and evening and some of the next day.

Of course, I was up from time to time, especially as we had our evening and morning devotionals, but the feeling of an overpowering tiredness was hard to shake. When you are tired, night and day tend to blend together, and rest, not the hour, is what seems important.

During the night I woke several times and visited with the captain, as was my custom on long voyages. He was a good man and a skilled mariner. I never mentioned the steep price he had charged me to charter the boat but sensed he felt a little uneasy. I did not talk about it but rather asked about him, his family, and his future. When he could tell I was interested in him and not in asking for a refund, he relaxed some, and we had some good visits. We talked about God, the wind, the ocean, the currents; about families; about the price of copra; about gardens and boats; about the Church and priesthood authority; and many other things.

After visiting with the captain for a while, I lay down and slept until there was a sudden shift of wind, or an unexpected movement, or a heavy wave that crashed against our boat-then I got up and visited with the captain some more. Generally it was a smooth voyage, and I slept most of the time.

Years later I ran into an older man at a stake conference in Tonga. He asked if Iremembered him. He looked familiar, but I wasn't sure. He then explained that he was the captain who had charged too much for the boat from Pangai to Nuku'alofa. I remembered then. He went on to say that it always bothered him that he had taken advantage of a missionary in need. As he put it, "It especially bothered me that you didn't fuss more. But when I realized you were interested in me and in returning good for evil, I determined I would someday investigate the Church. It took me many years to do so, but eventually I did. My wife and I have been sealed in the temple. I'm now a high priest and served for some time on the high council. Thanks for not getting angry with me." The fact is, I was upset at the time but was glad I hadn't shown it or that the Spirit had prompted me not to do any more on the matter at that time.

In the early afternoon of the next day, I was awakened and told that Tongatapu was in sight and we should arrive by midafternoon, well within the time I had promised my mission president. Before we landed, I opened the bag and counted the money I had received. Ichecked the list of passengers and freight to make sure everyone had paid. They had. When I totaled up the money received, it came to £54-10-6, nearly £15 more than the charter price of the boat! I marveled and reflected on the feeling I had received and on the telegram I had sent to the mission president saying that he would get his money back. It may seem like a small thing, but considering the circumstances of the time, to me it was a true miracle.

As we slowly pulled into the harbor at Nuku'alofa, I could not express my gratitude sufficiently to God for the safe trip, the timely arrival, and the fulfilling of impressions. I tried again to express adequate appreciation for the incalculably precious experience of being a missionary in His service, of knowing and feeling His power and goodness, of knowing of the love and mercy of the Savior. Those deeper-than-life feelings of gratitude recurred over and over again and came from so deep within me that when we finally landed, I found myself again emotionally and physically drained and almost as weak as when we left Ha'apai.

The mission president was at a wharf to meet us as some members had spotted us coming in and informed him. Nearby the SS Tofua was in port also. What a gigantic ship it was compared to our tiny sailboat! But, I thought, it won't get us to our destination any more safely than our solid sailboat. I thought of the long voyages of the ancient Polynesians and realized again that they were every bit as skilled as our modern engineers, boatbuilders, or captains.

The first thing I did was give the mission president the £54-10-6 and told him that this was his £40 back, plus the Lord's increase. I told him to do what he wanted with the extra, except to not even think of giving it to me or the captain. He smiled and replied, "Are you a mindreader also?" We laughed, and he put the money in his pocket. Then we went to the mission home for a final interview.

In those days missionaries were released in the field by the mission president, so after a very special interview the mission president handed me my release certificate along with my ticket on the SS Tofua to New Zealand via Vava'u; Niue; Pago Pago, Samoa; Apia, Samoa; and Suva, Fiji.

I thanked him for all he had done to help me. I realized that probably the biggest help he had given me was his trust. I felt deeply that he was a good man. I loved and respected him and told him so. Feki had gone on a building assignment to another island, so I stayed that evening at the mission home.

There was a huge crowd at the wharf the next morning as I boarded the Tofua. I couldn't figure it out because I knew hardly anyone on Tongatapu. When I was told that Prince Tungi and Princess Mata'aho were taking the same boat, I understood. I joked with the mission president about the great send-off he had arranged. Everything seemed to be in order, and soon we were on our way.

The mission president asked me to speak at some meetings in Vava'u and Niue on the way to New Zealand. It was a pleasure to do so. I also enjoyed the company of the prince and the princess on the voyage. One evening, the sea got very rough; little by little everyone left the dining area until Prince Tungi and I were the only two left. For some reason, I was not feeling sick, nor was the prince. We talked, laughed, and even played the piano for a long time. The prince is a good piano player, and I still remembered a few numbers even though I hadn't touched a piano for nearly three years. Playing that piano, which was heavily chained down in the turbulent sea, was like trying to ride a bucking bronco. We had a fun time as we visited, laughed, and tried to hit the right notes. Eventually we also retired.

My father had sent a telegram saying he would meet me in New Zealand at the conclusion of my mission. When we arrived in Suva, Fiji, I had a cablegram from him saying he was in Nadi and would be flying from there to Auckland, New Zealand. The boat was to spend the day in Suva, so I quickly called the International Airport in Nadi, which is on the opposite side of the island. I explained my situation and wondered if there was any way my father could come to Suva and we could go together to New Zealand on the Tofua, or if I could go to Nadi and fly with him to New Zealand.

The Air New Zealand people were most helpful and said they would check and let me know. Later I received word from them that Dad had already flown to New Zealand the evening before. They told me, however, that if I wanted they would honor my steamship ticket, and I could fly to New Zealand that night and save two or three days' travel time. I decided to do that. I knew the airfare was more than the boat fare, but when I got on the large Air New Zealand plane and found myself the one and only passenger, I could see why they took my steamship ticket so eagerly!

I arrived in New Zealand the next morning and took a taxi to the mission home. It was winter in the southern hemisphere, and I was very cold. However, meeting my father was such a warm experience that the cold didn't seem to bother. Dad's grandparents were converted and baptized in Christchurch, New Zealand, and immigrated to the United States in the 1870s. They were the only members of their family to join the Church, so we still had lots of relatives in New Zealand.

It was fun looking up and visiting family members, none of whom were yet members of the Church. We had some great discussions and gathered a lot of genealogical and family history information. We visited some cemeteries and made arrangements for more appropriate headstones and had many wonderful and heartwarming experiences. There is a special feeling about visiting graves of ancestors in distant lands. You feel a kinship or linkage that is hard to express.

After a while in New Zealand, we flew to Australia, and Dad proposed that we fly home through India, the Middle East, and Europe. I had enjoyed doing family history work in New Zealand, but the prospects of being a tourist or just seeing things held no special appeal for me. I was beginning to feel tired and just wanted to get home. I was also anxious to see Jean again.

I explained to Dad my appreciation for his thoughtfulness, but said that if he felt okay about it, I would like to catch the next plane straight back to the United States. I explained that I would like to go back to Idaho Falls, settle down, and just stay there and never travel anywhere ever again. He smiled knowingly and said it was a good desire, but things would probably turn out different from that. He graciously accepted my request and made the necessary arrangements. So after refueling stops on Canton Island and Hawaii, we landed in Los Angeles two days later.
