John H. Groberg, In the Eye of the Storm ( 1993)

60

The Next Step

What a humming, churning place Los Angeles was! Even though I had been in New Zealand, Australia, and Hawaii for a few days each, I was still terrified by so many people, cars, and such fast movements by everyone and everything. The English language seemed strange as well, but it was mostly the pale color of people and the rapid movements and fast pace of everything that made me feel uncomfortable.

We had several relatives in the Los Angeles area and went to visit some of them. When we got to my aunt's house and had access to a phone, the first thing I did was call Jean. We had a nice conversation. I asked what she was doing that evening. She said she was going to Mutual and asked if I would like to come. "Sure," I responded, "I'll see you this evening." I thought I still remembered how to get to her house.

Dad and I visited some other people, and when the sun started to get low in the sky, I told him I had promised Jean I would meet her in North Hollywood and go to Mutual with her.

"What time is Mutual?" he asked.

"7:30 p.m. How long does it take to get there?"

"It doesn't take long, but do you know what time it is?"

"No. I don't have a watch, but the sun is low, so it must be around 6:00 p.m."

"We are in the northern hemisphere now," he responded. "It's nearly 9:00 p.m.!"

I could have fainted. My first promise to Jean, and Ihad broken it terribly! I asked if we could go to North Hollywood anyway, which we did.

By the time we arrived in North Hollywood, Mutual was long over, but Jean was waiting at her home. It was wonderful to talk to her again! Even after three years' absence, there was a comfortableness in being with Jean that felt good. Since it was late, we arranged to meet and visit the next day. I promised I would buy or borrow a watch and not miss the next appointment. I apologized to Jean for making her wait so long for me, which, as things have turned out, may have been an omen of things to come.

The next day, Dad said he had other things to do, so I could take the car and drive to North Hollywood and return when I was through. I was petrified, as I had not driven a car for three years and was scared to death to do so again, especially on those crazy Los Angeles freeways! It is hard to understand, but when you have not been around cars and have only walked, ridden horses, or been on sailboats for three years, the speed and power of cars is a very scary thing. However, my desire to see Jean eventually overcame my fear of driving, and I braved the freeways and arrived in North Hollywood safely and on time. We spent most of the day visiting, going places, walking, talking, and just enjoying being with each other. That evening when I returned to my aunt's home, Dad asked how things had gone. "Great," I said, "I've decided I will marry Jean."

"Oh, that's interesting. What does she say?"

"Well, we haven't talked about that yet, but I'm sure it will be fine with her." (How arrogant men can be at times!)

Dad told me I shouldn't take things for granted or assume things I didn't know for sure. I couldn't say much as I knew he was right. But the fact was, I did know for sure.

Dad and I left the next day for Idaho Falls, and Jean and I agreed to continue writing. We arrived home to a tumultuous reception of parents, brothers, sisters, relatives, friends, and neighbors. It was great to be home! The sacrament meeting schedule in our ward was full for several weeks, so my welcome home was put off for about a month. I enjoyed being home for a few days, but soon wanted to go back to North Hollywood. My parents agreed, so I left by train for Los Angeles.

As I rode down, I wondered what I should do. I knew that giving a diamond engagement ring was traditional, but I also knew Ihad no money, so I would have to think of an alternative. I couldn't come up with anything profound, so I decided the only thing to do was tell the truth. I would simply tell Jean that I loved her, that I wanted to marry her, and that I didn't have anything to give her except my love and my life.

I won't go into detail, but Jean carefully and prayerfully considered my proposal, and after receiving her own confirmation she accepted. That evening we looked into the heavens together, chose a star to reach for, and committed ourselves to each other and to the Lord for eternity.

We spent a few days working on plans and schedules and went to Anaheim and cancelled her teaching contract for that fall. Jean's father was tied up with a special aeronautical defense contract and his first open date was 6 September. The Los Angeles Temple was open then, so that was to be our place and date of marriage.

I should emphasize that this was not a spur-of-the-moment decision. Jean and Ihad been friends for five years. We had dated for two years at college and corresponded for another three years during my mission, so while we had not previously spoken openly about marriage, we knew each other's feelings pretty well.

We had an engagement announcement party at which I was able to meet many of Jean's friends. We did lots of visiting and planning, but mostly we just enjoyed one another's company.

I returned to Idaho Falls to work and get ready for my homecoming talk, our marriage, and school. I asked Jean to come to my homecoming meeting. I don't suppose too many missionaries introduce their fiancée to the ward at their homecoming, but I sure did.

We picked out a pair of inexpensive wedding bands (it was eleven years and six children later before I gave Jean a diamond).

Jean went through the Idaho Falls Temple, met a lot of my family and friends, then returned to North Hollywood to complete marriage preparations with her family. Not long after, I left with my parents for Los Angeles and our big day in the temple on 6 September.

I remember the day well. It was beautiful in Los Angeles. I arrived at the temple early with my folks. I noted the beauty of the temple, the trees, the grass, the flowers, and the sky. But they all paled to nothingness compared to the beauty of my Queen Jean when she drove up with her parents and stepped out of the car. We went into the temple arm in arm. I thought I was the luckiest and happiest man alive. I sensed that Jean felt good also.

The ceremony was short, sweet, and powerful. President Bowring was wonderful, and the words, promises, and meanings of that perfect ceremony were literally out of this world. There were many relatives and friends in attendance. We all had a meal together at the temple cafeteria after the ceremony. It was a wonderful time!

When we left the temple, I took Jean to her parents' car and told her I needed to run some errands and rent some clothes for the reception, so I would go with my folks and she could go with hers and I would see her that evening at the cultural hall in North Hollywood. It never dawned on me that from her point of view I was sort of abandoning her, at least temporarily, right after we were married! I don't know exactly what she thought, but she just smiled beautifully and said, "Okay. See you soon."

Ipicked up the rental suit, got my suitcase, borrowed some money from Dad, and asked if Icould use the car for a few days. Mom and Dad were very supportive. We drove to Jean's home in North Hollywood and almost immediately went to the ward cultural hall for a reception. It was a wonderful evening of visiting with many friends and relatives. The best part, however, was being with Jean.

After the reception, we went to Jean's home to pack and change. Her father kept asking about where we were going on our honeymoon. I hadn't even thought about that. I was still not in a mode of doing too much planning ahead. I guess I was still remembering that a small change in the wind, or a slight tear in the sail, or a leak in the boat could make hours or even days of difference in arrival or departure times, so why bother about detailed schedules or specifics. They were just a dream and a waste of time.

Her father asked me again, and it finally dawned on me that it was late, I was married to Jean, and our suitcases were in the car, so we really should have someplace to go! I had a general plan, but no specifics. It was hard to bring these two worlds together. I finally explained that I really hadn't thought of where to go. Jean probably assumed I had everything worked out and would surprise her with the details. I finally told her father, "I guess we will just drive down the freeway and see what happens." He looked horrified. I suppose he wondered if I was kidding or just dumb or what. When I could see his concern, I asked if he had any suggestions.

When he realized I seriously had no specific plans, he asked me to "wait right there." His nonmember neighbors had a nice beach bungalow down on Lido Isle in Balboa Beach. Idon't know what arrangements he made, but soon he came back with a set of keys, a map, and some directions. I was most appreciative.

We finally bade good-bye to everyone and left in the car. As we drove down the freeway towards Orange County, thoughts of all kinds went through my mind. I remembered some of the feelings of three years ago when I was a missionary in Orange County, and many of the names on the freeway signs began to look familiar. The freeways weren't so crowded at night, and in the moonlight Ialmost felt like Ihad my hand on a boat tiller and was sailing down a beautiful silver sea path with a perfect breeze behind me filling the sails-only this was better, as Ihad my beautiful wife beside me. I hoped we could just keep sailing forever and ever and ever. I tried to tell Jean those feelings but found the English language was inadequate to do so.

Finally Jean said, "We need to take the next exit." I was in a dream world back in my beloved islands. I didn't want to turn off the freeway, now or ever, or do anything to break the reverie. But Jean insisted we had to turn right here or we couldn't get to the bungalow. "Crazy details," Ithought, "always interfering with that which is important!" I turned off and followed Jean's directions. Soon we arrived at a lovely bungalow.

Every couple's honeymoon is private and personal. All I can say is, it was wonderful. We spent some blissful days at Balboa Beach, then drove to Idaho Falls for another reception, and then back to Provo, where Iwas registered for school. We went to the temples in St. George, Manti, and Logan on the way coming and going. Everything was beautiful. I had Jean by my side. What else could anyone want!

Even though my focus was on Jean and on school now, I often thought of Tonga and the lessons I had learned there. I remember saying I would not take a million dollars for my experiences there, nor would I go through them again for a million dollars. I realized that Tonga, its language, its people, and missionary work was one world, and being in the United States, speaking English, attending school, being married, and working for a living was another world. I had a difficult time reconciling these two worlds but knew I must. I could see parallels all around me, and I began to realize that there were two distinct worlds right in Provo and everywhere-spiritual and temporal-forever things and not forever things. I knew you could never equate inner peace and understanding, or spiritual power and assurance, with popularity, glitz, learning, money, or anything else limited to this world. I knew that peace comes from doing right and that the only power that is real comes from obeying God, who gives the power to love, help, and serve.

I thought again of what a wonderful blessing a mission is! What an opportunity to serve, and, by serving, learn to love and come closer to God! Serving, then, is the key. What a blessing to be given a calling to serve!

I finally realized that marriage and family is a mission and thus an opportunity to love, serve, and come closer to God. It was still hard to work for money or study for position, but I knew Ihad to get on with my life; as long as Ihad the proper attitude and did the right thing, my mission would never end. That was a good thought. I felt that in reality all of life is a mission, an opportunity to love and serve God through loving and serving others. I felt I could accept that and move ahead.

I knew I would never forget Tonga, but I was determined to put myself just as fully into my marriage, family, and future opportunities to serve as Ihad in my mission.

I realized I was no more prepared for marriage or family than I had been for my mission. Both of them carried responsibilities far beyond my abilities. But I also knew that God had given me the strength and protection and understanding needed to see me through my mission responsibilities so I was confident He would give me the strength, protection, and understanding needed to see me through my marriage and family responsibilities.

I could tell from talking to others and listening to their comments that I was perceived as being a bit of a "plunger," one who just moved ahead without what some might perceive as proper planning. I hoped I was not jumping in too soon. I didn't feel I was. I have always related to Nephi when he said in 1 Nephi 4:6: "And I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which Ishould do."

I thought it through, and was very much at peace in my heart and mind. Along with other notations, Imade the following journal entry:"I have started the next phase of missionary work. I'm sure I'll enjoy it. On September 6, 1957, I married Jean Sabin in the Los Angeles Temple and we have begun the process of living happily ever after."

The next step had begun.

<_2._>Glossary

auhangamea (the destroyer of things)

faifekau (preacher, minister, missionary)

faifono (reading of the new laws)

fakahua (tacking maneuver, shifting sails, used mainly when going into the wind)

fale (house)

fanga ko palulki (Pangai harbor)

fangota (fishing or digging for shellfish in the reef area)

fau ( a rope-like substance used for straining kava)

Ha'apai veu (Ha'apai in turmoil)

hala tahi (path on sea)

hala uta (path on land)

hamu (non-animal source of food)

kai tunu (cookout)

kainga (extended family)

kaitu'u (to eat while standing)

kape (big tuberous plants weighing up to eighty pounds apiece)

kava (pepper root-type drink)

kiki (animal source of food)

ko ia (that's it)

koe maama'e (them is the light)

Kolipoki (Elder Groberg)

kumala (a tuber similar to sweet potatoes)

kuo moho 'ae toupai? (is the pudding done?)

lafa lafa (barge)

laka laka (line dancing)

loloto (deep spot)

lu (spinach-like greens)

ma pakupaku (dried biscuits)

mataka (copra board)

matapule (chief)

mill mill (rubbing or massaging)

moho (baked well)

ngoue fakafaifekau (a piece of land given either to the Church or to the missionaries)

oku ou'ife? (where am I?)

palangi (a white person)

pea na'e hoko o pehe (and it came to pass)

pelto (separate kitchen house)

po malanga (evening cottage meeting)

pola (woven coconut leaf)

pule fakakolo (town officer)

pule fakavahe (district officer)

Punaki (most respected and talented poet, singer, choir director, dancer, or choreographer)

pusiaki (like adoption)

saliote (horse-drawn cart)

seilo, seilo (a boat is coming)

ta'eaonga (useless)

tahi kula (red tide)

taimi kai (time to eat)

talo (taro root)

tangi lau lau (mourning for the dead)

ta'ovola (a woven sash)

tapa (a coarse cloth made from pounded bark)

te'eki ai (not yet)

toe taha atu (a little farther from me)

toe taha mai (a little closer to me)

toupai (pudding)

tuku ia (stop it)

tupenu (large piece of cloth)

ufi (a large potato-like tuber)

umu (meal cooked in earth oven)
