Página web, de Citavi 4.1 convertida a PDF 21/07/2013 05:29 a. m., es posible que haya diferencias con respecto al original.

Not a member? Click here Sign in

ver. 2.0.13.07.21

BIBLE STUDY TOOLS ORIGINAL LANGUAGE TOOLS HISTORICAL WRITINGS PASTORAL TOOLS PERSONAL TOOLS STUDY GROUPS SITE INFO WEBSTORE

Searching for the original version? Go to http://classic.studylight.org/

Problem finding something? Get the StudyLight-HowTo PDF file or read the "Frequently Asked Questions"

Home / Commentaries

Visit Our Sponsors

Keil and Delitzsch Commentary on the Old FREE Sermon Quotes ChurchPlants.com

Testament

Inspire Your Church Inspiration & Ideas

Free Video Illustrations Video Illustrations

Old Testament

Show The Bible Fresh Spring

Affordably Church Bulletins

Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers

Searching for choir music Kickstart a new season

Deuteronomy Joshua Judges Ruth

or orchestrations? of outreach

1 Samuel 2 Samuel 1 Kings 2 Kings

Earn Your M.A. in Worship Sermon

Christian Studies Resources

1 Chronicles 2 Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah

Esther Job Psalms Proverbs

Ecclesiastes Song of Solomon Isaiah Jeremiah

Find Us on Facebook

Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Hosea

StudyLight.org

Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah

Me gusta 7 373

Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah

Haggai Zechariah Malachi

Commentary Navigator

Karl Fredreich Keil (1807-1888) was a German Protestant exegetist. Several years Old Testament

after finishing his theological studys in Dorpat and Berlin, he accepted a call to the

Genesis Exodus Leviticus

theological faculty of Dorpat, where he labored for twenty-five years as lecturer and

Numbers Deuteronomy Joshua

professor of Old and New Testament exegesis and Oriental languages. In 1859 he

Judges Ruth 1 Samuel

settled at Leipsic, where he devoted himself to literary work and to the practical

2 Samuel 1 Kings 2 Kings

affairs of the Lutheran Church. In 1887 he moved to Rodlitz, continuing his literary

1 Chronicles 2 Chronicles Ezra

activity there until his death.

Nehemiah Esther Job

Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes

He belonged to the strictly orthodox and conservative school of Hengstenberg.

Song of Solomon Isaiah Jeremiah

Ignoring modern criticism almost entirely, all his writings represent the view that the

Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel

books of the Old and New Testaments are to be retained as the revealed word of

God. He regarded the development of German theological science as a passing Karl Fredreich Keil Hosea Joel Amos

Obadiah Jonah Micah

phase of error. His chief work is the commentary on the Old Testament (1866),

which he undertook with Franz Delitzsch. To this work he contributed commentaries on all the books from Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah

Haggai Zechariah Malachi

Genesis through Esther, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the minor prophets.

Search This Commentary

Franz Delitzsch (1813-1890) was a Lutheran, from Leipsic. He came of Hebrew

Enter query in the box below

parentage; studied at Leipsic where he became a private lecturer in 1842; held the

position of professor in Rostock in 1846; then in Erlangen in 1850; and then again in

Search!

Leipsic in 1867.

His exegetical activity began in earnest at Erlangen, where he prepared

ADVERTISEMENT

independently and in connection with Karl Keil some of the best commentaries on

the Old Testament (Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Song of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Isaiah,

1866) which had been produced in Germany. These were soon translated into

English and published at Edinburgh.

Delitzsch opposed the idea "of fencing theology off with the letter of the Formula of Franz Delitzsch

Concord." In an introduction to commentary on Genesis published in 1887, he made

it clear that the Bible, as the literature of a divine revelation, can not be permitted to be charged with a

lack of veracity or to be robbed of its historic basis.

In 1886 he founded a seminary at Leipsic in which candidates of theology are prepared for missionary

work among the Jews, and which in memory of him is now called Institutum Judaicum Delitzschianum.

Biographical text adapted from The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge.

ChristianBook.com

Unger's Commentary

on the Gospels

by Merrill F. Unger

29% Off Details

Retail price: 34.99

CBD Price: 24.99

Expositor's Bible

Commentary--

Revised: 13-Volume

Complete Set,

Hardcover

37% Off Details

Retail price: 574.99

CBD Price: 361.99

Exodus II: Chapters

19-40, The Law Thru

The Bible

Commentary Series

20% Off Details

Retail price: 8.99

CBD Price: 7.19

© 20012013, StudyLight.org • terms of use • privacy policy • rights and permissions • contact sl • about sl • link to sl • advertise

To report dead links, typos, or html errors or suggestions about making these resources more useful use our convenient contact form

Powered by Lightspeed Technology
