Brent L. Top, Larry E. Dahl, Walter D. Bowen, Follow the Living Prophets (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993)

Preface

The scriptures are replete with warnings and admonitions to the Saints of the last days about the need not only to know and understand the revealed roles of the prophets but also, and even more important, to increase our responsiveness to them.

Over the past several years, while we have taught a religion course at Brigham Young University entitled "Teachings of the Living Prophets," we have witnessed lives changed, hearts softened, and personal faithfulness and obedience increased through the concepts and doctrines taught in the course. And we have felt an increasing need for these teachings to be made available to the broader Church audience.

In this book we have attempted to teach those principles that will inform and inspire the reader. We desire to increase doctrinal knowledge and faith in and loyalty to those whom the Lord has called and authorized to lead his church. In organizing the ideas contained herein we have selected many quotations from the Brethren that teach and testify of these principles of salvation, for it is more important to us that the reader know what they teach and feel than what we think about the matter. In addition to the many scripture references and quotations from General Authorities, we have included an appendix containing the entire text of several classic addresses by leaders of the Church that teach the role of living prophets and the relationship and responsibilities the Latter-day Saints have to them.

We wish to extend our appreciation to our many colleagues at BYU who have shared ideas with us and provided valuable feedback in the preparation of this book. We also appreciate the thousands of students who have enriched our lives and who through their lives and experiences continually teach us of the great blessings that come to those who earnestly seek to faithfully follow the living prophets.

It is the hope of our hearts that this book will increase each reader's appreciation for the inspired guidance of the living Church by living prophets and instill a renewed determination to be faithful to the covenant to sustain and uphold the Lord's appointed servants. There can be no exaltation without accepting the Lord and surrendering our hearts and souls to him and to his will. In turn, there can be no total surrender to the Lord without accepting and following his prophets. "For he that receiveth my servants," declared the Lord "receiveth me" (D&C 84:36). To the fulfillment of that ultimate objective this book is directed.

1993 Bookcraft
