Brent L. Top, Larry E. Dahl, Walter D. Bowen, Follow the Living Prophets (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993)

We do not lack a prophet; what we lack is a listening ear by the people and a determination to live as God has commanded. That is all we need.

—J. Reuben Clark, Jr., General Conference, October 1948

1 A Listening Ear

Following living prophets is a critical factor in nurturing our current spiritual health and in attaining exaltation. To hearken to them is to hearken to the Lord; to ignore or reject them is to reject the Lord. To the infant restored Church in November 1831 the Lord revealed: "What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same" (D&C 1:38).

Earlier in the same revelation the Lord lamented the attitude of spiritual self-sufficiency of many in the world and declared the sad consequence of their stubborn determination to go their own way.

And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people;

For they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant;

They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall (D&C 1:14-16; see also D&C 84:87-97; 124:46).

In contrast to being "cut off from among the people" for not giving heed to the Lord's servants there are promised blessings to those who "receive" them. During his personal ministry to the Nephites the Lord said, "Blessed are ye if ye shall give heed unto the words of these twelve whom I have chosen from among you to minister unto you, and to be your servants; and unto them I have given power" (3 Ne. 12:1). In our own dispensation, on the day the Church was organized, the Lord instructed the Saints to "give heed unto all (the) words and commandments" which the Prophet Joseph Smith would give, as if those words came from the Lord's own mouth. The promised blessing for so doing was that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good" (see D&C 21:4-6). And as part of the blessings associated with "the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood" the Lord declared, "For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him" (D&C 84:36-38).

Learning How to Be Governed

With such great blessings promised the obedient, why would anyone resist following those the Lord has appointed to represent him and speak his mind and will? The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "But alas, it is in vain to warn and give precepts, for all men are naturally disposed to walk in their own paths as they are pointed out by their own fingers, and are not willing to consider and walk in the path which is pointed out by another, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, although he should be anunerring director, and the Lord his God sent him" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 26-27, hereafter cited as Teachings). Overcoming this natural tendency to resist counsel, even God's counsel, is admittedly a challenge. "It is also necessary," taught President John Taylor, "that we should learn the principles of order and government, but we must first learn how to govern ourselves, then how to govern our families, and lastly, learn how to be governed, which is the most difficult lesson that can be set us—it is infinitely worse than governing others" (The Gospel Kingdom, pp. 17-18).

The truth is, we need help in learning how to be governed. We must experience "a mighty change of heart." We must be "changed from [our] carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness," becoming "new creatures." We must be "born again"—"spiritually born of God." (See Mosiah 27:25-26; Alma 5:12-26.) The agent of that change is the Holy Ghost. And we must "yield" to the enticings of the Holy Ghost if we are to "put off the natural man," who is an "enemy to God," and willingly respond to the governance of God (see Mosiah 3:19). Unless we enjoy the Spirit of God we cannot understand the things of God; in fact, the things of God will appear foolish to us (see 1 Cor. 2:11-16).

Part of this conversion from a "natural" to a "spiritual" perspective consists in knowing by revelation to our own minds and hearts that the leaders of the Church are truly God's appointed spokesmen, and that the Lord expects us to give careful heed to their teachings. President Harold B. Lee spoke of the importance of obtaining such a testimony.

Now I want to impress this upon you. Someone has said it this way, and I believe it to be absolutely true: "That person is not truly converted until he sees the power of God resting upon the leaders of this church, and until it goes down into his heart like fire." Until the members of this church have that conviction that they are being led in the right way, and they have a conviction that these men of God are men who are inspired and have been properly appointed by the hand of God, they are not truly converted. (In Conference Report, April 1972, p. 118.)

Blind Obedience or Faith Obedience?

Does the Lord expect us to render blind obedience to the leaders of the Church? No. He expects enlightened or faith obedience. There is a world of difference between the two. The essence of the difference and what is required of us in order to achieve the proper obedience is captured in the following prophetic statements:

Were your faith concentrated upon the proper object, your confidence unshaken, your lives pure and holy, every one fulfilling the duty of his or her calling according to the priesthood and capacity bestowed upon you, you would be filled with the Holy Ghost, and it would be as impossible for any man to deceive and to lead you to destruction as for a feather to remain unconsumed in the midst of intense heat.

I am more afraid that this people have so much confidence in their leaders that they will not inquire for themselves of God whether they are being led by him. I am fearful they settle down in a state of blind security, trusting their eternal destiny in the hands of their leaders with a reckless confidence that in itself would thwart the purposes of God in their salvation, and weaken that influence they could give their leaders if they know for themselves by the revelations of Jesus Christ that they are led in the right way. Let every man and woman know by the whisperings of the Spirit of God to themselves whether their leaders are walking in the way the Lord dictates or not. (Harold B. Lee, quoting Brigham Young, in Conference Report, October 1950, p. 130.)

To obey! To hearken! What a difficult requirement! Often we hear: "Nobody can tell me what clothes to wear, what I shall eat or drink. No one can outline my Sabbaths, appropriate my earnings, nor in any way limit my personal freedoms! I do as I please! I give no blind obedience!"

Blind obedience! How little they understand! The Lord said through Joseph Smith: "Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof until long after the events transpire." (Scrapbook of Mormon Literature, vol. 2, p. 173.)

When men obey commands of a creator, it is not blind obedience. How different is the cowering of a subject to his totalitarian monarch and the dignified, willing obedience one gives to his God. The dictator is ambitious, selfish, and has ulterior motives. God's every command is righteous, every directive purposeful, and all for the good of the governed. The first may be blind obedience, but the latter is certainly faith obedience. (Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, October 1954, pp. 51-52.)

The difference between blind obedience and faith obedience, then, is knowing for oneself that the instruction is from God, and that God will not give any directives that are not right, that are not designed to bless our lives. That is not to say that all such instruction is easy to obey, or even that it will always appear "reasonable" to us, given our current level of understanding. Part of the business of this mortal life is to "prove" us—to see if we will "do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God shall command [us]" (Abr. 3:25). This testing period involves seeming contradictions which truly challenge the depth of our faith in and commitment to the Savior and our Father in Heaven. Knowing that, and also knowing that God speaks through his appointed servants to guide his children safely through this mortal maze, it makes abundant sense to follow those servants. That course is not blind obedience but faith obedience.

Admittedly, all instruction, counsel, commandments, even from God, require a certain amount of sorting out as they are applied to our individual circumstances. And common sense as well as a committed heart is an important factor in that enterprise. The use of this reality to rationalize ignoring or rejecting living prophets is not uncommon, however. We know and God knows when we are thus engaged. Ultimately all will be held strictly accountable for their decisions, interpretations, and applications regarding the teachings of the Lord's servants.

The Lord desires our faithful obedience—obeying because we have a trust in his purposes and a testimony that we are led by living prophets. There is, however, an even higher form of obedience which, though it is spiritually strenuous, yields greater blessings and personal freedom. "It is not alone sufficient for usas Latter-day Saints to follow our leaders and to accept their counsel," President Harold B. Lee counseled, "but we have the greater obligation to gain for ourselves the unshakable testimony of the divine appointment of these men and the witness that what they have told us is the will of our Heavenly Father" (in Conference Report, October 1950, p. 130).

Rendering intelligent obedience to living prophets requires us to study and struggle, ponder and pray concerning the counsels and teachings that proceed from them. It is no easy task, and in large measure it rightfully shifts the responsibility from them to us. Prayerfully pleading with the Lord to bless us with a witness of the Spirit concerning their counsel yields a blessing of knowing the will of God for us individually. This knowledge makes easier our obedience to even difficult requirements. Without such a liberating witness one may be left to "kick against the pricks"—to either reject the prophetic words outright or obey them grudgingly and with a critical and murmuring heart.

Blind obedience is constrictive; but enlightened, faithful, intelligent obedience liberates the soul and brings abundant blessings. An experience in the life of President Marion G. Romney illustrates this principle. While serving earlier in a political office, he was faced with a painful, personal dilemma when the leaders of the Church in a tersely worded editorial denounced the trends of the political administration then in power. "When I read that editorial," Brother Romney said, "I knew what I should do—but that wasn't enough. I knew that I must feel right about following the counsel of the Church leaders and know that they were right. That took a whole night on my knees to accomplish." (Improvement Era, October 1962, p. 742.) On other occasions, President Romney gave this powerful testimony that serves as a guide for each of us as we seek to "intelligently obey" the Lord's anointed today:

Those, and I testify to this out of my own experience, who will through mighty prayer and earnest study inform themselves as to what these living prophets say, and act upon it, will be visited by the Spirit of the Lord and know by the spirit of revelation that they speak the mind and will of the Father (in Conference Report, April 1945, p. 90).

It has been the rule of my life to find out if I could, by listening closely to what they said and by asking the Lord to help me interpret it, what they had in mind for the Latter-day Saints to do and then do it. I am happy to say, not boastfully but gratefully, that I have never hesitated to follow the counsel of the Authorities of the Church even though it crossed my social, professional or political life. (In Conference Report, April 1941, p. 123.)

A Listening Ear

In the October 1948 general conference President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., reminded the Saints and the world that the real lack in the world and in the Church is not a shortage of prophets and prophetic counsel; it is the lack of listening ears on the part of the people.

Some time ago a pamphlet came across my desk which unfortunately I threw away. On the outside page it was stated, "We need a prophet," and as I read it then, and as I think of it now, I think how blind the world is. We have had a prophet, an American prophet, one who spoke our language, one who was imbued with Christian ideals, and that prophet gave us the great righteous principles of which we know and of which the world partly knows; he gave them in our own language over a hundred years ago. These may all be read; we have been teaching them for a century. The trouble with the world is they do not want a prophet teaching righteousness. They want a prophet that will tell them that what they are doing is right, no matter how wrong it may be.

Now our Prophet, Joseph Smith, and the prophets since his time—and there has always been a prophet in this Church, and prophets, and you sustain the brethren here, conference after conference, as prophets, seers, and revelators—the Prophet himself, through the Lord by revelation, gave certain great principles that would save the world if the world would but listen. We do not lack a prophet; what we lack is a listening ear by the people and a determination tolive as God has commanded. That is all we need. The way has been made perfectly clear. (In Conference Report, October 1948, pp. 79-80.)

What is true of the world in this regard is true of some in the Church. Even for some who hear the teachings of the prophets there is a tendency to disregard or be selective in applying those teachings. It appears this is not a new posture. Ezekiel, millennia ago, decried the propensity of the people to gather, even excitedly, to hear the word of the Lord, then refuse to obey what was given them.

Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the Lord.

And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness.

And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy words, but they do them not.

And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them. (Ezek. 33:30-33.)

Of those who follow this pattern it may be said that they are not so much hard of hearing as they are hard of hearkening. Whether we refuse to hear the teachings of the prophets or we hear but refuse to obey, the result is the same. Great blessings are lost, both now and in eternity. The Lord commissions his prophets to teach his word to the Church and to the world; and he will hold members of the Church and the world accountable for how they respond to that word. In fact, as Moroni testifies, the Lord himself will remind us at the judgment bar that he did indeed proclaim his word to us through prophets:

And I exhort you to remember these things; for the time speedily cometh that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man?

I declare these things unto the fulfilling of the prophecies. And behold, they shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the everlasting God; and his word shall hiss forth from generation to generation.

And God shall show unto you, that that which I have written is true. (Moro. 10:27-29.)

Moroni then exhorts his readers to "come unto Christ, and lay hold upon every good gift" (10:30). One of the critical good gifts we have access to is living in a day when prophets and Apostles walk the earth. Our challenge and opportunity is to lend a listening ear to their words and then "do them." As we study and learn what the Lord has stated as the role and responsibilities of the prophets and our relationship to them, our understanding will increase. As our understanding of the doctrines increases, so should our desire to do the will of the Lord. Understanding coupled with desire empowered by the Spirit of the Lord will enable us to have listening ears and hearkening hearts.

1993 Bookcraft
