Brent L. Top, Larry E. Dahl, Walter D. Bowen, Follow the Living Prophets (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993)

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.

—Amos 3:7

2 A Living Fountain

The prophet Abraham was privileged to see in vision some of the events of the premortal world. In that vision he learned significant lessons concerning not only the premortal existence but also the fundamental objective for man's mortal existence. He recorded: "And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those that were with him: We will go down for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abr. 3:24-25).

The Lord has continued to remind his children of this primary purpose of life through the teachings and testimonies of his chosen witnesses—the prophets. From the time of Adam to the present day the message has remained constant: in order to return to our Heavenly Father and partake of eternal life with him we must learn his will and live it. To the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord said:

And I give unto you a commandment, that ye shall forsake all evil and cleave unto all good, that ye shall live byevery word which proceedeth forth out of the mouth of God.

For he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept; and I will try you and prove you herewith.

And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal.

Therefore, be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy.

For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me. (D&C 98:11-15.)

Learning and living "by every word which proceedeth forth out of the mouth of God" is a test of our obedience and loyalty to God, because it goes against the mortal tendencies of the natural man. The scriptures and history of the restored Church contain innumerable examples of men and women who were put through a variety of tests of obedience—"to see if they [would] do all things which the Lord their God [should] command them." Many failed because of the severity of the test, its seeming inconsistency, or even its simpleness. In resolving life's difficulties the natural man relies upon human reasoning and is rarely willing to submit to an unseen power. He denies himself the guidance of the Spirit of God (see Alma 41:11; 1 Cor. 2:14). President Joseph F. Smith taught: "It is not easy for men to give up their vanities, to overcome their preconceived notions, and surrender themselves heart and soul to the will of God which is always higher than their own" (Gospel Doctrine , p. 9). President N. Eldon Tanner spoke of the plight of those who will neither seek nor submit to the wisdom and will of God, but rely instead on the arm of flesh to solve life's difficult problems. "Men are stumbling and groping for answers to their own and world problems and finding their attempts at solution to be totally inadequate, and indeed they are only getting more and more deeply into situations from which they are unable to extricate themselves" (Ensign, March 1975, p. 2).

The Nephite prophet-king Benjamin taught his people that to overcome the natural man one must yield his own will to the will of God. His counsel is as applicable to us today and thechallenges of the modern world as it was in ancient times: "For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

Yielding one's will to the will of God is not only a test of loyalty and faithfulness but is also the only sure way whereby we can receive spiritual guidance and protection in mortality, becoming sanctified from sin and prepared to receive exaltation in the world to come. The blessings resulting from submission to the will of God can be clearly seen in the example of the Church that was under the spiritual leadership of Nephi, son of Helaman. "They did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God" (Hel. 3:35).

Difficult as it may be, it is imperative that we overcome the powerful mortal tendency to resist counsel and walk stubbornly in our own ways. As we strive to understand God's words and bring our hearts into harmony with his will we can look to the Savior as the perfect Exemplar. "I seek not my own will," he testified, "but the will of the Father which hath sent me" (John 5:30; see also John 6:38; Matt. 26:38-44). Through complete obedience he achieved total unity with the Father, and earnestly prayed that his apostles and those who believed on him through their words would similarly become one with him and his father (see John 17:1-26).

God's Will Made Known Through Living Prophets

There are those who agree that we must do the will of God yet insist that no mortal man can authoritatively represent the will of the Lord to them. Many even accept the Bible as scriptureand profess belief in the ancient prophets, but think it absurd that God would continue to reveal his will to modern prophets. In a general conference address President Hugh B. Brown told of a conversation he had had many years earlier with a prominent British jurist who questioned the need for continuing revelation and modern prophets and challenged President Brown to defend his position. The conversation went as follows:

"May I proceed, sir, on the assumption that you are a Christian?"

"I am."

"I assume that you believe in the Bible—the Old and New Testaments?"

"I do!"

"Do you believe in prayer?"

"I do!"

"You say that my belief that God spoke to a man in this age is fantastic and absurd?"

"To me it is."

"Do you believe that God ever did speak to anyone?"

"Certainly, all through the Bible we have evidence of that."

"Did he speak to Adam?"

"Yes."

"To Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jacob, and to others of the prophets?"

"I believe he spoke to each of them."

"Do you believe that contact between God and man ceased when Jesus appeared on the earth?"

"Certainly not. Such communication reached its climax, its apex at that time."

"Do you believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God?"

"He was."

"Do you believe, sir, that after the resurrection of Christ, God ever spoke to any man?"

He thought for a moment and then said, "I remember one Saul of Tarsus who was going down to Damascus to persecute the saints and who had a vision, was stricken blind, in fact, and heard a voice."

"Whose voice did he hear?"

"Well," he said, "the voice said ‘I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.’"

"Do you believe that actually took place?"

"I do."

"Then, my Lord"—that is the way we address judges in the British commonwealth—"my Lord, I am submitting to you in all seriousness that it was standard procedure in Bible times for God to talk to men."

"I think I will admit that, but it stopped shortly after the first century of the Christian era."

"Why do you think it stopped?"

"I can't say."

"You think that God hasn't spoken since then?"

"Not to my knowledge."

"May I suggest some possible reasons why he has not spoken. Perhaps it is because he cannot. He has lost the power."

He said, "Of course that would be blasphemous."

"Well, then, if you don't accept that, perhaps he doesn't speak to men because he doesn't love us anymore. He is no longer interested in the affairs of men."

"No," he said, "God loves all men, and he is no respecter of persons."

"Well, then, if he can speak, and if he loves us, then the only other possible answer as I see it is that we don't need him. We have made such rapid strides in education and science that we don't need God any more."

And then he said, and his voice trembled as he thought of impending war, "Mr. Brown, there never was a time in the history of the world when the voice of God was needed as it is needed now." (Improvement Era, December 1967, pp. 36-37.)

Rejection of living prophets and of continuing revelation manifests itself in a variety of ways. Some of the arguments are openly humanistic, rejecting not only the need for revelation but even the need for God. Of this form of rejection, Jacob declared: "O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learnedthey think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not." (2 Ne. 9:28.)

A more subtle yet just as real rejection of modern prophets and revelation comes in religious guise. These critics would never openly declare, "We do not need God," but the logic of their rejection of prophets would seem to say, "We don't need God (i.e., living prophets) because we have God's word." It is not uncommon to hear some say that everything that God would say or that we would need to hear from him is found in the Bible. To them, there is nothing more for God to say than what has already been said to the ancient prophets as recorded in the Bible. No doubt Nephi foresaw this modern rejection when he declared: "Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough" (2 Ne. 28:29). The Book of Mormon prophet Moroni also added his warning to those who in the last days would reject revelations and miracles.

And again I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues;

Behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them.

For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing.

Behold I say unto you God has not ceased to be a God of miracles.

And who shall say that Jesus Christ did not do many mighty miracles? And there were many mighty miracles wrought by the hands of the apostles.

And if there were miracles wrought then, why has God ceased to be a God of miracles and yet be an unchangeable Being? And behold, I say unto you he changeth not; if so he would cease to be God; and he ceaseth not to be God, and is a God of miracles. (Morm. 7:7-9, 15, 18, 19.)

There can be no true religion—no true worship of a living God—without continuing communication with the heavens, the living fountain of truth and light. "Whoever heard of true religion without communication with God?" asked President John Taylor.

A good many people, and those professing Christians, will sneer a good deal at the idea of present revelation. Whoever heard of true religion without communication with God? To me the thing is the most absurd that the human mind can conceive. I do not wonder, when the people generally reject the principle of present revelation, that skepticism and infidelity prevail to such an alarming extent. I do not wonder that so many men treat religion with contempt, and regard it as something not worth the attention of intelligent beings, for without revelation religion is a mockery and a farce. If I can not have a religion that will lead me to God, and place me en rapport with him, and unfold to my mind the principles of eternal life, I want nothing to do with it. (In Journal of Discourses 16:371.)

The scriptures, both ancient and modern, confirm that God has revealed, does reveal, and will continue to reveal his will to man through his servants the prophets. The Old Testament prophet Amos testified, "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, until he revealeth the secret unto his servants the prophets" (JST Amos 3:7). Nephi was taught by the Lord himself of the continual need for revelation and additional scripture, and of the last days, when many of the Gentiles would reject and revile the Book of Mormon and other modern revelation. Nephi recorded the Lord's own chastisement of those who would reject such revelations.

And because my words shall hiss forth—many of the Gentiles shall say: A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible.

Thou fool, that shall say: A Bible, we have got a Bible, and we need no more Bible. Have ye obtained a Bible save it were by the Jews?

Know ye not that there are more nations than one?Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of the word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also.

And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and that I speak forth my words according to mine own pleasure. And because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man, neither from that time henceforth and forever.

Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written.

For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every man according to their works, according to that which is written. (2 Ne. 29:3, 6-10.)

From the time of Adam, the Ancient of Days, to the present, God has continued to dispense his word and will to the world through mortal men inspired and empowered of God to be his prophet-spokesmen. Just as he spoke to prophets from Moses to Malachi (and beyond), he spoke to the Prophet Joseph Smith and declared anew the divine role of continuing revelation. As the heavens opened in the nineteenth century with the restoration of priesthood keys and the kingdom of God on earth, so came the doctrinal restoration confirming what Amos anciently declared—that God will always reveal his "secret" to his servants the prophets. "Wherefore, I the Lord,knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments; and also gave commandments to others, that they should proclaim these things unto the world; and all this that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets" (D&C 1:17-18).

Of this unbroken chain of revelation from God to man, President Spencer W. Kimball testified: "For thousands of years there have been constant broadcasts from heaven of vital messages of guidance and timely warnings, and there has been a certain constancy in the broadcasts from the most powerful station. Throughout all those centuries there have been times when there were prophets who tuned in and rebroadcasted to the people. The messages have never ceased." (In Conference Report, April 1970, p. 121.)

Continuing Revelation and Living Prophets Necessary Today

For some reason many find it easier to accept the words and revelations of dead prophets than of the living ones. "Even in the Church," observed Elder Spencer W. Kimball, "many are prone to garnish the sepulchers of yesterday's prophets and mentally stone the living ones" (Instructor, August 1960, p. 257). This attitude reflects a misunderstanding of or disregard for what is perhaps the most important principle associated with continuing revelation—that it is always, as the Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "adapted to the circumstances."

We are differently situated from any other people that ever existed upon this earth; consequently those former revelations cannot be suited to our conditions; they were given to other people, who were before us; but in the last days, God was to call a remnant, in which was to be deliverance, as well as in Jerusalem and Zion. Now if God should give no more revelations, where will we find Zion and this remnant? (Teachings, pp. 70-71.)

God said, "Thou shalt not kill"; at another time He said,"Thou shalt utterly destroy." This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed. Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire. (Teachings, p. 256.)

Whether Church members or not, it is not uncommon for people to feel uncomfortable when changes occur. At such a time some members may become critical of those who have been called, sustained, and authorized to "build up the church and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations" (D&C 107:33). They may question the inspiration of leaders or wonder whether the Lord is indeed still revealing his will to the earth today. But changes in the Church are not only inevitable; also, as Elder Boyd K. Packer testified, they "are a testimony that revelation is on-going."

The gospel plan was revealed line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little, and there a little. And it goes on: "We believe that he will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God" (A of F 1:9).

There will be changes made in the future as in the past. Whether the Brethren make changes or resist them depends entirely upon the instructions they receive through the channels of revelation which were established in the beginning.

The doctrines will remain fixed, eternal; the organization, programs, and procedures will be altered as directed by Him whose church this is. (In Conference Report, October 1989, pp. 18-19.)

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a dynamic organization—ever growing, ever changing—in a world of ever-fluctuating conditions and circumstances. It is a living (i.e., alive, vigorous, vital, responsive) organism, mercifully and wisely adapting to the current concerns of its people. Of this President John Taylor taught:

We require a living tree—a living fountain—living intelligence, proceeding from the living priesthood in heaven, through the living priesthood on earth. And from the time that Adam first received a communication from God, to the time that John, on the Isle of Patmos, received his communication, or Joseph Smith had the heavens opened to him, it always required new revelations, adapted to the peculiar circumstances in which the churches or individuals were placed. Adam's revelation did not instruct Noah to build his ark; nor did Noah's revelation tell Lot to forsake Sodom; nor did either of these speak of the departure of the children of Israel from Egypt. These all had revelations for themselves. And so must we, or we shall make a shipwreck. (The Gospel Kingdom, p. 34.)

The gospel of Jesus Christ is comprised of eternal principles having universal relevance and application. These eternal principles, laws, and ordinances never change, and adherence to them is required of all Saints, regardless of generation, locality, or individual circumstance. "The gospel is the divine plan for personal, individual salvation and exaltation," Elder Ronald E. Poelman taught. "The Church is divinely commissioned to provide the means and resources that implement this plan in each individual's life."

Procedures, programs, and policies are developed within the Church to help us realize gospel blessings according to our individual capacity and circumstances. Under divine direction, these policies, programs, and procedures may be changed from time to time as necessary to fulfill gospel purposes.

The eternal principles of the gospel implemented through the divinely inspired Church apply to a wide variety of individuals in diverse cultures.

A necessary perspective is gained by studying and pondering the scriptures. Reading the scriptures, we learn the gospel as it is taught by various prophets in a variety of circumstances, times, and places.

In the scriptures we discover that varying institutional forms, procedures, regulations, and ceremonies were utilized—all divinely designed to implement eternal principles. The practices and procedures change; the principles do not. (In Conference Report, October 1984, p. 79.)

The scriptures themselves dramatically illustrate how revelation through living prophets is "adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed." Numerous examples could be given. Caring for the poor was accomplished partly by allowing them to glean the corners of harvested fields in Old Testament times, and through "United Order" systems in early Latter-day Saint history; and it is done by the means of fast offerings and an integrated welfare system in our day. The Saints in Moses’ day were given a strict code of conduct in the Mosaic laws and carnal commandments as a "schoolmaster" to lead them to Christ (see Gal. 3:24). The Savior, in his day, gave a higher law adapted to a different generation with different circumstances and capacities. The strict health code of Old Testament times has been replaced by a modern "word of wisdom, showing forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints in the last days" (D&C 89:2). Plural marriage was commanded at some times and forbidden in others. In our own day, organizational and program changes have been made to meet the pressing demands of an ever-expanding church. Local and missionary funding policies have also been altered. All these examples and numerous others illustrate how the Lord continually makes his will known, guiding the Church as it moves from one stage of physical, numerical, and spiritual growth to another. The lives of individual members are thus blessed with inspired instruction for applying eternal gospel principles to their own unique situations.

Prophets: Watchmen to God's Covenant People

"Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel," the Lord told the prophet Ezekiel, "therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning" (Ezek. 3:17). Just as a watchman, from his vantage point high above the ground, is able to see potential dangers far in the distance and thus warn the inhabitants below, so does the prophet of God sound awarning. His singular entitlement to inspiration from the Almighty, coupled with his experience of living and leading in the world, allows him to perceive and then warn us of dangers that may threaten our happiness, stifle our spiritual progress, and veer us away from the "strait and narrow path which leads to eternal life" (2 Ne. 31:18).

In this dispensation the Lord has reiterated what he declared to Ezekiel (Ezekiel 33:17) and Jeremiah (Jeremiah 6:17) in Old Testament times and to the Book of Mormon prophet Alma the Younger (Alma 6:1): that the prophets serve as God's watchmen, not only to his church but also to the world. In a richly symbolic parable (see D&C 101:43-65) the Lord taught Joseph Smith the role of the latter-day prophet as a "watchman upon the tower" in the building and directing of the kingdom of God and the redemption of Zion. In the parable the lord of the vineyard tells his slothful servants, "And behold, the watchman upon the tower would have seen the enemy while he was yet afar off; and then ye could have made ready and kept the enemy from breaking down the hedge thereof, and saved my vineyard from the hands of the destroyer" (D&C 101:54).

The Lord has lovingly established his anointed prophets as watchmen not only to protect us and the Church from danger but also to enrich our lives with guidance and counsel. These watchmen are like vigilant shepherds to the flock. Declared President George Q. Cannon:

Great responsibilities rest upon the officers of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The souls of the children of men are entrusted to their care. They are called shepherds of the flock of Christ, and if the sheep of the flock are injured or destroyed, the blame rests upon the shepherds. They are also called watchmen. They must stand and give warning of the approach of danger. They tell the people to prepare to escape threatened evil. If they are not watchful and vigilant, trouble may fall upon those whom they are appointed to guard and care for.

God has placed us as shepherds over His flock, and if we do not look out for the flock, He will smite us and remove us. We are placed as watchmen upon the walls of Zion, and if we do not give warning when we see danger,then we are culpable and will be condemned of God. (Gospel Truth, p. 210.)

The kingdom of God—the earthly Church led by living prophets—can be the place where, as the Lord said, we "may contemplate the glory of Zion" and "receive counsel from those whom I have set to be as plants of renown [i.e., "trees of righteousness," anointed leaders who have been "planted" by the Lord in the midst of the people—see also Ezek. 34:29] and as watchmen upon her walls" (D&C 124:60-61). Elder John H. Groberg has shared the following personal experience from his missionary service in the South Pacific. It portrays this principle through an unforgettable image that will help us better visualize the prophets as our watchmen.

On one occasion we received word that a missionary was very ill on a somewhat distant island. The weather was threatening, but feeling responsible, and after prayer, we left to investigate the situation. Extra heavy seas slowed our progress, and it was late afternoon before we arrived. The missionary was indeed very ill. Fervent prayer was followed by administration, during which the impression came very strongly to get him back to the hospital on the main island and to do it now!

The weather had deteriorated to the point of a small gale. The seas were heavy, the clouds were thick, the wind was fierce, the hour was late, and the sun was sinking rapidly, betokening a long black night ahead. But the impression was strong—"Get back now"—and one learns to obey the all-important promptings of the Spirit.

There was much concern expressed and much talk about the darkness, the storm, and the formidable reef with its extremely narrow openings to the harbor we were attempting to gain. Some found reason to stay behind; but soon eight persons, including an ill missionary, a very experienced captain, and a somewhat concerned district president, boarded the boat, and the spiritually prompted voyage to home base began.

No sooner had we made our commitment to the open seas than the intensity of the storm seemed to increase sevenfold. The small gale now became a major storm. As thesun sank below the horizon, bringing with it darkness and gloom, so also did my spirit seem to sink into the darkness of doubt and apprehension. The thick clouds and driving rain increased the blackness of our already dark universe—no stars, no moon, no rest, only turmoil of sea and body and mind and spirit. And as we toiled on through that fearsome night, I found my spirit communing with the spirit of the father of an afflicted child in the New Testament, as he exclaimed, "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief." (Mark 9:24.) And He did, and He does, and He will. That I know.

As we rolled and tossed closer and closer to the reef, all eyes searched for the light that marked the opening—the only entry to our home. Where was it? The blackness of the night seemed to increase; the fierceness of the raging elements seemed to know no bounds. The rain slashed at our faces and tore at our eyes—eyes vainly searching for that life-giving light.

Then I heard the chilling sound of the waves crashing and chewing against the reef! It was close—too close. Where was that light? Unless we hit the opening exactly, we would be smashed against the reef and ripped and torn by that thousand-toothed monster. It seemed that all the elements were savagely bent on our total destruction. Our eyes strained against the blackness, but we could not see the light.

Some began to whimper, others to moan and cry, and one or two even to scream in hysteria. At the height of this panic, when many were pleading to turn to the left or to the right, when the tumultuous elements all but forced us to abandon life and hope, I looked at the captain—and there I saw the face of calmness, the ageless face of wisdom and experience, as his eyes penetrated the darkness ahead. Quietly his weather-roughened lips parted, and without moving his fixed gaze and just perceptibly shifting the wheel, he breathed those life-giving words, "Ko e Maama e!" ("There is the light!")

I could not see the light, but the captain could see it. And I knew he could see it. Those eyes long experienced in ocean travel were not fooled by the madness of the storm nor were they influenced by the pleadings of those of lesser experience to turn to the left or to the right. And so with one last great swell we hurtled through the opening and into calmer waters.

The roaring of the reef was now behind us. Its infamous plan of destruction had been foiled. We were in the protected harbor. We were home. Then and only then did we see through the darkness that one small light—exactly where the captain had said it was. Had we waited until we ourselves could see the light, we would have been dashed to pieces, shredded on the reef of unbelief. But trusting in those experienced eyes, we lived.

And so the great lesson: There are those who, through years of experience and training, and by virtue of special divine callings, can see farther and better and more clearly—and can and will save us in those situations where serious injury or death, both spiritual and physical, would be upon us before we ourselves could see.

I sense in the world today an almost exact duplication of that voyage of nearly 20 years ago. We are in the midst of a major storm over moral values that will get worse before we arrive home.

I thank the Lord for our great prophet-leader of today. In our moment of great need the lord has provided one tested and molded and trained and instructed and clothed with divine authority, who in addition to the total of all his experience, which is great, draws upon the strength and power of not only generations of faithful leaders but also of angels and of gods.

I bear testimony that I know that God lives. I know that our Father in heaven loves us. I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Savior of the world. I know that he is our personal Savior, that he is our Friend—and I know he is our Helper; he will help us each personally and individually as we merit that help.

I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God. I testify that in our day [the living prophet] is the man whose eyes see the light that can and will save us and the world. When all about us are sinking in darkness and fear and despair, when destruction seems close and the raging fury of men and demons ensnares us in seemingly insoluble problems, listen as he calmly says, "There is the light. This is the way." (New Era, March 1977, pp. 45-46.)

1993 Bookcraft
