Brent L. Top, Larry E. Dahl, Walter D. Bowen, Follow the Living Prophets (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993)

A seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God.

—Mosiah 8:16

3 The Living Oracles: Prophets, Seers, and Revelators

The word prophet brings many images to people's minds. Some may think of the ancient biblical prophets—with long white beards and flowing robes, prophesying impending doom to ancient peoples. Still others may have a negative image of some cultic leader or religious charlatan who appropriates the title to himself for purposes of priestcraft, to manipulate and prey upon those who would follow him. Even among Church members there are many ideas and images of the prophetic role, the most common image springing to mind from the title prophet being that of the President of the Church. While it is true that prophet applies to the President, it is not the only way in which the term can or should be used.

In the parable of the nobleman cited in the previous chapter (see D&C 101:43-62), the Lord uses two similar yet distinct symbols to teach us a valuable lesson on the role of prophets. The first symbol is the "watchman upon the tower" and the second is the "watchmen upon the walls." In referring to the watchman, the Lord declared that "one may overlook the land round about, to be a watchman upon the tower" (verse 45). In addition, others were "set [as] watchmen upon the walls" (verse 53) to assist the one watchman on the tower in his responsibilities of discovering the enemy "while yet afar off," warning the inhabitants, and protecting the vineyard (Church) "from the hands of the destroyer" (verse 54). To covenant Israel today, the one "watchman on the tower" is the prophet-president of the Church. Just as there were watchmen to assist in conveying the messages and warnings of the watchman, so are there in the restored Church "prophets, seers, and revelators" and others with varying prophetic responsibilities who are called and anointed to assist in all parts of the vineyard—that is, in "building up and regulating all the affairs of the [Church] in all nations" (D&C 107:34). Understanding the scriptural meaning of the terms prophet, seer, and revelator not only will help us to see better the role and responsibilities of the "Lord's anointed" but also, most important, will help us to more clearly perceive our relationship and responsibility to them.

Prophet: A Teacher of Known Truth

"Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets," Moses prayed, "and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Num. 11:29.) The term prophet, as used here by Moses, can have both a general definition with a broad application to all faithful followers of God and a specific meaning with a very narrow application to those who have been ordained to that calling. This is manifest in the ancient usage of the term. In Greek the word for prophet is prophetes—"one who speaks on behalf of the gods." Its primary meaning was one of being a "spokesman" or "announcer." The Old Testament usage of the word prophet came from the Hebrew word nabi, which conveyed the idea that a prophet is one called of God "to announce," or "to proclaim," the mind and will of God (see B. N. Napier, "Prophet, Prophetism," Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible 3:896-97; Joseph Fielding McConkie, Prophets and Prophecy, pp. 5-10). In our day, prophets of the Restoration have likewise testified of the role of prophets. President Harold B. Lee taught that "in a broad sense, a prophet is one who speaks, who is inspired of God to speak in His name" (Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 153).

While many think of a prophet in terms of receivingrevelations that would predict or foretell future events, the ancient usage "was never laden with such connotations as ‘one who predicts the future’ (the prefix pro- meant ‘forth,’ not ‘fore’) or ‘inspired spokesman’" (David E. Aune, Prophecy in Early Christianity and the Ancient Mediterranean World, p. 195). While prophecy is the primary function of a prophet, prophesying is not so much predicting as it is proclaiming—more teaching and testifying than foretelling. "A prophet is a teacher," explained Elder John A. Widtsoe. "That is the essential meaning of the word. He teaches the body of truth, the gospel, revealed by the Lord to man; and under inspiration explains it to the understanding of the people. He is an expounder of truth." (Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 257.) President Anthony W. Ivins, a Counselor in the First Presidency in President Heber J. Grant's administration, taught the same truth.

A careful study of the etymology of the word and of the lives, works and character of the prophets of old makes clear the fact that a prophet was, and is, one called to act as God's messenger. He is to teach men the character of God, and define and make known to the people, his will. He is to denounce sin, and declare the punishment of transgression. He is to be above all else a preacher of righteousness, and when the people depart from the path which he has marked out for them to follow, is to call them back to the true faith. He is an interpreter of the scripture, and declares its meaning and application. When future events are to be declared he predicts them, but his direct and most important calling is to be a forth-teller, or director of present policy, rather than a foreteller of that which is to come. (In Conference Report, October 1925, p. 20.)

In addition to the prophetic roles of preacher of righteousness, forthteller rather than foreteller, and expounder of the truth, we have the expressions of John the Apostle and the Prophet Joseph Smith expanding further the meaning of the words prophecy and prophet. John declared, "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Rev. 19:10). Explaining the nature of a prophet and commenting on John's words, Joseph Smith taught:

If any person should ask me if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, as that would give me the lie; for, according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, if I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and imposters may be detected. (History of the Church 5:215-16; hereafter cited as HC.)

Faithful members of the Church can be prophets in that they may be preachers of righteousness, forthtellers, or expounders of truth, but especially in that they can and should possess a testimony of Jesus. President Harold B. Lee said that "anyone who enjoys the gift by which he may have God revealed has the spirit of prophecy, the power of revelation, and, in a sense, is a prophet within the sphere of responsibility and authority given to him" (Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 155). This is how the term prophet can be generally defined and applied.

Another, more specific, aspect of the word prophet must be examined and understood. It stems from the ancient Hebrew root of the word that is related to cognate Akkadian and Arabic words meaning "the called one" or "one who is anointed" (see Kittel & Friedrich, Theological Dictionary of the Bible, 6:796-97). This implies a more restricted usage of the term prophet, referring to those who have been given a particular calling or office with specialized responsibilities above and beyond teaching or testifying in general. This more lofty view of the prophetic role is evident in the following statement by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

A true prophet is one who has the testimony of Jesus; one who knows by personal revelation that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God, and that he was to be—or has been—crucified for the sins of the world; one to whom God speaks and who recognizes the still small voice of the Spirit. A true prophet is one who holds the holy priesthood; who is a legal administrator; who has power and authority from God to represent him on earth. A true prophet is a teacher of righteousness to whom the truths of the gospel have been revealed and who presents them to his fellowmen so they can become heirs of salvation in the highest heaven. A true prophet is a witness, a living witness, one who knows, and one who testifies. Such a one, if need be, foretells the future and reveals to men what the Lord reveals to him. (The Mortal Messiah 2:169.)

This definition of a prophet as "a called one" or "a legal administrator" differentiates between all faithful Saints, who can be filled with the spirit of prophecy, and those who are additionally called, sustained, and set apart as prophets to the people. Even though Moses prayed that all the Lord's people could be prophets, there was still a fundamental difference between what they could be as prophets and what he was as the prophet.

Seer: A Perceiver of Hidden Truth

The Old Testament Hebrew word for seer is ro'eh which means "one who sees" or "one who looks." The ancient usage of the term also designated seers as a distinct class of prophets (see Brown, Driver, & Driggs, A Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament, p. 909). It is clear from the ancient usage of the word that while there is a very close relationship in function, seers were in some special way different from a prophet as a proclaimer or teacher of truth. This distinction is clearly seen in Book of Mormon teachings. When King Limhi asked Ammon whether he could translate the twenty-four plates that contained Jaredite records Ammon told him no, but that Mosiah could because he was a seer (see Mosiah 8:5-12).

Now Ammon said unto him: I can assuredly tell thee, O king, of a man that can translate the records; for he has wherewith that he can look, and translate all records that are of ancient date; and it is a gift from God. And the things are called interpreters, and no man can look in them except he be commanded, lest he should look for that he ought notand he should perish. And whosoever is commanded to look in them, the same is called seer.

And behold, the king of the people who are in the land of Zarahemla [Mosiah II] is the man that is commanded to do these things, and who has the high gift from God.

And the king said that a seer is greater than a prophet.

And Ammon said that a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God. (Mosiah 8:13-16.)

The seeric gift goes beyond receiving the mind and will of God and proclaiming it to the world. It is a deeply spiritual responsibility to "see" or perceive the things of God in a more profound way than other people—even others who have "the spirit of prophecy," or the testimony of Jesus. "A seer is one who sees with spiritual eyes," declared Elder John A. Widtsoe. "He perceives the meaning of that which seems obscure to others; therefore he is an interpreter and clarifier of eternal truth. In short, he is one who sees, who walks in the Lord's light with open eyes." (Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 258.) As Ammon taught, a seer is a prophet in that he is a proclaimer of truth and a forthteller, but a seer is a predictor or foreteller as well. Ammon taught: "But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known" (Mosiah 8:17).

The seeric responsibility and gift to see with "spiritual eyes" (Moses 1:11) things that cannot be "visible to the natural eye" (Moses 6:36), is no ordinary ecclesiastical duty within the Church but rather is a "supernatural endowment" belonging to those who have been sustained as seers and who hold those seeric keys (see Elder Orson F. Whitney, Saturday Night Thoughts, pp. 39-40). Functions of the seers are many and appear throughout the scriptures and the history of the Church, both ancient and modern. One of the most apparent, as seen in theseeric ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith, was that of translating ancient records. Ammon taught that the seer can look into the "interpreters" and translate if he is commanded of the Lord to do so (Mosiah 8:13; see also Mosiah 28:13-16). In the Doctrine and Covenants we read that Joseph Smith was called and sustained not only as a prophet and seer but also as a "translator" (see D&C 21:1). In sustaining the prophet in general conference, "In current practice, the word ‘translator’ is omitted," wrote Elder Widtsoe, "since should records appear needing translation, the President of the Church may at any time be called, through revelation, to the special labor of translation" (Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 256).

Using the Urim and Thummin to translate records is one of the roles of a seer, but that role has been relatively rare and limited throughout history. The larger and more common function of a true seer, as a perceiver of truth, is that of being "a pillar of truth and righteousness" possessing "great spiritual strength and insight and wisdom, and whose knowledge and understanding of the Church and its needs is not surpassed" (Joseph Fielding Smith, Improvement Era, June 1970, p. 27).

Revelator: A Bearer of New Truth

It would seem logical to assume that a revelator is anyone who receives revelations. There are many statements to indicate that each of us as general prophets can receive revelation in our own personal lives and inspiration to guide us in our own stewardships. "There are, of course, ranks and grades of prophetic responsibility and authority," wrote Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "Every member of the Church should be a prophet as pertaining to his own affairs." ( Mormon Doctrine, p. 606.) Just because we may be prophets in that we can receive revelation, that does not mean that we are revelators even in the general sense. Elder John A. Widtsoe taught that a revelator is "a bearer of new truth." "A revelator makes known, with the Lord's help, something before unknown. It may be new or forgotten truth, or a new or forgotten application of known truth to man's need. Always, the revelator deals with truth, certain truth (D&C 100:11) and always it comes with the divine stamp of approval. Revelation maybe received in various ways, but it always presupposes that the revelator has so lived and conducted himself as to be in tune or harmony with the divine spirit of revelation, the spirit of truth, and therefore capable of receiving divine messages." (Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 258.)

With this definition as the foundation, we recognize that although individual members can receive and teach revelations that are in the body of already revealed truth, they cannot receive and declare as revelation truths and doctrines that have never previously been revealed. That is the sacred responsibility of the revelator. That is one of those important roles that separates a revelator from a prophet. Just as seer is a different class of "anointed" prophet or an enlargement of the prophetic mantle, so is revelator. Speaking of Joseph Smith as the "revelator" for the Church (and by implication all those revelators that have succeeded him), the Lord declared: "For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye have received a commandment for a law unto my church, through him whom I have appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations from my hand. And this ye shall know assuredly—that there is none other appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations until he be taken, if he abide in me." (D&C 43:2-3.)

Prophets, Seers, and Revelators

The Church as the kingdom of God on earth is governed and directed at the various levels by men and women who are entitled to the spirit of prophecy and to be guided by inspiration in their service. While this means that there may be many prophets within the Church, at any given time there are only fifteen men at a time whom the Lord has designated to be "prophets, seers, and revelators." These fifteen have been given what President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., characterized as "a special spiritual endowment" different from all others.

It should be in mind that some of the General Authorities have had assigned to them a special calling; they possess a special gift; they are sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators, which gives them a special spiritual endowment in connection with their teaching of the people. They have theright, the power, and authority to declare the mind and will of God to his people, subject to the over-all power and authority of the President of the Church. Others of the General Authorities are not given this special spiritual endowment and authority covering their teaching; they have a resulting limitation, and the resulting limitation upon their power and authority in teaching applies to every other officer and member of the Church, for none of them is spiritually endowed as a prophet, seer, and revelator. ("When Are Church Leaders' Words Entitled to Claim of Scripture?" pp. 9-10.)

Those fifteen prophet-leaders who are endowed with special gifts and authority, and to whom we must look as the Lord's watchmen, are the President of the Church, the Counselors in the First Presidency, and the members of the Quorum of the Twelve.

The President of the Church

The President of the Church is uniquely different from all of the other prophets, seers, and revelators in that he "has a further and special spiritual endowment in this respect, for he is the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator for the entire Church" (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., "When Are Church Leaders' Words Entitled to Claim of Scripture?" p. 10). Speaking of the President of the Church as the "Presiding High Priest," the Lord declared: "Wherefore, it must needs be that one be appointed of the High Priesthood to preside over the priesthood, and he shall be called President of the High Priesthood of the Church; or, in other words, the Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood of the Church" (D&C 107:65-66).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained what is meant by the term Presiding High Priest: "God's chief representative on earth, the one who holds the highest spiritual position in his kingdom in any age, is called the high priest. This special designation of the chief spiritual officer of the Church has reference to the administrative position which he holds rather than to the office to which he is ordained in the priesthood." ( Mormon Doctrine, pp. 355-56.) The revelation further explains how the Presiding High Priest is the chief spiritual officer of the Church. "And again, the duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church and to be like unto Moses—behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the Church" (D&C 107:91-92).

Two phrases from the previous passage highlight the two distinctive administrative roles of the prophet, seer, and revelator—"to preside over the whole church" and "to be like unto Moses." Understanding the doctrinal meaning of these phrases illuminates the uniqueness of the roles of the President of the Church.

"To Preside over the Whole Church"

The word preside, the root word in president and presidency, comes from the Latin praesidere, which literally means to "sit in front of." The dictionary definition of the word is "to hold the position of authority" and "to possess or exercise control or authority." In modern revelation the Lord has spoken of the authority and sealing power of the Prophet Joseph Smith (and his successors) as the President of the Church:

And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law are these: All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all eternity, and that too most holy, by revelation and commandment through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of the priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead (D&C 132:7).

What is this "power and the keys of the priesthood" that belong to one man only upon the earth—the Lord's anointed? The answer begins to emerge in the scriptural account of the Savior'smeridian ministry with his twelve Apostles. Shortly after Jesus called the Twelve to be "fishers of men" (Matt. 4:19), he gave them "power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease" (Matt. 10:1). Though Peter, along with the other Apostles, had received the priesthood earlier, the Lord promised him additional authority. "And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matt. 16:19).

President Joseph F. Smith explained the distinction between priesthood and the keys of the Priesthood.

The Priesthood in general is the authority given to man to act for God. Every man ordained to any degree of the Priesthood has this authority delegated to him.

But it is necessary that every act performed under this authority shall be done at the proper time and place, in the proper way, and after the proper order. The power of directing these labors constitutes the keys of the Priesthood. In their fulness, the keys are held by only one person at a time, the prophet and president of the Church. He may delegate any portion of this power to another, in which case that person holds the keys of that particular labor. Thus, the president of a temple, the president of a stake, the bishop of a ward, the president of a mission, the president of a quorum, each holds the keys of the labors performed in that particular body or locality. His Priesthood is not increased by this special appointment. The president of an elders' quorum, for example, has no more Priesthood than any member of that quorum. But he holds the power of directing the official labors performed in the quorum, or in other words, the keys of that division of that work. (Gospel Doctrine , p. 136.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained this concept further.

As pertaining to this mortal sphere, priesthood is the power and authority of God, delegated to men on earth, to act in all things for the salvation of men. It is the same power held by the noble and great spirits before the foundations of this world were laid. It is the same power carried into the spirit world by the faithful elders when they depart this life. It is the same power the redeemed of the Lord will possess when they rise in glorious immortality and enter into their exaltation, when, reigning from eternal thrones, they will exercise this supreme power forever.

The keys of the priesthood are the right and power of presidency. They are the directing, controlling, and governing power. Those who hold them are empowered to direct the manner in which others use their priesthood. Every ministerial act performed by a priesthood holder must be done at the proper time and place and in the proper way. The power of directing these labors constitutes the keys of the priesthood. Every elder, for instance, has the power to baptize, but no elder can use this power unless he is authorized to do so by someone holding the keys.

The keys of the kingdom are the power, right, and authority to preside over the kingdom of God on earth, which is the Church, and to direct all of its affairs. (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith , p. 309.)

The President of the Church holds and exercises all of the keys of the priesthood that are necessary to "govern and direct all of the Lord's affairs on earth" (Joseph Fielding Smith, Ensign, July 1972, p. 87). All others who labor in the Church under the direction of the priesthood are empowered to do so by the authority of the President of the Church. It is through the keys of the priesthood which he holds that he governs, directs, and authorizes the use of priesthood on earth. "He is the one man on earth at a time who can both hold and exercise the keys of the kingdom in their fulness," wrote Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "By the authority vested in him, all ordinances of the gospel are performed, all teaching of the truths of salvation is authorized, and through the keys which he holds, salvation itself is made available to men of his day." ( Mormon Doctrine, pp. 591-92.) In this way, the President of the Church—the prophet, seer, and revelator—presides over the whole Church. "He alone can give direction to all others, direction from which none is exempt" (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, May 1983, p. 23).

"To Be Like unto Moses"

Of Moses, Jehovah declared: "With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold" (Num. 12:8). Moses was the prototype prophet "whom the Lord knew face to face" (Deut. 34:10). In our day, as anciently, the President of the Church is "like unto Moses" in that he is God's sole mouthpiece. To him comes the word of the Lord. As the presiding high priest, the prophet is the only one empowered to receive revelations for the entire Church.

In the early days of this dispensation the importance of this lofty right of the Prophet Joseph Smith (and his successors) became apparent when some claimed to have received revelations for the Church. Several months after the Church was organized, Hiram Page (one of the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon) maintained that he was receiving such revelations through a certain stone in his possession. Some members, including Oliver Cowdery, believed him. In a revelation given through Joseph Smith, speaking to Oliver specifically and the entire Church generally, the Lord instructed his Church regarding the principle of revelation: "But, behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee, no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses. And thou shalt be obedient unto the things which I shall give unto him. And thou shalt not command him who is at thy head, and at the head of the church; for I have given him the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead." (D&C 28:2-3, 6-7.)

Less than six months later this principle of revelation was again tested when a woman named Hubble "professed to be a prophetess of the Lord, and professed to have many revelations." She claimed "she should become a teacher in the Church." Appearing very sanctimonious, she "deceived some who were not able to detect her in her hypocrisy." (See HC 1:154, footnote.) The Lord then gave a revelation to Joseph Smith that clarified and further established the "law of revelation" by which the kingdom of God is governed.

For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye have received a commandment for a law unto my church, through him whom I have appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations from my hand.

And this ye shall know assuredly—that there is none other [besides the Prophet] appointed unto you [the Church members] to receive commandments and revelations until he be taken, if he abide in me.

But verily, verily, I say unto you, that none else shall be appointed unto this gift except it be through him; for if it be taken from him he shall not have power except to appoint another in this stead.

And this shall be a law unto you, that ye receive not the teachings of any [other than the Prophet] that shall come before you as revelations or commandments;

And this I give unto you that you may not be deceived, that you may know they are not of me. (D&C 43:2-6.)

These revelations emphatically declare that revelation for the entire Church comes only through one person—the prophet, the presiding high priest. Several of the Lord's anointed leaders who have served as prophets, seers, and revelators have left their testimonies of this vital principle. President George Q. Cannon stated:

Now, there is only one way in which the commandments of God can be revealed unto us. God has not left this in doubt. He has not left us to grope in the dark respecting His methods of revealing His mind and will unto His children. In the very beginning of the work of God in these last days, to remove all doubt upon this subject, God gave revelations unto this Church in exceeding great plainness, and there was one principle that was emphatically dwelt upon and enforced, namely, that there was but one channel, one channel alone, through which the word of God and the commandments of God should come to this people. The word of God was not to come from the people up. It was not vox populi, vox dei, but it was to be vox dei, vox populi—that is, the voice of God and then the voice of the people—from God downward through the channel that He should appoint; by the means that He should institute. (In Journal of Discourses 24:362-63.)

Commenting on the "law of revelation" as declared by the Lord in D&C 28 and 43 of the Doctrine and Covenants, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote:

There is order in the kingdom of God. There could not be order if every man was privileged to give commandments and claim the right to direct by revelation the members of the Church.

This law is given for our government for all time. It is the one who holds the keys and who stands as the Presiding High Priest and President of the Church, who is the spokesman of the Lord for the members of the Church. Individual members may receive the inspiration and revelation for their own guidance, but not for the Church. Moreover, no member of the Church will profess to receive a revelation for his own guidance, that is contradictory of any revelation coming from the President of the Church. (Church History and Modern Revelation 1:172.)

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., also taught that neither the Counselors in the First Presidency, members of the Quorum of the Twelve, nor any person in any position in the Church can receive revelations for the entire Church, declare doctrine, or speak as the Lord's representative without the authorization of the President.

Here we must have in mind—must know—that only the President of the Church, the Presiding High Priest, is sustained as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator for the Church, and he alone has the right to receive revelations for the Church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the Church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the Church. He is God's sole mouthpiece on earth for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the only true church. He alone may declare the mind and will of God to his people. No officer of any other church in the world has this high right and lofty prerogative.

So when any other person, irrespective of who he is, undertakes to do any of these things, you may know he is not "moved upon by the Holy Ghost" in so speaking unless he has special authorization from the President of the Church. ("When Are Church Leaders' Words Entitled to Claim of Scripture?" p. 10.)

A Unique Promise

Some may suggest that, since prophets are mortal men with mortal frailties, it is potentially dangerous to "give heed unto all his words and commandments as if from [God's] own mouth" (D&C 21:4-5). Therefore, how can we be sure the prophets speak for heaven? How can we be sure that they will not lead us astray?

While we do not claim infallibility for the prophet-president of the Church, we do have claim upon special promises and assurances about his prophetic ministry and counsel. Several men who have served as Presidents of the Church have left their solemn testimonies concerning this unique promise.

President Brigham Young:

The Lord Almighty leads this Church, and he will never suffer you to be led astray if you are found doing your duty. You may go home and sleep as sweetly as a babe in its mother's arms, as to any danger of your leaders leading you astray, for if they should try to do so the Lord would quickly sweep them from the earth. (In Journal of Discourses 9:289.)

President Wilford Woodruff:

I say to Israel, the Lord will never permit me or any other man who stands as president of the Church to lead you astray. It is not in the program. It is not in the mind of God. If I were to attempt that the Lord would remove me out of my place, and so he will any other man who attempts to lead the children of men astray from the oracles of God and from their duty. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 212-13.)

President Joseph F. Smith:

I testify in the name of Israel's God that He will not suffer the head of the Church, him whom He has chosen to stand at the head, to transgress His laws and apostatize; the moment he should take a course that would in time lead to it, God would take him away. Why? Because to suffer a wicked man to occupy that position, would be to allow, as it were, the fountain to become corrupted, which is something He will never permit. (In Journal of Discourses 24:192.)

President Heber J. Grant (as quoted by Elder Marion G. Romney):

Now if we will keep these things in mind, we shall not be deceived by false teachings. I remember years ago when I was a bishop I had President [Heber J.] Grant talk to our ward. Standing by me, he put his arm over my shoulder and said: "My boy, you always keep your eye on the President of the Church, and if he ever tells you to do anything, and it is wrong, and you do it, the Lord will bless you for it." Then with a twinkle in his eye, he said, "But you don't need to worry. The Lord will never let his mouthpiece lead the people astray." (In Conference Report, October 1960, p. 78.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith:

Now, brethren, I think there is one thing which we should have exceedingly clear in our minds. Neither the President of the Church, nor the First Presidency, nor the united voice of the First Presidency and the Twelve will ever lead the Saints astray or send forth counsel to the world that is contrary to the mind and will of the Lord. (In Conference Report, April 1972, p. 99.)

President Harold B. Lee:

Yes, we believe in a living prophet, seer, and revelator, and I bear you my solemn witness that we have a living prophet, seer, and revelator. We are not dependent onlyupon the revelations given in the past as contained in our standard works—as wonderful as they are—but we have a mouthpiece to whom God does reveal and is revealing His mind and will. God will never permit him to lead us astray. As has been said, God would remove him out of his place if he should attempt to do it. You have no concern. Let the management and government of God, then, be with the Lord. Do not try to find fault with the management and affairs that pertain to Him alone and by revelation through His prophet—His living prophet, His seer, and His revelator. (Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 164.)

President Ezra Taft Benson:

Christ has provided us the gift of a prophet. Of all mortal men, we should keep our eyes most firmly fixed on the captain—the prophet, seer, and revelator, and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This is the man who stands closest to the fountain of living waters (Jer. 2:13; 1 Ne. 11:25). There are some heavenly instructions for us that we can only receive through the prophet. A good way to measure your standing with the Lord is to see how you feel about, and act upon, the inspired words of His earthly representative, the prophet-president.

All men are entitled to inspiration, but only one man is the Lord's mouthpiece. Some lesser men have in the past, and will in the future, use their office unrighteously. Some will use it to lead the unwary astray; some will use it to persuade us that all is well in Zion; some will use it to cover and excuse their ignorance. Keep your eye on the prophet—for the Lord will never permit His prophet to lead this Church astray. (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, pp. 140, 142.)

These testimonies assure us that we can have confidence in the living prophet. If we will faithfully obey him and "give heed unto all his words" as if from the Lord, we have been promised that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness before you" (see D&C 21:4-6). That is a marvelous promise in a world that is increasingly threatened with more and more darkness and confusion.

The First Presidency

When the Church was officially organized on April 6, 1830, in Fayette, New York, there was no First Presidency as we know it today. Joseph Smith was identified in the revelation as "an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the first elder of this church" (D&C 20:2). Oliver Cowdery, who had assisted the Prophet with the work of the Restoration and had been at his side when the priesthood was restored by John the Baptist and later by Peter, James, and John, was "also called of God, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the second elder of this church" (D&C 20:3). It is interesting to note that Oliver was not called a counselor to Joseph, but rather the "second elder." In the earliest days and months of the Church's existence there was little reference to Joseph as "President of the Church." This changed, however, with the sustaining of Joseph as the "President of the High Priesthood" at a conference of the priesthood and membership of the Church in Amherst, Ohio, on January 25, 1832. Several weeks later, in March 1832, the Prophet received the revelation calling Counselors into the "Presidency of the High Priesthood" (see historical headings to D&C sections 75, 81-82). In fulfillment of this earlier revelation, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams were ordained on March 18, 1833, by Joseph Smith as Counselors in the First Presidency. Of this important historical event, Joseph said: "Accordingly I laid my hands on Brothers Sidney and Frederick, and ordained them to take part with me in holding the keys of this last kingdom, and to assist in the Presidency of the High Priesthood, as my Counselors" (HC 1:334).

The Prophet's statement about the Counselors taking part in holding the keys of the kingdom reflect the words he had previously received by revelation concerning the responsibilities and authority of the Counselors. "The keys of the kingdom," declared the Lord, "belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood" (D&C 81:2). Nearly a year later, the Lord further revealed:

Thus saith the Lord, verily, verily I say unto you my son [Joseph Smith], thy sins are forgiven thee, according to thy petitions, for thy prayers and the prayers of thy brethren have come up into my ears.

Therefore, thou art blessed from henceforth that bear the keys of the kingdom given unto you; which kingdom is coming forth for the last time.

Verily I say unto you, the keys of this kingdom shall never be taken from you, while thou art in the world, neither in the world to come;

Nevertheless, through you shall the oracles [revelations] be given to another, yea, even unto the church.

And all they who receive the oracles of God [i.e., revelations and the prophets who give revelations], let them beware how they hold them lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are brought under condemnation thereby, and stumble and fall when the storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house.

And again, verily I say unto thy brethren, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, their sins are forgiven them also, and they are accounted as equal with thee in holding the keys of this last kingdom. (D&C 90:1-6.)

How do the keys of the kingdom belong to the First Presidency, and in what way are the Counselors "equal" to the President? Commenting on the previously cited revelation Elder John A. Widtsoe addressed these pertinent questions and explained the proper relationship of the Counselors to the President.

Joseph Smith was given two Counsellors, the three forming the First Presidency of the Church (March 18, 1833). This was preceded on March 8, 1833, by a revelation declaring that "Through you [Joseph Smith] shall the oracles be given to another, even unto the Church." The pre-eminence of the President of the Church was maintained. The question as to whether the Counsellors held the same power as the President was soon debated among the people. What could the Counsellors do without direct appointment from the President? These questions were answered in a meeting on January 26, 1836. The Prophet there said, "The Twelve are not subject to any other than the First Presidency and where I am not, there is no First Presidency over the Twelve." In other words were the President taken, the Counsellorswould have no authority. The Counsellors do not possess the power of the President and cannot act in Church matters without direction and consent of the President. (In Roy W. Doxey, comp., Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants 3:247. For a discussion concerning the controversy surrounding this statement see the note on page 81 of this book.)

In 1835, the revelation contained in Doctrine and Covenants section 107 was received. In this section, which deals with priesthood and Church government matters, the Lord further identified the responsibilities of the First Presidency.

Of the Melchizedek Priesthood, three Presiding High Priests, chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the Presidency of the Church.

Again, verily, I say unto you, the most important business of the church, and the most difficult cases of the church, inasmuch as there is not satisfaction upon the decisions of the bishop or judges, it shall be handed over and carried up unto the council of the church, before the Presidency of the High Priesthood.

And the Presidency of the council of the High Priesthood shall have power to call other high priests, even twelve, to assist as counselors; and thus the Presidency of the High Priesthood and its counselors shall have power to decide upon testimony according to the laws of the church.

And after this decision it shall be had in remembrance no more before the Lord; for this is the highest council of the church of God, and a final decision upon controversies in spiritual matters.

There is not any person belonging to the church who is exempt from this council of the church. (D&C 107:22, 78-81.)

As the "highest council of the church," the First Presidency is responsible to administer both spiritually and temporally "the most important business of the church" and to make inspired judgments regarding "the most difficult cases of the church." President Joseph Fielding Smith explained that the First Presidency is "the supreme governing power of the Church."

The First Presidency preside over all councils, all quorums, and all organizations of the Church, with supreme appointing power and power of nomination. These powers of appointment, nomination, and presiding may be delegated by the First Presidency to others whom they may choose and whom the people sustain to represent the presidency in the government of the Church.

The First Presidency are the living oracles of God and the supreme adjudicators and interpreters of the law of the Church. They supervise the work of the entire Church in all matters of policy, organization, and administration. No part of the work of the Church is beyond their authority. (Improvement Era, November 1966, p. 978.)

President N. Eldon Tanner, who served as a Counselor to four Presidents of the Church and was intimately familiar with the workings of the First Presidency, described how the principles outlined in the revelations were put into daily practice in the administration of the Church in his day.

Let me list some of the things administered directly by the First Presidency: budgeting, educational, historical, and personnel departments; temples; auditing; and the welfare services.

In general, all these matters are under the direction of the First Presidency. Specifically, in regularly scheduled meetings, the First Presidency meet every Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday at 8 a.m. with a secretary who makes a complete record of all procedures. These discussions include the correspondence which has been addressed to the First Presidency—which contains almost everything from questions about pierced ears to appeals from decisions of excommunication by the stake presidency and high council. There are questions about dress and grooming standards, hypnotism, Sabbath observance, scripture interpretation, sensitivity training, sealings, complaints against local officers, reincarnation, donation of body parts to science or to others, cremation, transplants, legal matters, ad infinitum.

Their decisions also involve the selection of new temple presidencies, when and where new temples should be built, and other matters to be discussed when meeting with the Council of the Twelve Apostles and with the Presiding Bishopric.

Tuesday morning at 10 a.m. they meet with the Expenditures Committee, which is made up of the First Presidency, four members of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric. This is where heads of different departments present their expenditure requirements for consideration, and allocations are made. Examples include requests by the Physical Facilities Department for acquisition of lands and of buildings such as stake or ward houses, mission homes, visitors centers, and so on, and discussions of the costs of maintenance. Also, the Presiding Bishopric presents requests for expenditures involving welfare projects.

Wednesday First Presidency meetings are used for hearing reports from heads of different departments that come directly under the First Presidency, such as the Historical, Personnel, and Public Communications departments. Appointments for important visitors are also scheduled for Wednesday mornings where possible. I am always impressed by the influence the President of the Church has on these visitors as we receive direct and indirect feedback through correspondence or verbal reports.

Once a month on Wednesdays the First Presidency meets with the Combined Church Board of Education and Board of Trustees to deal with all matters affecting universities and colleges, institutes and seminaries, and other Church schools. Also, on one Wednesday each month they meet with the Welfare Services Committee, as mentioned previously.

On Thursday mornings at 10 a.m. they join with the Council of the Twelve in the upper room of the temple, where the Twelve have been convened since 8 a.m. It is in this room that the leadership of the Church has been directed by the Lord since the temple was completed. Here one experiences a special spiritual feeling, and at times senses the presence of some of these great leaders who have gone on before. Portraits of the twelve Presidents of the Church, and also of Hyrum, the Patriarch, hang on thewalls. There are also paintings of the Savior at the Sea of Galilee where he called some of his apostles, and others portraying his crucifixion and his ascension. Here we are reminded of the many great leaders who have sat in this council room, and under the direction of the Lord great decisions were made.

As the First Presidency enters this room at ten o'clock on Thursday mornings, we shake hands with all members of the Twelve, then change to our temple robes. We sing, kneel in prayer, and then join in a prayer circle at the altar, after which we change to our street clothes.

After discussing the minutes of the previous meeting, we consider such matters as the following: approval of changes in bishoprics as recommended by stake presidents—previously discussed in the meeting of the Twelve (you might be interested in knowing that during 1977 we approved an average of twenty-five to thirty new bishops every week); changes in stake, ward, mission, and temple organizations throughout the Church, including boundaries and officers; officers and administration of auxiliary organizations; matters brought in by the heads of different departments; and our reports of stake conferences and other activities during the week, such as funerals, speaking engagements, and so forth. It is in this body that any change in administration or policy is considered and approved, and it then becomes the official policy of the Church.

On the first Thursday of every month the First Presidency meets with all the General Authorities—the members of the Twelve, the Seventy, and the Presiding Bishopric. In this meeting all are advised of any changes in programs or procedures and instructed in their duties or responsibilities. The President calls on members to bear their testimonies, after which we all dress in our temple clothes, partake of the sacrament, and have a prayer circle with all members present participating. At the conclusion of the prayer all, other than the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, are dismissed, and those remaining change to their street clothes and carry on with the regular business of the Thursday meetings. A recording secretary makes a report of all that is said and done.

Following each Thursday meeting the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve have lunch in a room assigned for that purpose. In this room we have a lovely picture of the Last Supper. This is a period of relaxation, and in conversation we exchange experiences and discuss matters of common interest. I could tell you some interesting discussions if I had time. Friday at 9 a.m. the Presiding Bishopric meets with the First Presidency to give reports and discuss matters affecting the administration. (In Conference Report, October 1979, pp. 64, 67-69; also Ensign, November 1979, pp. 45-48.)

The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

Even before the Church was officially organized, the Lord told Joseph Smith through revelation that there were to be "others who are called to declare my gospel, both unto Gentile and unto Jew; yea, even twelve; and the Twelve shall be my disciples" (D&C 18:26-27). The word apostle literally means "one who is sent forth," with an added emphasis on the "commission or authority to represent another." Revelations received from 1829 to 1835 contain several references to apostles. However, an expanded understanding of the unique meaning of the word as an ecclesiastical calling in a presiding quorum of the Church did not come until what is now D&C 107 of the Doctrine and Covenants was revealed in 1835.

The twelve traveling councilors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world—thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling.

And they form a quorum equal in authority and power to the three presidents previously mentioned.

The Twelve are a Traveling Presiding High Council, to officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the Presidency of the Church, agreeable to the institution of heaven; to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the Gentiles and secondly unto the Jews.

The Twelve [are] sent out, holding the keys, to open the door by the proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ first unto the Gentiles and then unto the Jews.

It is the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the church, to ordain evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation. (D&C 107:23-24, 33, 35, 39.)

These verses highlight five important duties of the Quorum of the Twelve. Each is unique, yet is interrelated with the others and is essential in the overall administration of the Church and the fulfillment of the Savior's charge to the Apostles, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature" (Mark 16:15).

"Special Witnesses of the Name of Christ in All the World"

Prior to his ascension to heaven, the resurrected Christ commissioned his Apostles to proclaim the gospel throughout the world. He taught them that "it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these things." (Luke 24:46-48.) The charge is the same today: "The foremost responsibility of the Twelve Apostles," declared President Ezra Taft Benson, "is to bear witness to the divinity of Jesus Christ and to the restoration of His gospel in these latter days to all the world" ("150th Year for Twelve: ‘Witnesses to All World,’" p. 3).

What does it mean to be a special witness of the name of Christ? President Joseph F. Smith said:

All these, your brethren, that are called to the apostleship are endowed, or ought to be endowed, richly with the spirit of their calling. For instance these twelve disciples of Christ are supposed to be eye and ear witnesses of the divine mission of Jesus Christ. It is not permissible for them to say, I believe, simply; I have accepted it simply because I believe it. Read the revelation (D&C 18:26-33); the Lord informs us they must know, they must get the knowledge forthemselves, it must be with them as though they had seen with their eyes and heard with their ears and they know the truth. That is their mission, to testify of Jesus Christ and Him crucified and risen from the dead and clothed now with almighty power at the right hand of God, the Savior of the world. That is their mission, and their duty. (In Conference Report, April 1916, p. 6.)

President Smith's use of the phrase, "as though they had seen with their eyes and heard with their ears" implies a profound knowledge—a discerning, perceiving, or understanding—that comes by means beyond the auditory or visual senses. From the scriptures and statements of the prophets it is clear that Apostles, as special witnesses of the name of Christ, must know that he lives and must know him, but that special knowledge comes from an even greater witness than sight or hearing—the witness of the Holy Ghost. While serving as President of the Church, President Harold B. Lee told the students at Brigham Young University that there is a witness "more important than sight."

As I pray for the guidance of the Spirit, and seek to rise to the responsibility that has been given me, I don't ask for any special endowment. I ask only to go where the Lord would have me go, and only to receive what the Lord would have me receive, knowing that more important than sight is the witness that one may have by the witness of the Holy Ghost to his soul that things are so and that Jesus is the Christ, a living personage. It is that which guides me through many of the experiences of life. ("Be Loyal to the Royal Within You," p. 88.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith also testified that "impressions on the soul" are "far more significant than a vision." This important principle applies not only to the apostolic witness but also to the testimony of the risen Lord that each member of the Church should possess. President Smith taught:

They [the Twelve Apostles] are special witnesses for Jesus Christ. It is their right to know the truth and to have an abiding witness. This is an exacting duty upon them, to know that Jesus Christ is in very deed the Only Begotten Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, and the Savior of all those who will confess their sins, repent, and keep his commandments.

The question frequently arises: "Is it necessary for a member of the Council of the Twelve to see the Savior in order to be an apostle?" It is their privilege to see him if occasion requires, but the Lord has taught that there is a stronger witness than seeing a personage, even of seeing the Son of God in a vision. Impressions on the soul that come from the Holy Ghost are far more significant than a vision. When Spirit speaks to spirit, the imprint upon the soul is far more difficult to erase. Every member of the Church should have impressions that Jesus is the Son of God indelibly pictured on his soul through the witness of the Holy Ghost. (Improvement Era, November 1966, p. 979.)

Just as President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that every member of the Church can have a sure witness or knowledge of the reality of Christ, so also did the Prophet Joseph Smith. He stated: "God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them" (HC 3:380). By virtue of the baptismal covenant, all members of the Church also "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places" (Mosiah 18:9). As witnesses it is also their privilege to obtain a perfect knowledge of the Savior's divinity, even to seeing him face to face (see D&C 67:10; 88:68; 93:1; see also Bruce R. McConkie, The Promised Messiah, pp. 592-95). What, then, is the difference between rank and file members of the Church who are "witnesses" of Christ and members of the Twelve who stand as "special witnesses" of His name? One difference can be found in the scope of the apostolic witness. While we can have the same knowledge revealed to us as the Twelve, we are not called as "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world." Also, we do not have the keys of authority they possess which endow their apostolic witness with saving power.

"Equal in Authority and Power to the Three Presidents"

At the time of their ordination, the members of the Twelve have conferred upon their heads all of the same keys as those resident in the prophet-president of the Church (see D&C 90:6). Although as a quorum they may be "equal in authority and power to the three presidents" (D&C 107:24) there is a difference in how they can exercise or act upon those given keys. President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote:

Each of the apostles when he is ordained has conferred upon him all the keys and authorities which were given by Joseph Smith to the apostles before his death. These brethren, however cannot exercise these authorities except when the occasion arises that they come to the presidency. Before that time the powers lie dormant. This is one reason why they are sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators in the Church, but there can be but one revelator for the Church at a time. (Church History and Modern Revelation 2:151.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie provides us with additional insight as to how the Twelve hold all the keys yet serve "under the direction of the Presidency of the Church" (see D&C 107:33).

The keys of the kingdom of God—the right and power of eternal presidency by which the earthly kingdom is governed—these keys, having first been revealed from heaven, are given by the spirit of revelation to each man who is both ordained an Apostle and set apart as a member of the Council of the Twelve.

But since keys are the right of presidency, they can only be exercised in their fulness by one man on earth at a time. He is always the senior Apostle, the presiding Apostle, the presiding high priest, the presiding elder. He alone can give direction to all others, direction from which none is exempt.

Thus, the keys, though vested in all of the Twelve, are used by any one of them to a limited degree only, unless anduntil one of them attains that seniority which makes him the Lord's anointed on earth. (Ensign, May 1983, pp. 22-23.)

Thus, although the scriptures speak of the Quorum of the Twelve as being "equal in authority and power" with the First Presidency, it does not mean that they can function or use their powers independent of the senior prophet, seer, and revelator. President Joseph Fielding Smith clarified the meaning of the phrase "equal in authority" as it applies to the Twelve and the First Presidency. "I think it must be said that the Apostles could not be equal in authority with the Presidency when the First Presidency is fully and properly organized," he wrote. "There could not be two heads—or three heads—of equal authority at the same time, for such a thing would lead to confusion." (Improvement Era, November 1966, p. 979.) As long as the First Presidency is functioning, neither the Quorum of the Twelve as a body nor individual Apostles are entitled to lead or direct the Church without the authorization and guidance of the First Presidency. Their labor is to direct the business of the Church that is delegated to them by the presiding quorum—the First Presidency. "It becomes our business when the President of the Church delegates to us some of the keys which he holds in fulness," Elder Harold B. Lee stated. "Until he gives us the authority, it is not our business and we do not have the right to take his place." (Stand Ye in Holy Places, p. 156.) The keys of the kingdom that are equally and fully conferred upon each member of the Council of the Twelve lie dormant in the individual Apostle until he becomes the senior Apostle. Meanwhile, any and all other exercising of keys and/or apostolic authority by individual members of the Twelve is by delegation from the President of the Church.

As a quorum, the Twelve become "equal in authority" and the presiding quorum of the Church only when there is no First Presidency. (This doctrine and its implications to succession in the Presidency will be discussed at length in the next chapter.) These important concepts concerning the authority of the Twelve and their relationship to the First Presidency and the President of the Church are summarized in the following statement of President George Q. Cannon:

Every man who is ordained to the fullness of the Apostleship has the power and authority to lead and guide the people of God whenever he is called upon to do it and the responsibility rests upon him. And while it is the right of all the Twelve Apostles to receive revelation and for each one to be a Prophet, to be a Seer, to be a Revelator and to hold the keys in the fullness, it is only the right of one man at a time to exercise that power in relation to the whole people and to give revelation and counsel and direct the affairs of the Church—of course, always acting in conjunction with his fellow-servants.

And while we say that the Twelve Apostles have the right to govern, that the Twelve have the authority, that the Twelve Apostles are the men who preside, we do not mean that every one of the Twelve is going to give revelation to this great people, that every one of the Twelve has the right to counsel and dictate and regulate the affairs of the Church as emergencies may arise, independent of the rest.

Any one of them, should an emergency arise, can act as President of the Church, with all the powers, with all the authority, with all the keys and with every endowment necessary to obtain revelation from God and to lead and guide this people in the path that leads to celestial glory; but there is only one man at a time who can hold the keys, who can dictate, who can guide, who can give revelation to the Church. The rest must acquiesce in his action; the rest must be governed by his counsels. (Gospel Truth, pp. 207-8.)

To Build Up and Regulate the Affairs of the Church in All Nations

Serving under the direction of and upon delegation from the First Presidency, the Twelve are commissioned to regulate, or "put in good order," the Church and to supervise the implementation of its mission—perfecting the Saints, proclaiming the gospel, and redeeming the dead—in all parts of the world. President Ezra Taft Benson, while serving as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, explained how this is done in the Church today.

Each Thursday, the Quorum of the Twelve meets in council in an upper room in the Salt Lake Temple. Gold-gilded, framed paintings of each Church president grace the side and back walls of this room, reminding us that here the prophets of God have conducted the business of the Church. We meet from 8 to 10 a.m. to conduct the business of the council and approve matters for the consideration of the First Presidency. At 10 a.m. we join the First Presidency and decide in council the business before us. When the matters affect the entire Church, they are announced through letter, special statement, or the Bulletin.

President Spencer W. Kimball, while serving as an apostle, wrote the following words concerning the Thursday temple meeting, which we endorse today as applied to his administration as Church president:

"When in a Thursday temple meeting, after prayer and fasting, important decisions are made, new missions and new stakes are created, new patterns and policies initiated, the news is taken for granted and possibly thought of as mere human calculations. But to those who sit in the intimate circles and hear the prayers of the prophet and the testimony of the man of God; to those who see the astuteness of his deliberations and the sagacity of his decisions and pronouncements, to them he is verily a prophet." (Instructor, August 1960, pp. 256-57.)

The mission of the Church to preach the gospel, perfect the saints and redeem the dead is facilitated today by three executive councils.

The Missionary Executive Council considers all the policy matters relating to preaching the gospel throughout the world. The Priesthood Executive Council considers priesthood policies and programs (including the auxiliary organizations of the Church), and the Temple and Genealogy Executive Council considers matters pertaining to temples and genealogical work.

Additionally, each executive council has geographical jurisdiction for a major area of the world including one-third of the United States and Canada. Area presidencies report to a member of the Twelve on one of the three executive councils.

Through other committees of the Twelve, all training and curriculum materials are correlated and reviewed for appropriateness and doctrinal correctness.

Under the direction of the First Presidency, individual members of the Twelve may put in order matters of the Church. This includes doctrine, priesthood procedures, administration of Church funds, and restoration of blessings. (Church News, January 27, 1985, p. 3.)

To Open the Doors of Nations for the Proclamation of the Gospel

One of the first and most important functions of the Twelve in the last days was and is to travel to the ends of the earth opening the doors of nations for the teaching of the restored gospel and for the establishment of the Church there. In other words, they are to effect the gathering of Israel. "The Twelve are not to serve tables," the Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "but to bear the keys of the Kingdom to all nations, and unlock the door of the Gospel to them" (HC 2:432). The Twelve, acting under the direction of the First Presidency, "unlock" these doors through negotiations with heads of state and through the priesthood ordinance of dedication or rededication. "Proselyting the gospel in nations of the world only occurs when a member of the Twelve dedicates the land for that purpose," President Ezra Taft Benson explained. "The Church works within the laws of each nation to ensure that Church practices do not conflict with the law or the customs of that nation. We do not proselyte where the laws of that country prohibit the practice." (Church News, January 27, 1985, p. 3.) Responsibility for geographical areas of the world, being divided among them, members of the Twelve not only regulate the affairs of the Church but also, through their faith, prayers, and apostolic ordination and keys, seek ways to break down cultural or political barriers and increase mutual understanding so that doors can be opened, nations dedicated, missionaries sent forth, and the gospel proclaimed "unto the ends of the earth."

"To Ordain Evangelical Ministers"

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "an Evangelist is a Patriarch" and that "wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a Patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints" (HC 3:381). The revelations outline the responsibility of the Twelve with regard to the calling and ordaining of patriarchs in the stakes of Zion. "It is the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the church [stakes], to ordain evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation" (D&C 107:39). For many years in the Church, all patriarchs were approved by the Council of the Twelve and then called and ordained by one of its members. As the Church has become larger, the practice or administration has been modified, but it still remains one of the fundamental responsibilities of the Twelve to approve the names of those to be called as patriarchs and to authorize stake presidents to extend the call and ordain them. Of this duty of the Twelve, President Ezra Taft Benson said: "As defined by revelation, an evangelical minister is a patriarch. The Twelve have responsibility of approving all patriarchs in the world. Stake presidents may recommend calls and ordain a patriarch when approved by the Quorum of the Twelve. Approval of the calls of patriarchs rests with the Quorum of the Twelve." (Church News, January 27, 1985, pp. 3, 11.)

Unanimous Voice of the First Presidency and the Twelve

Just as the Lord has given a unique promise that the individual prophet-president of the Church will never lead us astray, he has given us the same promise concerning the collective prophets, seers, and revelators—the quorums of the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles. As previously cited, President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that "the united voice of the First Presidency and the Twelve will [never] lead the Saints astray or send forth counsel to the world that is contrary to the mind and will of the Lord" (in Conference Report, April 1972, p. 99). That we can be secure in this assurance is clear from this revelation from the Lord:

Every decision made by either of these quorums [the First Presidency, the Twelve Apostles, and the Seventy] must be by the unanimous voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must be agreed to its decisions, in order to make their decisions of the same power or validity one with the other—

A majority may form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to be otherwise—

Unless this is the case, their decisions are not entitled to the same blessings which the decisions of a quorum of the three presidents were anciently, who were ordained after the order of Melchizedek, and were righteous and holy men.

The decisions of these quorums, or either of them, are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity;

Because the promise is, if these things abound in them they shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord. (D&C 107:27-31.)

This principle of unanimity is a profound blessing to the entire Church. As Elder James E. Faust said, it "provides a check on bias and personal idiosyncrasies. It ensures that God rules through the Spirit, not man through majority or compromise. It ensures that the best wisdom and experience is focused on an issue before the deep, unassailable impressions of revealed direction are received. It guards against the foibles of man." (In Conference Report, October 1989, p. 11.)

The First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve, working together, comprise the "constitutional body of the Church." Elder Stephen L Richards taught: "They [the First Presidency] are the supreme court here on earth in the interpretation of God's law. In formulating their interpretations and decisions they always confer with the Council of the Twelve Apostles who by revelation are appointed to assist and act with them in the government of the Church. When, therefore, a judgment is reached and proclaimed by these officers it becomes binding upon all members of the Church, individual views to the contrary notwithstanding. God's Kingdom is a kingdom of law and order." (In Conference Report, October 1938, pp. 115-16.)

This inspired principle provides us with the assurance that the inadequacies and limitations that all mortal, individual leaders of the Church possess will not, indeed cannot, derail the Church or misdirect the Saints. Elder Boyd K. Packer so testified:

We who have been called to lead the Church are ordinary men and women with ordinary capacities struggling to administer a church which grows at such a pace as to astound even those who watch it closely. Some are disposed to find fault with us; surely that is easy for them to do. But they do not examine us more searchingly than we examine ourselves. A call to lead is not an exemption from the challenges of life.

We are sorry for our inadequacies, sorry we are not better than we are. We can feel, as you can see, the effect of the aging process as it imposes limitations upon His leaders before your very eyes.

But this we know. There are councils and counselors and quorums to counterbalance the foibles and frailties of man. The Lord organized His church to provide for mortal men to work as mortal men, and yet He assured that the spirit of revelation would guide in all that we do in His name. (In Conference Report, October 1989, p. 19.)

Speaking to the students of Brigham Young University, Elder Packer explained the principle of unanimity as it works in the presiding quorums of the Church. He not only spoke of the practical workings of councils and quorums but also testified of the resulting spiritual blessing that comes to the entire Church through the unified voice of the prophets, seers, and revelators.

When a matter comes before the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in a temple meeting, one thing that is determined very quickly is whether it is of serious consequence or not. One or another of us will see in an apparently innocent proposal issues of great and lasting consequence.

It is clear from the revelations that the decisions of the presiding quorums "must be by the unanimous voice of thesame. Unless this is the case, their decisions are not entitled to the same blessings" (D&C 107:27, 29). In order to ensure that to be the case, matters of consequence are seldom decided in the meeting where they are proposed. And, if the proposal is a part of a larger issue, sufficient time is taken to "bring us all along" so that it is clear that each of us has either a clear understanding of the issue or, as is often the case, has a very clear feeling about it.

It would be unthinkable to deliberately present an issue in such a way that approval depended upon how it was maneuvered through channels, who was presenting it, or who was present or absent when it was presented.

Often one or more of us is away during regular meetings. We all know that the work must proceed and will accept the judgment of our brethren. However, if a matter has been studied by one of the Quorum in more detail than by the others or he is more familiar with it either by assignment, experience, or personal interest, the matter is very often delayed until he can be in on the discussion.

And, always, if one of us cannot understand an issue or feels unsettled about it, it is held over for future discussion.

I remember occasions when a delegation was sent to the hospital to discuss with a member of the Council who was ill some urgent matter that could not be delayed but which needed that "unanimous consent." There are occasions, as well, when one of us will leave the meeting temporarily to call one of our number who is abroad to get his feelings on a matter under discussion.

There is a rule we follow: A matter is not settled until there is a minute entry to evidence that all of the Brethren in council assembled (not just one of us, not just a committee) have come to a unity of feeling. Approval of a matter in principle is not considered authority to act until a minute entry records the action taken—usually when the minutes are approved in the next meeting.

Sometimes an afterthought keeps one of us restless over a decision. That is never dismissed lightly. It cannot be assumed that that restless spirit is not in fact the Spirit of Revelation.

That is how we function—in council assembled. That provides safety for the Church and a high comfort level for each of us who is personally accountable. Under the plan, men of ordinary capacity may be guided through counsel and inspiration to accomplish extraordinary things.

Even with the best of intentions, it does not always work the way it should. Human nature may express itself on occasion, but not to the permanent injury of the work. I have a deep, even sacred, regard for councils; inspiration is evident in them. If ever another course has been followed, trouble has followed as surely as night follows day. ("I Say Unto You, Be One," pp. 83-84.)

Even if the President of the Church may be slowed in his service or debilitated by age or illness, the principle allows for counselors and councils comprised of other prophets, seers, and revelators, endowed with the same keys, to ensure the continuance of the proper leadership and direction for the Lord's kingdom on earth. From the vantage point of his unique personal experience President Gordon B. Hinckley, in an address entitled "In Counselors There Is Safety," testified of the roles of unanimity, keys, and councils in the administration of the Church.

No president in any organization in the Church is likely to go ahead without the assurance that his counselors feel good about the proposed program. A man or woman thinking alone, working alone, arriving at his or her own conclusions, can take action which might prove to be wrong. But when three kneel together in prayer, discuss every aspect of the problem which is before them, and under the impressions of the Spirit reach a united conclusion, then we may have the assurance that the decision is in harmony with the will of the Lord.

I can assure all members of this Church that in the First Presidency we follow such a procedure. Even the President of the Church, who is Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and whose right and responsibility it is to make judgment and direct the course of the Church, invariably consults with his counselors to determine their feelings. If there is a lack of unity, there follows an absence of action. Two counselors, working with a president, preserve a wonderful system of checks and balances. They become a safeguard that is seldom, if ever, in error and affords great strength of leadership.

In some circumstances, a counselor may serve as a proxy for his president. The power of proxy must be granted by the president, and it must never be abused by the counselor.

It may not be easy to be a counselor. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., who, as a counselor, had responsibility for the operation of the Church while President Heber J. Grant was ill, said to me on one occasion, "It is difficult to have responsibility without authority."

He was saying, in effect, that he had to move forward in handling those duties which ordinarily devolve upon the President, but while doing so, he did not have the authority of the President.

I came to understand that situation in a very real way. If I may share with you some personal feelings: During the time that President Kimball was ill, President Tanner's health failed and he passed away. President Romney was called as First Counselor, and I as Second Counselor to President Kimball. Then President Romney became ill, thus leaving to me an almost overwhelming burden of responsibility. I counseled frequently with my Brethren of the Twelve, and I cannot say enough of appreciation to them for their understanding and for the wisdom of their judgment. In matters where there was a well-established policy, we moved forward. But no new policy was announced or implemented, and no significant practice was altered without sitting down with President Kimball and laying the matter before him and receiving his full consent and full approval.

In such circumstances when I would go to visit him, I always took a secretary who kept a detailed record of the conversation. I can assure you that I never knowingly moved ahead of my file leader, that I never had any desire to move out ahead of him in Church policy or instruction. I knew that he was the appointed Prophet of the Lord in that day. Even though I, too, had been sustained as a prophet, seer, and revelator, along with my Brethren of the Twelve, I knew also that none of us was the President of the Church.

President Benson is now ninety-one years of age and does not have the strength or vitality he once possessed in abundance. Brother Monson and I, as his counselors, do as has been done before, and that is to move forward the work of the Church, while being very careful not to get ahead of the President nor to undertake any departure of any kind from long-established policy without his knowledge and full approval.

I am grateful for President Monson. We have known one another for a long time and have worked together in many responsibilities. We counsel together. We deliberate together. We pray together. We postpone action when we are not fully certain of our course and do not move forward until we have the blessing of our President and that assurance which comes from the Spirit of the Lord.

We pray for our President. We pray often and with great earnestness. We love him and know our proper relationship to him, as well as our responsibility to the entire Church. We counsel with the Twelve and partake of their judgment, which is a greater resource than I am able to describe.

Do not fear, . . . there is a Presidency over this Church. (Ensign, November 1990, pp. 50-51.)

Other General Authorities of the Church

Although they are not sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators, and do not have the same keys of the kingdom conferred upon them as do the First Presidency and the Twelve, there are other "watchmen on the walls" who are sustained as General Authorities of the Church. "These brethren are all delegated general administrative authority by the President of the Church," Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote concerning General Authorities. "That is, they are called to preach the gospel, direct church conferences, choose other church officers, perform ordinations and settings apart, and handle the properties and interests of the Church generally. The labors of their ministries are not confined to stake, ward, or regional areas, but they have general jurisdiction in all parts of the Church." ( Mormon Doctrine, p. 309.)

The revelations identify the Seventy and the Presiding Bishopric as those other watchmen who serve under the direction of and in cooperation with the First Presidency and the Twelve in administering the worldwide Church and ministering to the Saints. While they are not prophets, seers, and revelators in the same sense as the Presidency and the Twelve, they are nonetheless prophets to the Church in the general sense—as forthtellers and preachers of righteousness. Each group has important duties that affect the Church and its members both spiritually and temporally.

The Seventy

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the Twelve are to "call upon the Seventies to follow after them, and assist them" (HC 2:432). The Lord revealed the duties of the Seventy and how they were to assist the Twelve. "The Seventy are also called to preach the gospel, and to be especial witnesses unto the Gentiles in all the world—thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling. And they form a quorum, equal in authority to that of the Twelve special witnesses or Apostles just named. The Seventy are to act in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the Twelve or the traveling high council, in building up the church and regulating all the affairs of the same in all nations." (D&C 107:25-26, 34.)

During the administration of President Spencer W. Kimball, the First Quorum of the Seventy was reconstituted (1975-76) to better fulfill the divine charge found in the revelations. President Kimball said of this important development:

With this move, the three governing quorums of the Church defined by the revelations—the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the First Quorum of the Seventy—have been set in their places as revealed by the Lord.

This will make it possible to handle efficiently the present heavy workload and to prepare for the increasing expansion and acceleration of the work, anticipating the day when the Lord will return to take direct charge of His church and kingdom. (In Conference Report, October 1976, p. 10.)

We have seen in the last several years a more complete application of these revealed instructions [D&C 107:33-34]. Today we should even more clearly understand how they are to be applied in building up the Church in all nations. Events in the world may make this approach to managing the affairs of the kingdom not only practical but a necessity in the years ahead.

As the kingdom thus functions, these wonderful men of the Quorum of the Twelve can go about the Church and set things in order as is necessary, but be relieved of their assignments to manage programs and departments as they once did. The work of the managing and directing our various departments and programs is now the work of our General Authorities in the First Quorum of the Seventy, and they have the willing and capable support of the Presiding Bishopric and our temporal departments—all to the end that we can move forward in unity and at a pace never before known. (In Conference Report, April 1979, pp. 139-40.)

Since President Kimball made the latter statement in 1979, a Second Quorum of the Seventy has been created (April 1989) to meet the growing demands of a worldwide Church. This development is another step toward the fulfillment of the revelation on the Seventy that allows for the calling of additional Seventies even "until seven times seventy, if the labor in the vineyard of necessity requires it" (D&C 107:96). With the organization in place to accommodate almost unlimited growth, the Seventy are called upon to assist the Twelve in many ways. They have an apostolic calling to be "especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world" and to act "under the direction of the Twelve in building up the church and regulating all the affairs of the same in all nations" (D&C 107:25, 34). Elder J. Thomas Fyans explained how the Seventy fulfill this divine mandate.

Assignments that the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve have given to the First Quorum of the Seventy can be divided into two categories: headquarters assignments and field assignments.

Headquarters assignments include serving as directors of Church headquarters departments and organizations. At the head of a Church department is an executive director and two or more managing directors, all of whom are members of the First Quorum of the Seventy.

The quorum presidents serve as executive directors of the Correlation, Curriculum, Missionary, Priesthood, Genealogical and Historical departments. Other quorum members serve as executive director of the Temple Department and as managing directors in all of the departments. In addition, members of the quorum serve as the general presidency of the Sunday School and the Young Men, as presidents of several temples and as president of the International Mission.

The second category of assignments, field assignments, include serving in an area presidency. The First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve organized the area presidencies to meet the needs of an expanding Church. Each area presidency reports to one of the three Church Executive Councils (Priesthood Executive Council, Missionary Executive Council, and Genealogy Executive Council). The area presidency structure provides a direct communication channel from Church headquarters to stakes and missions throughout the world and from the stakes and missions to Church headquarters.

Each area presidency, acting under the direction of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve, is responsible for the affairs of the Church in its assigned geographical area of the world. Some area presidencies live at Church headquarters and have domestic assignments (United States and Canada). Others live at headquarters and have overseas assignments. Still others live in the areas where they preside.

Area presidencies are responsible for the supervision and leadership development of mission presidents, regional representatives and stake presidents. They also direct Church managers for real estate, construction, physical facilities, finances and budgets. The presidencies supervise, train, and direct in a variety of ways. They attend stake conferences nearly every weekend. They hold two mission presidentseminars each year. During a tour of each mission, they meet with all of the missionaries and mission leaders, hold mission firesides, and take care of the needs of mission districts. The presidencies also hold quarterly leadership meetings with Regional Representatives and stake and mission presidents to answer questions, solve problems and help plan the work.

Church headquarters organizations work with area presidencies instead of dealing directly with local officers, fostering cooperation and coordination between area leaders and headquarters offices. ("Seventies Began 150 Years Ago," p. 6.)

The Presiding Bishopric

Since the earliest days of the Church—when Edward Partridge and Newell K. Whitney served as bishops—the Presiding Bishopric has worked under the direction of the First Presidency in temporal matters, including the charge to search out and administer relief to the poor of the Church. The Lord specified in the revelations that the Bishopric is "set apart unto the ministering of temporal things, having a knowledge of them by the Spirit of truth" (D&C 107:71). While the basic responsibility to minister in temporal things will remain constant, the manner in which the Presiding Bishopric fulfills this charge has changed and will continue to change through the years as technologies and the needs of the Church change (see D&C 42:31-32; 51:5, 12-13). Many of the duties and challenges of the current Presiding Bishopric could not even be imagined in the early days of the Church. Yet each Bishopric, whatever the requirements of the times, was, is, and will be responsible for the temporal welfare of the Church.

Bishop Victor L. Brown, who served in the Presiding Bishopric for nearly a quarter of a century, explained the nature of the temporal work of the Presiding Bishopric: "The Presiding Bishopric, under the direction of the First Presidency, has the responsibility for administering many of the temporal affairs of the Church. These include physical facilities, finance, welfare services, materials management, and information systems. We administer this network of temporal functions to support and service priesthood needs and Church activities throughout the world." (In Conference Report, April 1979, p. 125.)

The temporal support services provided by the Presiding Bishopric, under the direction of the First Presidency and the Twelve, include things such as acquisition of lands, construction and maintenance of buildings, operation of Deseret Industries, storehouses, employment services, social services, and welfare production facilities. They work closely with area presidencies and bless the Saints "in the field" with important services such as translation and distribution of Church materials. One of the most important duties of the Presiding Bishopric is to work closely with the First Presidency and the Twelve on the disposition of tithes and offerings (see D&C 120; see also Ensign, April 1977, pp. 94-95). In addition to their temporal duties, they are also General Authorities with a spiritual ministry to travel around the Church testifying and teaching and "building up and regulating" the affairs of the Church.

All things—both temporal and spiritual—are done in "wisdom and order" through the unified service of and close cooperation with all of the General Authorities of the Church, under the delegation and direction of the senior prophet, seer, and revelator. As members of each quorum faithfully discharge their divine duties, individual members of the Church, as well as the institutional Church, are blessed and benefited by the living oracles of God. Our lives are enriched by better understanding the role and responsibilities of the living oracles and our relationship to them. Of this blessing, Elder Spencer W. Kimball testified: "The authorities which the Lord has placed in his Church constitute for the people of the Church a harbor, a place of refuge, a hitching post, as it were. No one in this Church will ever go far astray who ties himself securely to the Church Authorities whom the Lord has placed in his Church." (In Conference Report, April 1951, p. 104.)

1993 Bookcraft
