Brent L. Top, Larry E. Dahl, Walter D. Bowen, Follow the Living Prophets (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993)

Conference time is a season of spiritual revival when knowledge and testimony are increased and solidified.

—Howard W. Hunter, general conference, October 1981

7 General Conference: A Season of Revelation and Renewal

In an April 1830 revelation the Lord said: "The several elders composing this church of Christ are to meet in conference once in three months, or from time to time as said conferences shall direct or appoint; and said conferences are to do whatever church business is necessary to be done at the time" (D&C 20:61-62). Since then, many church conferences have been held, both locally and for the general church. There we assemble, as President Spencer W. Kimball expressed it, "to worship the Lord, to feast upon the words of Christ, and to be built up in faith and testimony" (Ensign, May 1978, p. 45).

General conference is the Lord's conference—a conference wherein he instructs his people, as he himself stated at one such conference, "by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same" (D&C 1:38). The Lord in fact refers to general conference as "my conference" (see D&C 124:88)—a conference at which the revealed will of the Lord is made manifest "by the voice of the conference" (D&C 73:2; see also 72:7).

General conference, as a season of revelation and renewal, is not unique to the Church in this last dispensation. Throughout time there have been many significant gatherings and conferences of the Lord's people in which the "voice of the Lord" wasmanifested through inspired instruction and profound spiritual outpourings. One of the earliest great conferences was the gathering of Adam, Eve, and their righteous posterity in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman (see D&C 107:53-57). Prior to the Savior's glorious second coming another momentous conference of the Lord's faithful Saints will be held in that same valley (see D&C 116; also Dan. 7:9-10, 13-14; HC 3:386-87). Throughout the scriptures we are able to catch glimpses of and teachings about other significant gatherings of God's people. Elder Alvin R. Dyer compared modern conferences of the restored Church to the feasts and festivals of ancient Israel.

In ancient biblical times, "the feast" was a time of gathering, a time of harvest, a time of rejoicing, and what is more particularly significant, "the feast" was designated by the Lord as a time of remembrance. These observances were established among the people for various reasons. "Three times," said the Lord, "thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year": the feast of the harvest, the feast of the weeks, the feast of tabernacles, and there were others (see Ex. 23:14, 16; 34:22; Lev. 23:34; Deut. 16:10, 16). But in all of these there seemed to be a central motive, a time of the renewal of spirit, of regeneration, that the people might continue with gratitude and sacrifice to fulfill the purposes of the Lord, which were intended for their good and blessing.

There are "feasts" that we observe at which we also gather to rejoice and be renewed in spirit and in thought, and to which we too bring the harvest of our achievements to evaluate, and then, with renewed determination, go forward to do better. Here, as in all the "feasts" of ancient times, is to be found the need of the people themselves, seeking the strength and the fortitude to push on. From such occasions will come this strength, if our hearts and minds can be brought in tune with the Spirit of God. (In Conference Report, October 1966, p. 133.)

In the Book of Mormon we read of two such gatherings where souls were strengthened and renewed and where revelations were abundantly poured out upon the Saints as the "dews from heaven." King Benjamin gathered his people together to bless them as well as teach them. His inspired words were written down and distributed to those who could not hear them, so that they could be read, reread, pondered, and discussed (see Mosiah chapters 1-5). When the resurrected Christ appeared among the Nephites, he too gathered them together on more than one occasion to teach them, pray for them, and bless them (see 3 Nephi chapters 9-27). In each of these gatherings revelations of such overwhelming magnitude were communicated that the people were overcome with joy, and mortal words could not adequately record them. Souls were strengthened, covenants were renewed, sins were forgiven, hearts were changed, and personal resolves to be "steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works" (Mosiah 5:15) were fortified.

For us today the purposes of the general conference and the blessings that flow therefrom are much the same. As we understand the value and objective of the Lord's conferences, prepare for them, and apply them to our lives, we too can experience a similar outpouring of the Spirit. The following counsel of King Benjamin to his people remains for us a clarion call to likewise gather and be nourished by the "bread of life" and the "living waters" that abound at general conferences: "My brethren, all ye that have assembled yourselves together, you that can hear my words which I shall speak unto you this day; for I have not commanded you to come up hither to trifle with the words which I shall speak, but that you should hearken unto me, and open your ears that ye may hear, and your hearts that ye may understand, and your minds that the mysteries of God may be unfolded to your view" (Mosiah 2:9).

Just as the presence of Jehovah attended the ancient camp of Israel and an angel instructed King Benjamin in what he should teach his people, so too are the Lord's servants today inspired in their exhortations, receiving guidance from beyond the veil in their preparation. As in times past, the Lord does not leave his servants alone as they instruct us; he is not absent from his conference. "The Lord has magnified each one who has spoken," President David O. McKay observed at the concluding session of a general conference, "to the end that his words have emanated from the presence of our Father" (Improvement Era, December 1965, p. 1161). Like King Benjamin of old, President Joseph Fielding Smith instructed us on the significance of general conference as a time to be trained by the Lord, and invited all Saints everywhere to prepare their ears to hear, their minds to understand, and their hearts to hearken to the voice of the Lord.

It is our prayer that all those who are present and all those who hear the broadcasts, and all those who read the conference messages will have their hearts open to the great truths which will be presented and the words of wise counsel which will fall from the lips of those who shall speak to us.

We are the servants of the Lord. We have received light and truth and revelation from him. He has commanded us to proclaim his truths and live his laws. And so now, in harmony with his mind and will, and as guided by his Holy Spirit, we give counsel and direction to the Saints, and to the world.

Now there is much more that the Lord would have us hear and know and do, and I shall rely upon [the First Presidency], upon the members of the Council of the Twelve and the other General Authorities to counsel further with you by the power of the Spirit about these things. (Ensign, July 1972, pp. 27-28.)

Purposes of General Conference

As the Church has expanded into an international entity and as its programs and members have diversified, the nature of conference (format, length, and so forth) has been altered. However, the fundamental purposes as stated in the revelations have remained constant. The scriptures and latter-day prophets have identified several important functions of general conference that serve to further the kingdom of God on earth and to strengthen individual members.

As the first quoted scripture in this chapter indicates "conferences are to do whatever church business is necessary to be done at the time" (D&C 20:62). In the earliest days of the Church, when membership was small and concentrated, many of the matters that are handled today in wards and stakes were taken care of as part of the general conferences. Today the business that is transacted in general conference is composed of those matters that affect the entire membership of the Church. Such Church business includes canonization of new scriptures, reorganization of the presiding quorums or of auxiliaries, callings and releases of general officers of the Church, and announcement of changes in policies or programs. In the future the transaction of Church business may change somewhat to reflect the contemporary needs of the Church, but one of the fundamental functions of general conference will remain—"to do whatever church business is necessary to be done at the time."

Closely related to the transaction of Church business is the presentation of reports. These reports come in a variety of ways—some formal and others less formal. The formal reports that are annually presented for the information of the Church (typically in the April conference) include the statistical report for the previous year and the auditors’ financial report. The financial report assures the membership of the Church that sacred tithing funds and other donations are being expended according to the inspired policies and procedures of the Church, as administered under the direction of the First Presidency, the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric (see D&C 120). The audit of Church finances and the subsequent report to the general membership ensures institutional integrity and helps to establish financial stability in order "that the church may stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world" (D&C 78:14). Other reports that are less formal and are given periodically would include stewardship reports from Church leaders and/or reports concerning special assignments or ministries that have impacted the Church in some manner. Sometimes the significant and exemplary service of prominent Church members is acknowledged and commended. President David O. McKay stated that such reports, as given in general conference, "inform the membership of general conditions—whether the Church is progressing or retrogressing, economically, ecclesiastically, or spiritually" (in Conference Report, October 1954, p. 7).

The statistical report is not delivered in general conference in order to boast or to impress the world with our growth as a church, but to report progress to the members. It also is a means of showing the fulfillment of Daniel's prophecy that the kingdom of God that started as a small stone is rolling forth and filling the earth. Seeing such rapid growth and recognizing in the modern church the fulfillment of ancient prophecies should instill in us a sense of gratitude for the blessings of the Lord, not a sense of pride in our own accomplishments. Reporting the growth of the Church and all the related statistical information also serves as a reminder to us that there is yet much work to be done and that, as President Spencer W. Kimball declared, "we have paused on some plateaus long enough" (in Conference Report, April 1979, p. 114). He further explained how an acknowledgment of the growth of the church should bring with it an increased sense of gratitude and obligation.

I rejoice with you in the progress and expansion of the Lord's earthly kingdom in almost all parts of the free world. We are constantly opening up new areas, and we are continually establishing new missions and dividing others.

This growth is a cause for thanksgiving and praise to the Lord for divine direction of this program of saving souls and bringing them into the fold of Christ. While much has been done and accomplished, much more remains to be done. We must go forward in courage and great boldness to proclaim Jesus Christ as the resurrected Lord and the Redeemer of mankind. (In Conference Report, October 1978, p. 4.)

"And a commandment I give unto you," the Lord declared through the Prophet in Nauvoo, "that you should fill all these offices and approve of those names which I have mentioned, or else disapprove of them at my general conference" (D&C 124:144). From the time of the organization of the Church on April 6, 1830, sustaining those people who have been called of God to preside over and direct the affairs of the Church has always been one of the fundamental purposes of the conference. "All things shall be done by common consent in the church, by much prayer and faith" (D&C 26:2; see also D&C 20:65). As was discussed in chapter 5, the sustaining vote of common consent is in reality a personal covenant to sustain, strengthen, assist, be loyal to, pray for, and in all ways support those who are called to preside over and serve in the Church. For this reason we participate in a sustaining vote at each conference (ward, stake, and general), whether or not there have been changes in the officers since the previous conference. In this way each member of the Church is given the opportunity to renew that covenant. Just as the sacrament is administered in every sacrament meeting for the renewal of our baptismal covenants and is a central feature of our worship, so also the renewal of our covenant of common consent is critical to our gaining the spiritual insight and uplift that is central to general conference.

In the early days of the Church, leaders and missionaries, as well as the general membership, were often called to gather for a conference in which the Lord would give them instructions concerning the personal and collective challenges they were facing (see D&C 58:56, 61-62; 124:88). The commandment was issued to the Saints to gather from all directions to be taught from on high and to be strengthened in their callings and responsibilities. Accompanying the commandment to convene a conference were promised institutional instructions, as well as spiritual blessings for the Church.

Behold, thus saith the Lord unto you my servants, it is expedient in me that the elders of my church should be called together, from the east and from the west, and from the north and from the south, by letter or some other way.

And it shall come to pass, that inasmuch as they are faithful, and exercise faith in me, I will pour out my Spirit upon them in the day that they assemble themselves together.

And it shall come to pass that they shall go forth into the regions round about, and preach repentance unto the people.

And many shall be converted, insomuch that ye shall obtain power to organize yourselves according to the laws of man;

That your enemies may not have power over you; thatyou may be preserved in all things; that you may be enabled to keep my laws; that every bond may be broken wherewith the enemy seeketh to destroy my people. (D&C 44:1-5.)

General conference today fulfills this commandment. And although it is somewhat different from that conference in 1831, the purpose is the same—the spiritual outpouring still flows, inspired counsel is still delivered, and the magnification of individual leaders and members still results. Concerning this revealed purpose and blessing of general conference Elder Marion G. Romney stated: "We have come to this conference from many nations of the world—not, however, as representatives of the governments of these nations. We are here representing the leadership of the kingdom of God. This Church is the literal kingdom of God in the earth. We did not come to argue, to jockey for position, to compromise differences and establish policies. We came here to hear and learn the word of God as he has and does now reveal it through his appointed servants, and to take it back and teach it to our people." (In Conference Report, April 1961, p. 117.)

President Spencer W. Kimball also spoke of the manifold long-term benefits that come from the veritable spiritual harvest that attends the Lord's conference of his people.

My dear brothers and sisters, we came together to wait upon the Lord, to be cleansed and edified by his Spirit, and to know in our hearts the spirit of true worship.

We have not been disappointed. The Lord has been with us by the power of his Spirit, and it has been good for us to be here.

I hope we will go forth now, believing the doctrines that have been preached, taking the counsels of the Brethren, and basking in the same spirit that has uplifted and edified us while here.

Now this system of revealed religion which has come to us by revelation is a very practical religion. It deals with flocks and herds and properties; it teaches us how to get along with each other here and now; it is a way of life that turns a dreary and drab mortal existence into a glorious and exhilarating experience. (Ensign, November 1978, p. 71.)

As circumstances in the world change, the challenges facing the Saints and the spiritual and temporal needs of the Church also change. For this reason, general conference has become a vital link between the eternal principles revealed in the past and the current application of those principles. Having made reference to the innumerable conferences and conventions held for various secular purposes, Elder Kimball observed: "All the conferences and conventions combined of all the years could not possibly be as important as [the] recent three-day conference of the Lord's Church. Let no arrogant, self-assured, self-styled intellectual discard the truths there taught and the testimonies there borne, nor argue with the messages and instructions there given." ("In the World but Not of It," p. 2.)

Sometimes the counsel and instructions given are very direct and specific to contemporary challenges, societal trends, and personal problems. "We've never had a conference," President Harold B. Lee once said of general conference, "where there has been so much direct instruction, so much admonition, when the problems have been defined, and also the solution to the problem has been suggested. I think you have never attended a conference where you have heard more inspired declarations on almost every subject and problem about which you have been worrying." (In Conference Report, October 1973, p. 170.) President Spencer W. Kimball made a similar comment concerning a conference over which he presided. "The sermons from the Brethren have developed almost every theme and subject, and they have been rich and full of meat" (in Conference Report, October 1976, p. 163). Such observations perhaps could be made concerning every general conference. The Lord is eternally mindful of our need for unceasing guidance. "It is my humble opinion," President Joseph Fielding Smith testified, "that we are receiving counsel by inspiration, or revelation, at every general conference of the Church" (Answers to Gospel Questions 2:205).

Sometimes, however, the messages of general conference may be more general in nature, reemphasizing long-held beliefs and reminding the Saints of those things that they already know and have been taught to do. One must not minimize the significance of or ignore these inspired reminders and reiterations just because they do not appear to be new or unique. President Kimball taught:

Some may wonder why General Authorities speak of the same things from conference to conference. As I study the utterances of the prophets through the centuries, their pattern is very clear. We seek, in the words of Alma, to teach people "an everlasting hatred against sin and iniquity." We preach "repentance, and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ" (Alma 37:32-33). We praise humility. We seek to teach people "to withstand every temptation of the devil, with their faith on the Lord Jesus Christ" (Alma 37:33). We teach our people "to never be weary of good works" (Alma 37:34).

Prophets say the same things because we face basically the same problems. Brothers and sisters, the solutions to these problems have not changed. It would be a poor lighthouse that gave off a different signal to guide every ship entering a harbor. It would be a poor mountain guide who, knowing the safe route up a mountainside, took his trusting charges up unpredictable and perilous paths from which no traveler returns. (In Conference Report, April 1976, p. 7.)

Earlier in this dispensation the Lord promised that at general conference "it shall be made known unto you what you shall do" (D&C 73:2). As stated, this promise is fulfilled with each and every conference. Although the issues and problems may change and temptations may take on a new face, the living prophets provide the guidance on both temporal and spiritual matters that will enable us to stand "steadfast and immovable" amidst the storms of the day. "We meet together often in the Church in conferences," President Spencer W. Kimball testified, "to worship the Lord, to feast upon the word of Christ, and to be built up in faith and testimony. The purpose of this conference is that we may refresh our faith, strengthen our testimonies, and learn the ways of the Lord from his duly appointed and authorized servants. May we take this opportunity, then, to remind each other of our covenants and promises and commitments." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 521.)

"The main purpose of general conferences," President N. Eldon Tanner stated, "the main purpose of this conference, is to sound the voice of warning. You who hear and are warned must warn your neighbors. If we fail to heed the warnings given, or fail to warn our neighbors, we all may be lost." (In Conference Report, October 1976, p. 124.) One of the primary missions of the Church—the earthly kingdom of God—is to proclaim the gospel and to take its message to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Likewise, it is the obligation of every member to "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places" (Mosiah 18:9). General conference instructs and inspires us so that we can be spiritually enlarged and in turn teach and inspire others. "That ye may be prepared in all things," the Lord declared concerning the school of the prophets and elders held in the early days of the Church and which also applies to general conferences today, "to magnify [your] calling. I sent you out to testify and warn the people." (D&C 88:80-81.)

Today general conference is able to fulfill an institutional charge by proclaiming the gospel through the use of current technologies such as radio, television, satellites, videos, and so forth. In the early days of the Church, general conference was used to teach and motivate members and missionaries to go forth and share the gospel with family, friends, and neighbors. That is likewise a desired outcome today, but with the advent of these modern inventions the Church is also able to proclaim the gospel directly to the world in general conference. It is not uncommon, therefore, to hear some of the Brethren address those who are not members of the Church. Perhaps in the future the missionary objective of conference will be expanded as technology increases the accessibility of the Church's general conferences throughout the world.

The Lord promised the early Saints that "as they are faithful, and exercise faith in me, I will pour out my Spirit upon them in the day that they assemble themselves together" (D&C 44:2). The promise is the same for us today. When the much-awaited spiritual outpouring is realized in conjunction with general conference, hearts are changed, spirits are revived, souls are strengthened, and personal resolves of greater righteousness are renewed. Whether or not anything new is revealed or set forth in the conference, the fruits of the Spirit always include an individual rejuvenation and a rededication to those principles taught and testified of in general conference. Declared President Howard W. Hunter:

Conference time is a season of spiritual revival when knowledge and testimony are increased and solidified that God lives and blesses those who are faithful. It is a time when an understanding that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, is burned into the hearts of those who have the determination to serve him and keep his commandments. Conference is the time when our leaders give us inspired direction in the conduct of our lives—a time when souls are stirred and resolutions are made to be better husbands and wives, fathers and mothers, more obedient sons and daughters, better friends and neighbors. (In Conference Report, October, 1981, p. 15.)

At the conclusion of one of the general conferences over which he presided, President Spencer W. Kimball spoke of the personal impact that conference had had on him and of his new resolve to apply its messages to his life. His humble and unassuming example taught the Saints that if the prophet of the Lord can find impetus for improvement in the inspired messages and personal, spiritual promptings that accompany each general conference, they, too, should find ample room for growth.

Many suggestions have been given that will help you as leaders in the perfection of your work. Many helpful thoughts have been given for the perfection of our own lives, and that, of course, is the basic reason for our coming.

While sitting here, I have made up my mind that when I go home from this conference this night there are many, many areas in my life that I can perfect. I have made a mental list of them, and I expect to go to work as soon as we get through with conference. (In Conference Report, October 1975, p. 164.)

Differing Responses to General Conference

Whether it be the transaction of Church business, the renewal of our covenant of common consent, the reception of inspired instruction, or the proclaiming of the gospel to the world, each of the purposes of general conference is spiritual in nature and intended to uplift and motivate each member of the Church. The success of any given general conference in fulfilling these purposes and achieving the Lord's overall objectives will be determined not only by quality or content of the talks given by the Brethren, but also, and chiefly, by our individual responses to the messages and the promptings of the Spirit which accompany them. Elder Marion G. Romney described the diversity of response to general conference that he had observed while visiting stake conferences. He then pointed out why such differences exist and, in so doing, affirmed to us what is required to enjoy the abundant outflow of the Spirit and to be strengthened and encouraged by general conference.

A number of the speakers had just attended for the first time a general conference. Their reports were soul stirring. One bishop wished that every member of his ward might attend just one conference in the tabernacle. Another, when he stood with the vast congregation for the first time, was so moved that tears ran down his cheeks, and his voice so choked that he could not join in the singing. A third was impressed with President Grant's closing remarks. He said as he finished his talk: "Three times the President said, ‘I bless you, I bless you, I bless you.’"

In another outlying stake, an ex-bishop said to me that conference was nothing but a political convention. In another a man said that whether he would follow the counsel of the leaders depended upon what subject they discussed.

How are these different responses accounted for? I will tell you. The members of one group were observing and keeping the commandments of God, and the others were not; one group was walking in the light of truth, and the other was in the dark; one group enjoyed the Spirit of the Lord, and the others did not. (In Conference Report, April 1942, p. 19.)

How to Gain the Most from General Conference

Just as personal revelation is not received in a vacuum—that is, without individual effort and diligence—effectively recognizing and receiving the inspired messages of general conference also requires considerable effort on the part of each Church member. The extent to which general conference helps us acquire doctrinal knowledge and gospel insight, receive personal inspiration for meeting life's challenges, and achieve spiritual strength to resist temptations and more fully live the teachings of the Master will be commensurate with our own personal preparation for and study of general conference. These and many other "fruits" of general conference will be ours as we put forth our best efforts to obtain them before, during, and after each general conference.

Our perception of the spiritual success of any conference depends not so much upon the preparation and skill of the speakers as on our own preparation for the conference (see Boyd K. Packer, "Follow the Brethren," Appendix E). It is not uncommon for a family or individual to exert considerable effort, time, and resources in preparing for a much-awaited vacation or personal project, yet we often approach general conference with little thought or effort. One of the ways in which we should prepare for general conference is to pray for the Brethren. "When the Brethren arise to speak," President Lorenzo Snow counseled, "you should ask the Lord to let them say something that you want to know, that they may suggest something to you that will be of some advantage. If you have any desire to know certain matters that you do not understand, pray that these brethren in their talks may say something that shall enlighten your mind in reference to that which troubles you, and we will have a grand and glorious conference, a better one than we have ever had before." (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, p. 89.)

It is true that we should and often do pray, both personally and with our families, for the Brethren as they prepare for conference. Yet we sometimes fail to seek the Lord's influence as we prepare ourselves. Just as the quality of the produce from a farm or backyard garden is largely dependent upon the preparation ofthe soil, so too must our hearts and minds be prepared to become fertile receptors for the seeds of the gospel which are sown during general conference.

One significant thing we could do to enable us to gain the most from general conference is to prepare our hearts and minds in the weeks and days prior to conference through prayer and, in some cases, fasting. This will not only help us to focus on the true intent of general conference but it will also create an attitude of spiritual anticipation in that we will look forward to the conference "hungering and thirsting after righteousness." Rather than passively viewing it as a televised substitute for Sabbath meetings wherein our obligation to worship is fulfilled simply by watching or attending the Sunday morning session, we will be filled with spiritual cravings to hear and live by "every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God" (Matt. 4:4).

All spiritual experiences in life are enhanced through proper personal preparation, and general conference should receive the same type of consideration. We usually prepare for patriarchal blessings through fasting and prayer so that the experience will have greater significance in our lives. Missionaries enhance their effectiveness dramatically when they diligently prepare to teach the gospel through conscientious scripture study and personal prayer. Temple ordinances become more instructional and covenants and promises become more meaningful as daily guides in life when a person has prepared himself to be "taught from on high" (see D&C 43:16). Preparation precedes power. With general conference, it is no different.

The success of any general conference for us as individuals begins well before the first weekends in April and October. "In a few days there opens another general conference of the Church," said Elder Boyd K. Packer at a BYU Devotional just days before the commencement of general conference. "The servants of the Lord will counsel us. What you shall gain will depend not so much upon their preparation of the messages as upon your preparation for them." (That All May Be Edified, p. 244.) If, like the sons of Mosiah, we give ourselves to "much prayer and fasting" in preparation for general conference, we too can be filled with "the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation" (see Alma 17:3) and be magnified in our callings and spiritually strengthened individually.

Attendance at general conference—whether it be in the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City or watching the telecast via satellite in stake centers or on the television in our homes—provides the capstone to one's personal preparation. As we attend conference, in whatever manner or capacity, we receive both instruction by the speakers and inspiration by the promptings of the Spirit. "You have heard many sermons in [general conference], many sermons that could be of great value to you," President Spencer W. Kimball taught. "But it isn't so much what has been said that is important as it is what you have heard." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 522.) It becomes imperative, therefore, that we pay close attention not only to what we hear but also to what we feel.

One of the ways in which we learn and retain something is to take notes on what we hear and are taught. This practice is a valuable instructional tool and a significant spiritual exercise in listening to and learning from general conference. It may not be necessary to write down extensive notes on every presentation, inasmuch as the talks are soon published in their entirety. What notes should we take, then, as we attentively listen to conference? President Kimball encouraged the Saints to make "copious notes of the thoughts that have come to your mind as the Brethren have addressed you" (in Ensign, November 1975, p. 111). The actual words of the talks are the same for everyone, but the spiritual insights and the promptings and proddings of the Spirit will not be the same for all. Therefore the most important notes to record in our journals would be those personal "flashes" of insight and inspiration—when we learn something new, when something that has personal relevance and application is spoken to the mind and heart, or when the Spirit prompts us to make changes in our life. As we listen to the speakers we can, as Nephi said of the scriptures, liken their words to ourselves, our unique circumstances, the needs and desires of our hearts. In this manner general conference is transformed from institutional instruction to inspiration of individuals.

King Benjamin had his great discourse written anddistributed among the people so that those who could not hear would have access to his important counsel and teachings. Besides making them accessible to those who didn't or couldn't attend or hear conference, there is an additional value to having the conference discourses published and available to all the Saints. Thereby we may refresh in our memories the words we heard, the feelings we felt. We also gain new insights and "hear" and feel new promptings as we study the printed talks again and again. In this way we continue to be blessed and taught by general conference long after the last sermon and the closing prayer.

Through the years several of the Lord's prophets have urged the Latter-day Saints to make general conference a continual blessing by re-reading the messages and studying the conference reports just as we would study the standard works. "If you want to know what the Lord would have the Saints know and to have his guidance and direction for the next six months," declared President Harold B. Lee, "get a copy of the proceedings of this conference, and you will have the latest word of the Lord as far as the Saints are concerned" (in Conference Report, October 1973, p. 168). President Spencer W. Kimball counseled us on several occasions to carefully study the talks that were given in general conference. To students at BYU he said: "I hope you young people all heard the messages of the ages delivered [in the previous general conference]. There will be other conferences every six months. I hope that you will get your copy of [the Ensign containing the conference talks] and underline the pertinent thoughts and keep it with you for continual reference. No text or volume outside the standard works of the Church should have such prominent place on your personal library shelves." ("In the World but Not of It," p. 3.)

While serving as President of the Church, he likewise often closed general conference with counsel to the Saints to continue to study, ponder, and live the principles that were set forth in the conference. "I urge you to take much thought in your return home from this conference and think again of the things that have been brought to your attention," he declared on one occasion (in Conference Report, October 1977, p. 113). At another conference he said, "May I stress again the value of reading the addresses given at our general conferences in the Ensign magazine" (in Ensign, May 1978, p. 77).

At the conclusion of the April 1988 general conference, President Ezra Taft Benson stated: "I commend my Brethren of the General Authorities for the excellent addresses they have given. My humble prayer is that all of us will follow the counsel and instruction we have received. As we have felt the Spirit and made new and sacred resolves, may we now have the courage and fortitude to carry out those resolves. For the next six months your conference edition of the Ensign should stand next to your standard works and be referred to frequently." (In Conference Report, April 1988, p. 84.)

As with the study of the scriptures, our reading and marking of the conference addresses can continue to bless our lives and those of our families and friends when we use those messages in talks and lessons and in counseling and conversation in the Church and at home. President Kimball encouraged us, "Let the messages and spirit of this conference radiate and find expression in all that you do henceforth—in your homes, in your work, in your meetings, and in all your comings and goings" (Ensign, November 1978, p. 73).

Preparation, attention, and note-taking are of limited consequence if what is said and done in general conference does not translate into increased obedience and personal righteousness. Hearing conference is of little value if we do not also hearken to the words of the prophets and the promptings of the Spirit.

Throughout the scriptures, the term hearken is inextricably linked to obedience. Different terms were used in the Hebrew text whenever reference was made to hearing without implied obedience (see Russell M. Nelson, "Listen to Learn," Ensign, May 1991, pp. 22-25). General conference "will have been lost motion," President Spencer W. Kimball boldly declared, "a waste of time, energy, and money if its messages are not heeded" ("In the World but Not of It," p. 2). James the Apostle commanded the early Saints, "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only." His charge is relevant to the Saints today. "For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: for he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was." (James 1:22-24.) Let us not go our way after general conference and forget to implement the lessons welearned from the speakers as well as from the Spirit. Our most important, even imperative, duty with regard to general conference is not merely to hear and know but also to do.

Of the importance of general conference and the eternal significance of our response to it, Elder Mark E. Petersen testified:

A general conference of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is far more significant than most people realize.

The spirituality which characterizes these conference sessions leaves its stamp indelibly upon many who see and hear. It is different from the religious worship to which most people are accustomed, and is impressive to say the least.

And so it should be, for it is one of the most important events of the present day. Many do not so regard it, even among the Latter-day Saints. But for those who appreciate its true significance, it is of transcending importance, for in it prophets of God speak, living prophets.

When God gives a message to mankind, it is not something to be lightly cast aside. Whether He speaks personally or through His prophets. He Himself said, it is the same.

And in this conference His prophets speak!

Shall we not take our modern prophets seriously and accept them as the servants of God? Will we choose to follow the wisdom of the world or the wisdom of these inspired men? Will we consider worldly deductions of greater value than the advice of our spiritual leaders?

We of today do not kill our prophets, nor do we put them into prison as was the case with Jeremiah and his contemporaries. But do we believe them? Or do we nullify what they say by our indifference?

When the prophets of God speak today it is as significant as when Moses or Jeremiah spoke. Their words are as valid and as binding as were the teachings of the prophets anciently.

In general conference the modern prophets speak to a modern world, by modern facilities, with a modern message. And that message is the Gospel of Christ, brought to earth once again in its purity. It alone can save. (Why the Religious Life, pp. 203-6.)

1993 Bookcraft
