Some obvious printer's errors have been corrected as seemed reasonable, such as certain punctuation errors (like omitted periods, periods to commas or semi-colons to commas, and some mismatched quotation marks, etc.). Some inconsistent or obvious spelling errors or typos within the text were also corrected (e. g. , make to made, begining to beginning, conviced to convinced, satisfiy to satisfy, immedite to immediate, successsful to successful, maratime to maritime, gunpower to gunpowder, bowlder to boulder, asend to ascend, degardation to degradation, forgivness to forgiveness, en to ten, myrtyr to martyr, continet to continent, gratitute to gratitude, loyality to loyalty, philanthrophist to philanthropist, extavagant to extravagant, justifiying to justifying, weakend to weakened, Fich's to Fitch's, Reedemer to Redeemer, matyrdom to martyrdom, etc., etc.).

The book used as a reference for this e-book transcription originally belonged to O. N. Toomey, and was digitized by the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University. It can be viewed or downloaded free at https://archive.org/details/handofprovidence00award.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAND OF PROVIDENCE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
