LECTURES.                                                          REFERENCES.

  I. Samuel, the Prophet.                                        I Samuel Chaps. I to
                                                                   XXV. Josephus' Antiquities
                                                                   Book V,
                                                                   Chaps. X and XI, also
                                                                   Book VI.

  II. David, the King.                                           I Samuel Chap. XVI-XXXI;
                                                                   also II Samuel
                                                                   Chaps. I-XXIV. I Kings
                                                                   Chaps. I-II. I Chronicles
                                                                   Chaps. X-XXIX. The
                                                                   Psalms of David, Josephus'
                                                                   Antiquities,
                                                                   Books VI and VII.

  III. Maccabees, the Patriots, their Times                       Books of the Maccabees
              and Achievements.[1]                                I and II (found in
                                                                   Douay Bible). Josephus'
                                                                   Antiquities, Book XII,
                                                                   Chaps. VI-XI.

SPECIAL TEXT: "I exhort you, especially, to agree with one another; and in what excellency any one of you exceeds another, to yield to him so far, and by that means to reap the advantage of everyone's own virtues."--MATTATHIAS, Father of the Maccabees, to his sons.

NOTES.

1. Suggestions in the Formation of an Unwritten Lecture: "The simplest formal address that can be constructed has three distinct parts. They may be named as follows:

1. The Introduction.

2. The Discussion.

3. The Conclusion.

On this framework a speech-plan can be constructed simple enough for any child. And it is at the same time true that even a child, with such a plan, might speak appropriately who would otherwise not be able to begin at all.

The Introduction: "This is at once important and embarrassing. First words are nearly always heard attentively, and they do much to determine the degree of attention that will be bestowed on the remainder of the speech. The young speaker should select something as an introduction upon which his mind can fasten, instead of dwelling upon the frightful generality of the naked theme. * * * * The introduction should be simple, and, above everything else, easy for the speaker to comprehend and remember. If there is anything in the whole world which he is sure he can talk about for a few moments, and which can be made to have a moderate degree of connection with his subject, let that be chosen for an opening. * * * * When the introductory topic is selected it should be turned over in the mind until the speaker knows just what he is going to say about it. This process will have a wonderfully quieting effect upon his nerves. He has fairly mastered something, and knows that at all events he can begin his speech. It is well to make a note of this introduction in a few simple words, which will strongly fasten themselves in the memory. No effort toward elaboration should be made, for that would naturally lead to a memorized introduction, and either require the whole speech to be written, or produce a painful and difficult transition.

The Discussion: "This should deal directly with the subject or central idea of the discourse. Here a clear statement of at least one thought which the speaker can fully grasp should be made. The pen (or pencil) may be used in preparation without impropriety. If but one idea is thought of, let that be written in the fewest and strongest words at the students' command. While doing this it is likely that another and related thought will spring into mind which can be treated in the same manner. With diligent students there may even be a danger of getting down too many seed-thoughts. When this central division is completely wrought out, two other points claim attention. How shall the transition be made from the introduction to the discussion? A little reflection will show how to glide from one to the other, and that process should be conned over, without writing, until it is well understood. It is wonderful how many outlines of ideas the memory will retain without feeling burdened; and this power of retention grows enormously through exercise. After this, the mode of gliding from the discussion to the conclusion may be treated in the same manner, and with equal profit.

The Conclusion: "The conclusion itself is scarcely less material than the introduction; but there is much less range of choice in the manner of closing than in that of beginning. The subject is before the audience, and any wide departure from it seems like the beginning of a new speech--something not usually well received. There is this distinction between the relative value of introduction and conclusion; a good introduction adds most to a speaker's ease, confidence, and power during the moment of speech; but a good conclusion leaves the deepest permanent impression upon the audience. It is usually remembered longer than any other part of the address." (Extempore Speech, Pittenger, pp. 46-49.)

Footnotes

1. Paper.
