SPECIAL LESSON.

THE PECULIAR FORCE OF MORAL DUTIES WHEN REGARDED AS COMMANDMENTS OF
GOD.[1]

Illustrations:

(a) Observance of the "Lord's Day."

(b) Honor thy Father and thy mother.

(c) Thou shalt not bear false witness.

(d) Thou shalt not steal.

(e) Thou shalt not covet.

(f) "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. * * * Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."

SPECIAL TEXT: "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: fear God and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man."

NOTES.

1. Suggestions in the Formation of a Lecture: In a previous lesson on lectures, I made some suggestions in relation to the construction of a lecture (Lesson XI, Part II), quoting from a little work by William Pittenger on "Extempore Speech," calling attention to the simple framework of a lecture, consisting of, 1. The Introduction;; 2. The Discussion; 3. The Conclusion. I now give from the same work an example in outline of such a speech.

"Subject--The Ocean.

"1. Introduction--The vastness of the ocean. No one person has seen more than a small part of it. Power evidenced by storm and shipwrecks.

"2. Discussion.--Five great divisions of the ocean. Use in nature, watering and tempering the land; in commerce, as a highway; in history, by dividing and uniting nations; its mystery, etc.

"3. Conclusion.--Proof of the Creator's power and wisdom found in the ocean.

"THE SAME PLAN CONDENSED.

"Subject--The Ocean.

"1. Vastness and Power.

"2. Parts, Use, and Mystery.

"3. Evidence.

"DEAN SWIFT'S SERMON.

"(Illustrating above plan.)

"This eccentric clergyman once preached a sermon shorter than its own text, yet having all the three parts of which we have spoken. The text was Prov. xix: 20: "'He that pitieth the poor lendeth to the Lord; and that which he hath given will he pay him again.'

"The sermon was:

"'Brethren, you hear the condition; if you like the security, down with the dust.'

"The collection is said to have been munificent.

"In this short sermon the text with the word 'Brethren' constitutes the introduction; the phrase, 'you hear the condition,' is a good transition to the discussion contained in the next member, 'if you like the security,' which assumes the truth of the text, makes its general declarations present and personal, and prepares the way for the forcible and practical, if not very elegant conclusion, 'down with the dust.'" (Extempore Speech, pp. 53, 54.)

Extempore Speech: Extempore speech does not lose its special character, though some scattered quotations be read or repeated from memory. To pick up a book, in the midst of a speech, and read a theme or argument, or the statement of another's position, does not make the discourse composite in character, unless such reading be the principal part of it. * * * * Unwritten speech does not preclude the fullest preparation. The plans advocated in this volume will enable a speaker to gather materials as widely, arrange them as systematically, and hold them as firmly in hand, as if every word was written; while at the same time he may have all the freedom and play of thought, the rush of passion, and the energy of delivery that comes in the happiest moment of outgushing words. (Extempore Speech, Pittenger, p. 25-6.)

Preparation for Extempore Speech: On all ordinary occasions a good speech must result from a previous ingathering of materials--the formation of a mental treasury in connection with a special subject. The speaker works for days or weeks in collecting from all sources and arranging in the happiest manner that which his hearers are to receive in an hour with no other labor than that of listening. The great advantage of writing is supposed to lie in this preparation. Today an orator may write everything he knows about a subject; tomorrow, by means of reading, conversation, or further thought, he may have more ideas to record; and he may thus continue to widen and record his knowledge, until his time, or the subject itself, is exhausted. Then he may revise, select what is most appropriate, refine and polish his language, and finally come before an audience confident that he holds in his hand the very best that he can give them. (Extempore Speech, Pittenger, pp. 27-8.)

Footnotes

1. Note to Teacher.--It would be well for the sake of giving variety to our exercises, as also for the excellence of the exercise itself, to make no assignments of the sub-divisions of the subject of these special lessons to individual members, but let it be a subject for general consideration by all the quorum during the week preceding its treatment in the class; and then call upon the members to speak to the subject without previous warning or notification. In a word, let it be an exercise in extemporaneous speaking. (See suggestions in the Introduction.)
