SCRIPTURE READING EXERCISE.[1]

(A) THE BOOK OF DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS.

  ANALYSIS.                                                   REFERENCES.

  I. The First of Direct Modern Revelations--Joseph        History of the Church,
        Smith's First Vision.                              Vol 1, Chap. 1. Pearl of
  II. The First Compilation of Modern                      Great Price, pp. 81-7.
         Revelations--The "Book of Commandments."          Note 1. Preface of Book
                                                            of Commandments. History
                                                            of the Church, Vol. I,
                                                            pp. 221-226. Ibid 234-236,
                                                            270. New Witness for
                                                            God, Chap. x. Note 2 and
                                                            3.
  III. The Book of Doctrine and Covenants.
          1. History of the Book.                           History of the Church,
          2. Character of the Book, its Composition.        Vol 11, Chap. xviii.
          3. Testimonies respecting it.                     Y. M. M. I. Manual (No. 10),
                                                            pp. 21-27.

SPECIAL TEXT; Behold, I am God and have spoken it; these commandments are of me, and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding. And inasmuch as they erred it might be made known: and inasmuch as they sought wisdom they might be instructed; and inasmuch as they sinned they might be chastened, that they might repent; and inasmuch as they were humble they might be made strong, and blessed from on high, and receive knowledge from time to time."--THE LORD TO JOSEPH SMITH.

NOTES.

1. The Far-reaching Effect of the First Direct Revelation (Called Joseph Smith's First Vision) in Modern Times: How little that fair-haired boy, standing there in the unpruned forest, with the sunlight stealing through the trees about him, realized the burden placed upon his shoulders that morning by reason of the visitation he received in answer to his prayer! Here is not the place for argument, that is to come later; but let us consider the wide-sweeping effect of this boy's vision upon the accepted theology of Christendom. First, it was a flat contradiction to the assumption that revelation had ceased, that God had no further communication to make to man. Second, it reveals the errors into which men had fallen concerning the personages of the Godhead. It makes it manifest that God is not an incorporeal being without form or body, or parts; on the contrary he appeared to the Prophet in the form of a man, as he did to the ancient prophets. Thus after centuries of controversy the simple truth of the scriptures which teach that man was created in the likeness of God--hence God must be the same in form as man--was re-affirmed; Third, it corrected the error of the theologians respecting the oneness of the persons of the Father and the Son. Instead of being one person as the theologians teach, they are distinct persons, as much so as any father and son on earth; and the oneness of the Godhead referred to in the scriptures, must have reference to unity of purpose and of will; the mind of the one being the mind of the other, and so as to the will and other attributes. The announcement of these truths, coupled with that other truth proclaimed by the Son of God, viz., that none of the sects and churches of Christendom were acknowledged as the church or kingdom of God, furnish the elements for a religious revolution that will affect the very foundations of modern Christian theology. In a moment all the rubbish concerning theology which had accumulated through all the centuries since the gospel and authority to administer its ordinances had been taken from the earth, was grandly swept aside--the living rocks of truth were made bare upon which the Church of Christ was to be founded--a New Dispensation of the gospel was about to be committed to the earth--God had raised up a witness for himself among the children of men. (New Witness for God, Vol. I, pp. 173-4.)

2. The Book of Commandments: By the middle of September, 1831, the revelations which had been received by the Prophet for the direction of individuals and the Church had amounted to quite a number; and as the Church about that time assembled in Conference at Hiram, Portage County, Ohio, and authorized W. W. Phelps to purchase a printing press to be set up at Independence, Missouri, it was resolved to make a collection of these revelations and publish them in book form under the title "The Book of Commandments." A special conference was held on this business on the first of November, at Hiram, on which occasion the "Lord's Preface" to the Book of Commandments was received by revelation through the Prophet. (This is now the Lord's Preface to the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and stands as section 1.) The Prophet asked the conference what testimony they were willing to attach to this "Book of Commandments," which would shortly be sent to the world. A number of the brethren arose and said that they were willing to testify to the world that they knew that the revelations were of the Lord, and on the succeeding day--for the conference continued through two days--the brethren arose in turn and bore witness of the truth of the Book of Commandments. (History of the Church, Vol. I, p. 222, note.) The Prophet also received by inspiration the formal testimony which it was the intention evidently to have the brethren in attendance at the conference sign, (see note 3), but as the book was never completely printed, this testimony was not published, and its publication seems to have been neglected in subsequent collections and publications of the revelations. It was also resolved by the conference that the number of copies in the first edition to be printed at Independence, Missouri, should be 10,000, but finally in 1832, when the printing was begun, it was considered prudent only to print an edition of 3,000. (Church History, Vol. I, p. 270.) The work of printing began and was continued until 160 pages had been printed, when, on the 20th day of July, 1833, mob violence broke out at Independence, the house of W. W. Phelps, which contained the printing establishment, was thrown down and the printing materials taken possession of by the mob. Many papers were destroyed, and the family furniture thrown out of doors. A number of copies of the Book of Commandments, however, so far as printed, was saved by members of the Church, and one of these coming into the possession of the late President Wilford Woodruff, he deposited it with the Church Historian, in whose possession it now is, and accounted as among the precious documents of the collection of rare books and manuscripts in the Historian's office.

3. The Testimony to the Truth of the Book of Commandments: "The testimony of the witnesses to the book of the Lord's commandments, which he gave to his Church through Joseph Smith, Jun., who was appointed by the voice of the Church for this purpose; we therefore feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth and upon the islands of the sea, that the Lord has borne record to our souls through the Holy Ghost, shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true. We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God, the Father, and his Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, that the children of men may be profited thereby." (History of the Church, Vol. I, p. 226.)

4. The Doctrine and Covenants: Having been hindered by their enemies from completing the publication of the "Book of Commandments," the Church renewed its efforts to publish the revelations in Kirtland, Ohio. In September, 1834, a committee on compilation and arrangement was appointed consisting of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams. About one year later this committee completed its labors, and on the 17th of August, 1835, a general assembly of the Church convened in Kirtland, the quorums of the priesthood were arranged in the order of their standing as then understood. President Joseph Smith and Frederick G. Williams were absent in Michigan, and the Twelve were absent in the East, visiting the churches. The "Doctrine and Covenants" was presented to the quorums separately for their acceptance, and voted upon by them; after which it was presented to and accepted by the general assembly by unanimous vote as the "Doctrine and Covenants" of their faith.

After this action, W. W. Phelps presented an article (not a revelation) on "Marriage," and Oliver Cowdery one on "Government and Laws in General," both of which were ordered printed in the book of "Doctrine and Covenants." There was also printed in the book a series of Seven Lectures on Faith, that had previously been delivered before a theological class in Kirtland. So that the Doctrine and Covenants then comprised the Articles of Faith, seven in number, the two Articles on Marriage and Government and a collection of Revelations, (not all that had been given, by the way,) the last forming the body and greater part of the book. (See History of the Church, Vol. II, chapter xviii.)

5. In What Light the Various Parts of the Doctrine and Covenants are to be Regarded: It is only the Revelations of God that are to be regarded as setting forth the absolute truth, the final word, so far as it is written, as the doctrine and the covenants of the Church. Hence the parts of the "Doctrine and Covenants" that are not revelations are not of the same rank with the revelations, and are only of binding force as they are in agreement with these revelations. The following note on these Lectures on Faith is from the History of the Church, Vol. II, p. 176:

    "These 'Lectures on Theology' here referred to were afterwards
    prepared by the Prophet (see page 180), and published in the
    Doctrine and Covenants under the title 'Lectures on Faith.' They
    are seven in number, and occupy the first seventy-five pages in the
    current editions of the Doctrine and Covenants. They are not to
    be regarded as of equal authority in matters of doctrine with the
    revelations of God in the Doctrine and Covenants, but as stated by
    Elder John Smith, who, when the book of Doctrine and Covenants was
    submitted to the several quorums of the Priesthood for acceptance
    (August 17, 1835), speaking in behalf of the Kirtland High Council,
    'bore record that the revelations in said book were true, and
    that the lectures were judicially written and compiled, and were
    profitable for doctrine." The distinction which Elder John Smith
    here makes should be observed as marking the difference between the
    Lectures on Faith and the revelations of God in the Doctrine and
    Covenants." (History of the Church, Vol. II, p. 176.)

6. Testimony of the Twelve Apostles: As stated in note 4, the Twelve Apostles were not present at the general assembly of the Church, held on the 17th of August, 1835, at which time the Doctrine & Covenants was accepted by the Church, but previous to their departure on their missions to the churches in the East, their testimony to the truth of the revelations was written and read by W. W. Phelps to the Saints in conference assembled, and stands as follows:

    "The testimony of the Witnesses to the Book of the Lord's
    Commandments, which commandments he gave to his Church through
    Joseph Smith, Jun., who was appointed, by the voice of the Church,
    for this purpose.

    "We therefore feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of
    mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth, that the
    Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost shed
    forth upon us, that these Commandments were given by inspiration of
    God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true. We give
    this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is
    through the grace of God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, that
    we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony
    unto the world, in the which we rejoice exceedingly, praying the
    Lord always that the children of men may be profited thereby."

    The Twelve Apostles of the Church at the time were: Thomas B.
    Marsh, David W.. Patten, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson
    Hyde, Wm. E. McLellin, Parley P. Pratt, Luke S. Johnson, William
    Smith, Orson Pratt, John F. Boynton, Lyman E. Johnson. (History of
    the Church, Vol. II, p. 245.)

Footnotes

1. The reading should now be from the Doctrine and Covenants, and so continued through the lessons dealing with that book.
