Parley P. Pratt, Mormonism Unveiled ( 1838)

Contradictions

Under this head, Mr. Sunderland says, "in the Book of Mormon, page 149, and throughout the book, the plates on which it is said to have been engraved, were brass. But the eight witnesses say they had the appearance of gold." This is Mr. Sunderland's blunder and NOT a contradiction in the book. The plates on which the Book of Mormon were written, are not where called brass, but the plates brought from Jerusalem to America containing the writings of Moses and the Jewish prophets, are called brass; and the distinction is kept so plain throughout the whole record, that a blunder or mistake on this point, on the part of Mr. S., is inexcusable.

And from his general proceedings in this matter, we feel justified in calling it a lie. Mr. Sunderland also says, "it speaks of a compass, five or six hundred years before Christ." But he does not tell us the fact, as the book does, in relation to the invention of this compass. The book says it was prepared by the hand of the Lord; but perhaps Mr. S. thinks the Lord could not have invented a compass in that early age of arts and sciences: but some scientific men profess to trace the knowledge of the compass back to very early ages. Indeed, some show reasons for believing it was invented in Egypt, in the days of her glory—but be this as it may, our God is just as good at mechanical inventions, architecture, tailoring, smithing, stone working, &c. &c., as at any other business. For proof of this, we refer the reader to the tables of stone, not only written on by the finger of God, but the first tables were made by Him. Also, the plans of the tabernacle, temple, Aaron's garments, &c.; as well as the workers in gold and silver, &c., were all inspired of God, according to Moses.

Again, he says, "on page 440, it is said the sun does not move at all." This is another lie. It only speaks on the principle of lengthening out the day, and gives us to understand that the earth rolls back on its axis, to cause this phenomena, instead of the sun moving for this purpose. He further says, page 431, ten years before Christ, a writer pretends to quote the following passage: "they that have done good shall have everlasting life; and they that have done evil shall have everlasting damnation;" but he adds, "no such scripture was written at that time." I reply, no such scripture is now written, except in the Nephite records, of which the Book of Mormon is not one hundredth part, and Mr. Sunderland knows not what was written among them; therefore, he cannot judge; he knows not but the scripture referred to, was written 40 times over, in some of their former records; therefore, he has made a presumptuous assertion.

He quoted Book of Mormon, page 65: "Adam fell that men might have joy." This does not read so, but says, "Men are that they might have joy." But I am tired of noticing his lies. He says, "the Voice of Warning,page 37, says the Nile now has seven mouths." But the "Voice of Warning," page 37, says no such thing, not even naming the Nile, its streams or mouths. Mr. S. proceeds to reject the 11th chapter of Isaiah, because from the construction of the lion's jaws, he cannot chew the cud like the ox. Now, Mr. Sunderland, you begin to come out like a man; you no longer act under a cloak of religion, you have turned infidel at last, and cannot believe the Bible one whit sooner than the "Book of Mormon." And the "Book of Mormon," says, if we believe one we will believe the other. But he pleads an excuse for his unbelief, by saying, the passage referred to cannot be taken literally. Pray, Mr. S., permit me to suggest a rule of interpretation, that will just suit your views of this passage. That little n-o-t, which the tempter made use of, in his quoting scripture to Eve, then it would read thus: "The lion shall n-o-t eat straw like the ox." Your further say, "according to the representation on page 540, of the Book of Mormon, there was an insect called in the reformed Egyptian language, a honey bee." This is another falsehood; the original language there calls it "deseret," which is by interpretation, a honey bee. Again, you find fault with page 542, for speaking of windows so long before the invention of glass. But here you are at war with the Bible, which mentions windows as early as Noah's ark, and the flood. You complain of a certain book being written among the Josephites, in the language of their fathers, (Hebrew,) and yet the book professes to be reformed Egyptian. Well, what contradiction is all this? The brass plates brought from Jerusalem were in Hebrew; and the abridgement that Mormon made [now called the "Book of Mormon,"] was written in "reformed Egyptian." But you say, "the reformed Egyptian was never spoken by any person." But how do you know what was done in America? The writers in the "Book of Mormon" say it was called among them "reformed Egyptian," being handed down and altered by them, according to their manner of speech.

One would certainly judge you to be acquainted in ancient America, when you make an assertion like the foregoing. But again; you say "Let any 'Mormonite' produce a specimen of such a language if he can." This I agree to do, when you produce a man acquainted with all the ancient languages. Again, you say, "a hero in the Book of Mormon, page 529, is made to say, that his ten thousand warriors, whom he was leading into battle, were killed. But in the very next page he is represented as leading them in the front of battle again, after were hewn down." I say boldly, this is a gross misrepresentation: and now, let the public read the two pages and judge for themselves.

Again; you say the "Book of Mormon," page 48, mentions the Mariners' compass. I say it does not mention the Mariners' compass; but a compass prepared by the hand of God, as you may read particularly in the "Book of Mormon."

Mr. S. says, "the Book of Mormon purports to have been originally engraven on brass plates." Now, Mr. La Roy Sunderland, why do you lie again? Why continue to add lie to lie, to make the "Book of Mormon" appear false? The "Book of Mormon" no where purports to have originally been engraven on "brass plates." [I am more, and more ashamed of the living lie; whose falsehoods I am unveiling;] the book says "gold plates."

But you say, "Now, admitting there were as many plates as there are pages in the book, and that each plate weight not less than one pound each; these plates must have weighed not less than five hundred and fifty pounds." Here we see another mark of a confused and shattered brain. Why? Mr. S., there is only half as many leaves in a book as there are pages, for one leaf makes two pages; as you may learn by examining Mr. Webster's Spelling Book. Besides, a thin gold plate, about 7 by 8 inches and about the thickness of tin, would not weigh a pound: and you should know that the "Egyptian" is a much shorter language than the English. You say, "probably Smith knew very well that the traditions of the natives would not countenance the "Book of Mormon." In answer to this, I will quote a few of their traditions.

First, says Mr. Boudinot, "It is said among their principle or beloved men, that they have it handed down from their ancestors, that the book which the white people have, was once theirs: that while they had it they prospered exceedingly, &c. They also say, that their fathers were possessed of an extraordinary divine spirit, by which they foretold future events, and controlled the common course of nature; and this they transmitted to their offspring, on condition of their obeying the sacred laws; that they did by these means, bring down showers of blessings upon their beloved people; but that this power for a long time past had entirely ceased." Colonel James Smith, in his journal, while a prisoner among the natives, says, "They have a tradition, that in the beginning of this continent, the angels or heavenly inhabitants, as they call them, frequently visited the people, and talked with their forefathers, and gave directions how to pray."

Mr. Boudinot, in his able work, remarks concerning their language: "Their language in its roots, idiom and particular constructions, appears to have the whole genius of the Hebrew, and what is very remarkable, and well worthy of serious attention, has most of the peculiarities of that language; especially those in which it differs from most other languages." There is a tradition related by an aged Indian of the Stockbridge tribe, that their fathers were once in possession of a "sacred book," which was handed down from generation to generation; and at last hid in the earth, since which time they had been under the feet of their enemies. But these oracles were to be restored to them again; and then they would triumph over their enemies and regain their ancient country, together with their rights and privileges. Mr. Boudinot, after recording many traditions similar to the above, at length remarks: "Can any man read this short account of Indian traditions, drawn from tribes of various nations; from the west to the east, and from the south to the north, wholly separated from each other, written by different authors of the best character, both for knowledge and integrity, possessing the best means of information, at various and distant times, without any possible communication with each other; and yet suppose, that all this is the effect of chance, accident, or design, from a love of the marvelous or a premeditated intention of deceiving, and thereby ruining their well established reputation? Can any one carefully, and with deep reflection, consider and compare these traditions with the ten tribes of Israel, without at least drawing some presumptive inferences in favour of these wandering natives being descended from the ten tribes of Israel?"

Mr S. says, "In the Book of Mormon, page 550, a man is spoken of who was the father of 32 children!" I reply, this was almost half as many as Ahab had sons. 2d Kings, c. x: v.6; where his 70 sons are mentioned, and no doubt he had some daughters. But this Bible statement can be spiritualized, and so avoid the marvelous.

But, says Mr. S., "it speaks of 'Church' five or six hundred years before Christ." I reply, the Bible speaks of "Church" as early as Moses. But, says he, "this Book speaks of the paradise of God, 500 years before Christ;" but I ask (if there was no such place till invented by modern priests,) where did Adam dwell, when first created? and did the Savior add a new term, as well as idea, to the Hebrew, when he told the thief on the cross concerning Paradise?

Mr. S. says, "the Jews never kept any of their records on plates of brass." But I inquire, how does he know? In fact, he seems to be perfectly acquainted with every thing that ever transpired in every age and country. Pray, Mr. S., who are you? "This Book," says Mr. S., "countenances murder for opinions' sake; it also countenances deception and theft; page 12 and 13." I say it does not countenance murder for opinion's sake; the circumstance recorded on these pages, was the slaying of Laban, who had robbed them, and sought their lives. Therefore, this is another lie, Mr. S. And as to deception and theft, it was taking a record from a robber, who had robbed them of an immense property. But Mr. S., why not condemn the Bible? Look at Moses slaying the Egyptian, and concealing him in the sand, and running away to escape justice. Look at the Israelites, borrowing of the Egyptians and not paying them. Look at Jacob's deception of his father, Isaac; and his deception of his father-in-law, with the pealed rods. And at Rachel, stealing the images; and of Samuel slaying Agag; and at David's deception, feigning himself crazy, by letting his spittle run down on his beard. And when you have looked at all these, you shall have as many more. But yet, in your estimation, the Bible is unerring truth, and the "Book of Mormon" a deception. Oh! what an impartial judge.

You say, "it speaks of the Lamb of God; and of the Gospel of the Lamb; the Apostles of the Lamb; the Holy Ghost; the Mother of God; of Priestcraft; of the Crucifixion of Christ, and his Baptism by John; of the Roman Catholic Church; and of immersion:—long before the advent of Messiah." I reply, it does not use the term "Roman Catholic," nor "Christians," nor "immersion," in the place to which you refer, and only speaks of the other events as some thing future, shown to Nephi in a vision, and made known to him by an angel; and if this is a mark of "fraud," then it is a mark of fraud for Christ to be as a Lamb, slain from the foundation of the world: or for God to have foreknowledge; or for Isaiah to speak of the Mother of God—"Behold, a Virgin shall conceive." You say, "on page 236, Christ is represented as the grandson of God, he is called 'The Son of the only begotten of the Father.'" Here, Mr. S., you have taken advantage of a typographical error; the word OF being inserted where it should not be, and is corrected in the second edition. Are you so foolish as to think this was really the sentiment of any people? No; you know better. It was through malice, you did it. You say the book admits that men are liable to mistakes; so it does, and you admit it too; why then take advantage of men's mistakes? But you say, on page 538, we are commanded to give thanks to God, that he hath made manifest its imperfections. This sir, is not so. But Moroni exhorts, rather than commands, that we would give thanks unto God, that he had made manifest his (not its,) imperfections and the imperfections of those who had written before him, that we might learn to be more wise than that which they had been. Now, if you take advantage of such humble acknowledgments, then why not take advantage of David's imperfections, so clearly make manifest in the Psalms, and in his history? Why not take advantage of all wise and good men" for they have all been guilty of some imperfections. And I highly esteem those who are most willing to acknowledge their own, and to forgive those of others, when they are acknowledged in an humble manner: and God loves them too. Yes, Mr. Sunderland, I could take even you by the hand and forgive you your lies, mistakes, blunders, and hard speeches, if you would humbly acknowledge them and repent: and I am sure God would forgive you too. Your seventh number on "Mormonism," is not worthy of any reply, being made up of all manner of evil spoken against us falsely, because of the word of our testimony; and this too, taken from a book falsely called, "Mormonism Unveiled:" a work got up not only by a most determined enemy, but by one, whose character is so disgusting to every decent, respectable person who knows him, that the Book had never any weight at all in the West, where it was published. However, I will gather much from your last number in favour of "Mormonism." The Saviour says, "blessed are you when men shall revile you, and cast you out of their company, and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for Christ's sake; rejoice ye in that hour, and be exceeding glad; for so persecuted their fathers, the prophets, which were before you." Now we will see how much it falls short of all manner of evil.

Fortune telling, money digging, juggling, wicked cheat, liar, profane, intemperate, quarrelsome, not good character, gold bible company, indolent, lying, notoriously bad, wife whipper, destitute of moral character, visionary, addicted to vicious habits; and add to this catalogue, the ridiculous stories that went the rounds of the religious papers concerning the "Angel caught;" and walking on the water story; and the murder story; together with "adultery," and the love tale of Mr. Smith's stealing his wife; and then the all things common; together with doing away with matrimony; and then the treason against government; the stirring up of the slaves against their masters; the instigating of the Indians to war and bloodshed; together with driving the inhabitants of Jackson county, Missouri, from their houses and lands, and the taking possession of them by force. And if it does not amount to all manner of evil, then the imagination of the priests, and the devil combined, is not fertile enough to fulfil the prediction of the Saviour, for I am sure they have tortured their thinking powers. Perhaps they might have added the story of eating their own children; and of their having hairy throats, and but one eye, and that in the middle of their foreheads, &c.; as was said concerning the Waldenses, in the north of France; and of the primitive christians. But, however, we are willing to give our enemies the priests, and others, together with his Satanic majesty, great credit, for inventive and fertile imaginations, as well as for great credulity; more especially when we remember that "Mormonism Unveiled," which is now credited by religious editors in this city, was got up by one D.P. Hulburt, (who was cut off from our society for adultery, and afterwards put under bonds for threatening the life of Brother Smith,) who was assisted by one Deacon Clapp, who, by the by, became so familiar with Hulburt's wife, that he had some hundred dollars to pay; besides endangering his Deaconship.

However, Hulburt being so notorious a character, it was thought best, (even after he had advertised in the papers, that he was about to publish "Mormonism Unveiled,") to change authors, and publish under the name of Howe, (a printer in Painesville, Ohio,) whose mind had been somewhat chafed, because his own wife and sister belonged to the church of Latter Day Saints; so Howe became the adopted father of "Mormonism Unveiled."

But that ridiculous story, concerning Solomon Spalding's Manuscript Found, being converted, by Sidney Rigdon, into the "Book of Mormon," published at first as a probability, without a shadow of truth; a lie, which never had any credit among the honest and intelligent part of community in the West, has at last been published in the "New York Evangelist," "Zion's Watchman," and other religious papers, as an established fact, beyond the possibility of a doubt. Yes, Solomon Spalding is like to be set down as the author of the "Book of Mormon," and Sidney Rigdon as the impostor who palmed Solomon Spalding's novel upon the world as a "Religious Work." And many are as willing to believe this lie, as the Jews were, that the disciples had come and stolen the body of Jesus, in order to palm a deception upon that age. Thus they have "strong delusion, that they may believe a lie, that they may all be damned, who believe not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness." All this I am willing they should enjoy, because the scriptures must be fulfilled. But for the sake of the honest in heart, who love the truth, I here offer my testimony on this subject; as I was a personal actor in the scenes which brought Sidney Rigdon into an acquaintance with the "Book of Mormon," and into connection with the Church of Latter Day Saints.

About A.D. 1827, Messrs. A. Campbell, W. Scott, and S. Rigdon, with some others residing in Virginia, Ohio, &c., came off from the Baptists, and established a new Order, under the name of Reformed Baptists, or Disciples; and they were termed by their enemies, Campbellites, Ridgonites, &c. This reformation, as to its doctrine consisted principally of the baptism of repentance, for remission of sins, &c. And Mr. Rigdon, in particular, held to a literal fulfilment and application of the written word; and by this means he was an instrument to turn many from the false notions of sectarian traditions, to an understanding of the prophecies, touching the great restoration of Israel, and the mighty revolutions of the last days. Many hundred disciples were gathered by his ministry, throughout the Lake Country of Ohio; and many other preachers stood in connection with him in those principles. I was then pursuing an agricultural life, and mostly occupied in converting the wilderness into a fruitful field; but being a member of the Baptist Church, and a lover of truth, I became acquainted with Mr. Rigdon, and a believer in, and a teacher of the same doctrine. After proclaiming those principles in my own neighbourhood and the adjoining country, I at length took a journey to the State of New York, partly on a visit to Columbia, Co., N.Y., my native place: and partly for the purpose of ministering the word. This journey was undertaken in August, 1830. I had no sooner reached Ontario Co. N.Y., than I came in contact with the "Book of Mormon," which had then been published about six months, and had gathered about fifty disciples, which were all that then constituted the Church of Latter Day Saints. I was greatly prejudiced against the Book; but remembering the caution of Paul, "Prove all things and hold fast that which is good," I sat down to read it; and after carefully comparing it with the other scriptures, and praying to God, He gave me the knowledge of its truth, by the power of the Holy Ghost; and what was I, that I should withstand God? I accordingly obeyed the ordinances, and was commissioned by revelation and the laying on of hands to preach the fullness of the Gospel. Then, after finishing my visit to Columbia Co., I returned to the brethren in Ontario Co., where for the first time I saw Mr. Joseph Smith, Jr., who had just returned from Pennsylvania, to his father's house, in Manchester. About the 15th of October, 1830, I took my journey, in company with Elder O. Cowdery, and Peter Whitmer, to Ohio. We called on Elder S. Rigdon, and then for the first time, his eyes beheld the "Book of Mormon; I, myself, had the happiness to present it to him in person. He was much surprised, and it was with much persuasion and argument, that he was prevailed on to read it, and after he had read it, he had a great struggle of mind, before he fully believed and embraced it; and when finally convinced of its truth, he called together a large congregation of his friends, neighbours and brethren and then addressed them very affectionately, for near two hours, during most of which time, both himself and nearly all the congregation were melted into tears. He asked forgiveness of every body who might have had occasion to be offended with any part of his former live; he forgave all who had persecuted or injured him, in any manner; and the next morning, himself and wife, were baptized by elder O. Cowdery. I was present, it was a solemn scene, most of the people were greatly affected: they came out of the water overwhelmed in tears. Many others were baptized by us, in that vicinity, both before and after his baptism—insomuch, that during the fall of 1830, and the following winter and spring, the number of disciples was increased to about 1000; the Holy Ghost was mightily poured out, and the word of God grew and multiplied; and many priests were obedient to the Faith. Early in 1831, Mr. Rigdon having been ordained, under our hands, visited elder J. Smith, Jr., in the State of New York, for the first time; and from that time forth, rumor began to circulate, that he (Rigdon) was the author of the Book of Mormon. The Spalding story never was dreamed of until several years afterwards, when it appeared in Mormonism Unveiled—a base forgery, by D.P. Hulburt, and others of similar character, who had long strove to account for the Book of Mormon, in some other way beside the truth. In the west, whole neighbourhoods embraced Mormonism, after this fable of the Spalding story, had been circulated among them; indeed, we never conceived it worthy of an answer, until it was concerted by the ignorant and impudent dupes or knaves, in this city, who stand at the head of certain religious papers, into something said to be positive, certain, and not to be disputed! Now I testify, that the forgers of the Spaulding lie, (concerning S. Rigdon and others,) are of the same description as those who forged the lie against the disciples of old—accusing them of stealing the body of Jesus, &c. And those who love this lie, are no better. I mean the editors of the N.Y. Evangelist, Zion's Watchman, and all others who are equally guilty, including all who read and believe such a thing. And except they repent they will have their part with drunkards, whoremongers, sorcerers, thieves, murderers, &c., for being guilty of loving or making a lie: and in that day when the secrets of all hearts shall be made manifest, then shall they know, that these things and many others were base falsehoods, put in circulation by the devil and his servants; and that the Book of Mormon, is a record of eternal truth which speaks from the dust, as a voice from the dead, bearing record of the Gospel of a crucified and risen Redeemer, reproving the sins of the world, and warning them of the things which must shortly come to pass; therefore, repent, all ye ends of the earth, and be baptized for remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; and signs shall follow those that believe; and this Gospel of the kingdom shall first be preached among all nations, and then shall the Son of Man come. Amen.

METHODISM.—Having unveiled Mormonism by removing the covering of lies and misrepresentations, which Mr. Sunderland, a Methodist editor, had thrown over it; we shall now proceed to a short examination of Methodism, as taken from their own discipline.

1st. A description of the Methodist God, as found in the second section of their discipline.

1stly. "There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body or parts."

2nd. In unity of this Godhead, there are three persons of one substance, power and eternity; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

3rdly. This, "Christ, very God, and very Man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried."

4thly. "To reconcile his father to us," &c.

5thly. "Christ did truly rise again from the dead, and took again his body, with all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith he ascended into Heaven."

6thly. "And there sitteth until he return, to judge all men at the last day."

I must say, that I never saw such a bundle of nonsense, contradiction and absurdity, thrown together before.

1st. A God without body or parts, consisting of three persons.

2nd. One of these persons, who is very God, was crucified, dead and buried, (without body or parts!)

3rd. The object was to reconcile his Father to us, instead of reconciling us to the Father; thus conveying the idea, that his Father must be changed about, and made a new creature, in order to be reconciled to poor sinful mortals, who are unchanged.

4th. This God (without body or parts,) arose from the dead, and took upon him his body, when he had none; but to cap the climax, he has gone to Heaven, there to remain, till He comes to judge the world at the last day. Thus contradicting the 3rd, 20th and 21st of Acts, where Peter promises that God will send him again, at the time of restitution of all things spoken by the Prophets; this restitution will be a long time before the last day; see Rev., c, 20th, and Zech. 14th.

Here then is the Methodist God, without either eyes, ears or mouth!!! and yet man was created after the image of God; but this could not apply to the Methodist God for he has no image or likeness! The Methodist God can neither be Jehovah nor Jesus Christ; for Jehovah showed his face to Moses and seventy elders of Israel, and his feet too: he also wrote with his own finger on the tablets of stone. Isaiah informs us that his arm is not shortened; that his ear is not dull of hearing, &c., and that he will proceed to make bare his arm in the eyes of all the nations. And Ezek. says, "his fury shall come up in his face," and Zech., c. 14 says "his feel shall stand in that day, upon the Mount of Olives," and they which behold shall say, what are these wounds in thy hands, and in thy feet, &c. Consequently, Methodism is a system of idolatry.

2ndly. Their Priesthood, was handed down from the Wesleys and others, who received their authority from the Church of England, or nowhere; and the Church of England received their Priesthood from the Church of Rome, or from the King and Parliament, or nowhere; and if from the King and Parliament, or the Church of Rome, then it was not from Heaven—but of man. For neither the King, Parliament or Pope, had any more authority in conferring Priesthood, than I have to confer the Sceptre of the Chinese Empire upon the American Chief, Blackhawk. But if they received their Priesthood from the Church of Rome, (the mother of harlots,) then is the English Church a legitimate daughter of the old lady, and Methodism the grand daughter; consequently, Methodism is a harlot. But if the Methodists claim Priesthood by revelation, I deny the claim, for their God is not capable of giving a revelation, having no mouth! and their discipline forbids later revelation than the scriptures, and the scriptures know nothing of Methodist priests.

3rdly. Their Ordinances.—1st. Three kinds of water baptism are practiced by them. The Bible knows but one kind: see Eph., c. 14.

2nd. They baptize infants, whereas the Gospel requires faith and repentance before baptism: see Acts, c. 2 and v. 28; see also, the Saviour's commission to his Apostles.

3d. They neither lay on hands in the name of Jesus, to heal the sick; nor anoint them with oil in the name of the Lord, that they may be healed; thus neglecting to fulfil the Saviour's directions, in the last chapter of Mark. And James' directions in his writings to the saints.

4th. The gifts of the spirit, as spoken of in 1st Cor., c. 13: Eph. c. 4, and many other places, are denied by, them, and totally set aside—for instance, Apostles, Prophets, Miracles, Healings, Revelations, Visions, Prophecyings, Tongues, Interpretations, &c, &c,; therefore, they have a form of Godliness, denying the power and gifts of God.

4thly. Priestcraft, Moneyed Plans, &c.—See Methodist discipline, section 5: "Every Preacher, who has charge of a circuit, shall earnestly recommend to every class or society, in his circuit, to raise a quarterly or annual collection." "Every Preacher who has the charge of a circuit, shall make a yearly collection; and if expedient, a quarterly one, in every congregation." "Men and brethren help! was there ever a call like this since you first heard the Gospel sound?" "A public collection shall be made at every annual, and every general conference," "The annual product of the charter fund." The profits of the Book—concern." "Every annual conference, has full liberty to adopt and recommend, such plans and rules, as to them may appear necessary, the more effectually to raise supplies." "It shall be the duty of each annual conference to take measures from year to year, in every circuit and station within its bounds." The foregoing are but a few of the moneyed plans of this vast organization. their cry is money yearly—money quarterly—money monthly—money weekly—money daily—money at conference meetings—money at circuit—money in congregation—money at class meetings—money for missions; in short, it is money when they lie down, and money when they rise up. It is money that will keep their hands from hanging down, and the work of their God from coming to a dead stand. My readers will perceive, that Mr. Sunderland's outcry against the Mormonite moneyed plan, for the support of their poor, comes with a very ill grace.

Having proved that Methodism is a system of idolatry; a false and perverted Gospel: a daughter of the great mother of harlots—having a form of godliness, denying the power, as well as a system of priestcraft of the deepest dye. I now call upon every honest Methodist, to come out from such abominations, and receive the TRUTH; for her sins have reached unto Heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities, and her judgements slumber not. Amen!

Mr. Sunderland,—Sir: If you wish your readers to come at the truth; to read both sides of the question, and judge for themselves; you will doubtless publish my answer to your papers on Mormonism, in full, in Zion's Watchman. Justice, truth, and the common principles of humanity, require it. Not only does justice to an injured, persecuted and inoffensive people, require it—but your readers who have been deceived and abused by your falsehoods, slanders and misrepresentations, have claims on you, as their editor, to undeceive them; and you will remember too, that there is a still higher authority, to which all men are amenable, and that, these things will stare you in the face, in the day of final retribution, if you repent not. Not only is your own welfare at stake, in time and in eternity, but the souls of thousands who read you paper, and who have not our books to compare with your quotations. With these considerations, I hope to see my answer in your paper; should it not appear, I shall conclude that you prefer the dark rather than the light, and that you dare not lay before your readers a statement of facts, and therefore, shall notice it in my next edition.

I am, respectfully, P.P. PRATT.

Mr. La Roy Sunderland.

Note to the Fourth Edition.—Mr Sunderland, instead of correcting any of his false statements and misrepresentations, continues to publish falsehoods respecting the Latter Day Saints. New York, April, 1842.

These lines were composed by a gentleman who does not stand connected with the church of "Latter Day Saints," and were handed us just as our pamphlet was going to press, and on account of the sentiments of truth, as well as the bold and independent spirit which they breathe, we are thankful for the opportunity of publishing them, for the edification of our readers.

Adieu to honour, wealth and fame; And every worldly pleasure: I bid farewell to my good name; For to obey my Saviour.

I covet not that high esteem To which I did aspire; My Saviour's love shall be my theme; I care for nothing higher.

Yes, if I could advance his praise, By works of my performing, Among the Saints of latter days; I would be called a "Mormon."

Although they commonly are call'd A poor deluded people: Their prophets, priests and teachers, all Offscourings of the rabble.

And were not all the saints of old Derided, by opposers Of light, and truth, which did unfold, From Adam, down to Moses?

Yes, all the holy prophets were With Christ, and his Apostles; Accounted as these "Mormons" are, False prophets and impostors.

But truth is strong and will prevail; For it proceeds from Heaven: It always did, end ever shall: By inspiration given.

And when it doth their systems rub, Proud men became uneasy; And call the Master, Beelzebub, And all his servants crazy.

Thus all, in every age, who live Godly, in Christ the Saviour; Such base calumny shall receive, From those they cannot favour.

Nor think, as they would have them think; Nor do as they are doing; And blunder with them on the brink Of everlasting ruin.

Men still love darkness more than light, Because their deeds are evil: And will declare that wrong is right— Though it were from the devil

That midnight, the old carnal mind; Remains as dark as ever; And all the blind, that lead the blind, Fall in the ditch together.

Oh! how they earnestly contend; And still sink in the mire! Their broken systems cannot mend 'Till purified by fire.

Columbian Bard. New York, March 24, 1838.
