Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Acknowledgments

This book was a marathon project that needed to be done at a sprint pace. That pace would have been impossible without the devotion and skill of many people. My primary collaborator was Gordon Irving of the Family and Church History Department, who is one of the Church's primary oral historians. During most of the research phase while I was in Australia, Gordon and I were in frequent communication by e-mail. Using agendas we outlined together, he conducted eighteen interviews with Elder Maxwell over a period of seven months. Gordon then edited these transcripts, which totaled 560 pages, as well as my own several interviews with Elder Maxwell. Gordon also recorded thoughtful interviews about Elder Maxwell with each member of the First Presidency, several members of the Quorum of the Twelve and the Quorums of the Seventy, and others named in the bibliography and notes.

Gordon, who was a student in Elder Maxwell's political science classes at the University of Utah in 1967 and 1970, was also a lively source for research questions, research sources, and stimulating conversations about history, biography, and most major topics in the book. Then he meticulously read an early draft of the manuscript, offering many helpful comments. He also outlined the bibliographic essay. Both as a professional historian and a companion in a shared cause, Gordon's well-schooled and faithful touch has made this a much better book.

Members of Elder Maxwell's family provided indispensable help. Cory, his son, was my other frequent e-mail companion during the research phase, and his diligence yielded many sources we otherwise might have missed. Assisted by Jan Jensen, he combed, inventoried, copied, and shipped as a weekly care package across the Pacific portions of large annual scrapbooks that Elder Maxwell's secretaries have compiled since the late 1960s. Cory also conducted interviews with Maxwell family members, helped unearth the buried treasures of personal and family letters, and gathered the photographs from which the final selections were made.

The family history work of Elder Maxwell's sister Ann M. Washburn was an invaluable source for the chapters on the ancestral stories and on their family. His other sisters Lois Maxwell, Sue M. Skanky, Carol M. Wright, and Kathy M. Parker gave candid and helpful background and comments on the early family chapters. Elder and Sister Maxwell's children and their spouses provided similarly valuable reviews of the chapters on their family.

I thank Eric d'Evegnee, a graduate student in English at Brigham Young University, who is married to our daughter Sarah. Eric read and analyzed all of Elder Maxwell's numerous books, speeches, and articles, identifying literary patterns and illustrations with both depth and detail. Even though I also read this material for myself, the chapters that discuss Elder Maxwell's writing reflect Eric's insight and diligence more than is apparent from either the text or the notes.

Several secretaries made helpful contributions. B. Jean Hyde and Cherie Best typed most of the oral history transcripts. Elder Maxwell's secretary, Susan Jackson, helped in numerous ways, providing details about the sequence of events during Elder Maxwell's illness and finding speeches, letters, and other materials that seemed always at her fingertips. My secretary in Sydney, Maureen Young, contributed both research skills and keen insight. My secretary in Salt Lake City, Barbara Madsen, has been a tireless research assistant who worked along many fronts.

The staff at the Church History Library and the libraries at BYU and the University of Utah were always responsive and generous in providing books, sources, and suggestions. I profited from counseling with many of the people whose interviews and letters are cited in the notes and with Kent Brown, Elder Spencer J. Condie, Sheri L. Dew, Ronald Esplin, Elder Kenneth Johnson, Leslie Norris, Lea Rosser, Ronald Walker, and others among Elder Maxwell's friends and associates. I also drew on the support of Elder L. Aldin Porter, Elder Earl C. Tingey, and other members of the Presidency of the Seventy.

I thank those who read early drafts of the manuscript and gave valuable suggestions Sheri L. Dew, Eric d'Evegnee, Joy M. Hafen, Marie K. Hafen, Thomas K. Hafen, Gordon Irving, Martha Johnson, Colleen H. Maxwell, Cory H. Maxwell, Elder Neal A. Maxwell, Phillip C. Smith, and Richard E. Turley Jr. In addition, Deseret Book's Suzanne Brady, Richard Erickson, Tonya-Rae Facemyer, Amy Felix, Lisa Mangum, Michael Morris, Richard Peterson, Sheryl Roderick, and Anne Sheffield contributed high standards and much effort in preparing the manuscript for publication.

I am deeply grateful to my family, especially to Marie and our daughter Rachel, who supported and encouraged me when "the book" made me seem perpetually absent even when I was physically present. Marie's serene confidence that the Lord would sustain me let us discover afresh the spiritual gift of peace of mind.
