Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

The Fellowship of Christ's Suffering

One

I Should Have Seen It Coming

All Apostles are Disciples of Jesus, but not all of Jesus' disciples are Apostles. This is the story of one Apostle's personal journey of discipleship.

A few weeks before April conference in 1997, Elder Neal A. Maxwell was released from the hospital after forty-six days and nights of debilitating chemotherapy. Now he wanted to speak to the Church, if only to thank people for their prayers. The First Presidency left the choice to him. To avoid the risk of infection arising from crowd contact, they would make special arrangements for his entry and exit from the Tabernacle.

What about his hair, which the chemotherapy had uprooted? Someone got him a brown toupee, which he tried out on his family and a few friends. And there was a far more basic question could he, in his weakened condition, even make it to the pulpit and back?

In the end, he kept it simple no vanity, no hair, and a six-minute talk. He felt he "needed to make a statement, and my special audience within an audience were all the people who'd lost their hair because of chemos. I wanted them to see that shining pate and feel a sense of hope." His simple acceptance of his own appearance showed how far he had come since the now-forgotten years of his severe adolescent acne.

Midway through the Saturday morning conference session, Elder Maxwell approached the pulpit. For those who had not already heard the news of his deadly leukemia, the piercing frankness of the TV camera immediately told them that something unusual was going on. There he stood, this man known for the power of articulate speech and spiritual insight, now barely strong enough to hold on to the pulpit. His once full head of hair was replaced by stark baldness; his glasses seemed larger than usual. Some may even have wondered who was speaking. Yet the voice was warmly familiar. As he spoke, "his courage and countenance reduced the next speaker, Apostle Robert Hales, to tears."

Some have likened this moment to Elder Bruce R. McConkie's final general conference testimony on April 6, 1985, which one person said meant more to him than if he had read all of Elder McConkie's books. So it was with Elder Maxwell. One Church member said, "That is how I'll always remember Neal A. Maxwell that honest, visual image of bravery and submission, rising from his sickbed to speak to the Church in utter humility. That captures everything he's written and said for years about being meek and lowly. That day his heart spoke fully to mine. I want to be that kind of disciple."

He began the talk with self-deprecating humor: "My thanks to the First Presidency for this opportunity, during which, as you can see, the lights combine with my cranium to bring some different 'illumination' to this pulpit." Next a modest medical report: "treatments to date have proved encouraging." Then his waiver of any claim to a miracle: "If I have any entitlement to the blessings of God, it has long since been settled in the court of small claims by His generous bestowals over a lifetime."

He thanked the many who had helped and prayed, and then he became distinctly but subtly autobiographical. He expressed special gratitude for the Holy Ghost, "for the recent ways in which He has been the precious Comforter, including in the midnight moments." That was an understatement, after his wrenching 1,100 hours of medical confinement. Typically for him, he offered lighthearted candor rather than a heroic flourish: "Those who emerge successfully from their varied and fiery furnaces have experienced the grace of the Lord, which He says is sufficient (see Ether 12:27). Even so . . . such emerging individuals do not rush to line up in front of another fiery furnace in order to get an extra turn!"

The allusion to grace introduced his central message the enriched understanding of the Atonement that had come to him in his reflections on his trauma. "The more I learn and experience," he said, "the more unselfish, stunning, and encompassing His Atonement becomes! When we take Jesus' yoke upon us, this admits us eventually to what Paul called 'the fellowship of [Christ's] sufferings.'" Then, if we are meek enough, our suffering "will sink into the very marrow of the soul." The mention of "marrow" by a leukemia patient was not coincidental.

To provide context for this moment, let us go back about a year to 1996, when Elder Maxwell was enjoying easier days. That spring had seemed busier than usual. But he relished a full agenda and was enjoying this season of his maturity as a senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

It had been pleasant for him a short time before, as new chairman of the Church's Public Affairs Committee, to accompany President Gordon B. Hinckley on a trip to the White House, where they presented two volumes of personal family history to President Bill Clinton. Elder Maxwell never went to Washington these days without smiling inside as he remembered how intimidating the place had seemed to him when he and Colleen were first there in the early 1950s, unable to afford their own car. He had worked then on the staff of Wallace Bennett, United States senator from Utah, where he discovered that while Potomac fever might be contagious, it wasn't addictive.

As chairman of the Temple and Family History Executive Council, Elder Maxwell had closely followed the staff's preparation of the Clinton history. He had asked them to highlight what he called "by the ways" that added a personal touch to their visit such as their discovery that Hillary Clinton's English ancestry tied into a family line of Vice President Al Gore. President Hinckley encouraged the Clintons to hold a family home evening to look through their new books. As they left, Elder Maxwell mentioned to President Clinton that the First Presidency and the Twelve had recently prayed for him and for the country in the Salt Lake Temple, following a longstanding custom regarding the occupants of the Oval Office.

In the weeks that followed, Elder Maxwell was involved as the Church Public Affairs staff supported President Hinckley's preparation for his now-celebrated interview with Mike Wallace on 60 Minutes. Twenty-five years earlier, Neal had confided to a friend that if he could choose one person to represent the Church on national television, it would be Gordon B. Hinckley. The two had worked behind the scenes on Church public affairs issues since the early 1970s, when Brother Maxwell was a regional representative of the Twelve. The Church had come a good distance "out of obscurity" (D&C 1:30) since those days. Given his lifelong fascination with the media, politics, and the Church, nobody appreciated this development in media attitudes more than Neal Maxwell did.

By the time April conference ended, the issues were piling up, not only in Public Affairs and Family History but also in the Church Historical Department and the Area Committee, in which Elder Maxwell now chaired key committees of the Twelve.

When not assigned to headquarters meetings or trips, the Maxwells would be home for "free weekends," as they were in mid-April. On Saturday the 13th, he spoke about King Benjamin's sermon during the annual FARMS Symposium at Brigham Young University. The next day he talked in three meetings the missionary farewell for his grandson Peter Maxwell, a sacrament meeting in south Salt Lake Valley, and an evening missionary fireside at the University of Utah.

As the gray haze of Salt Lake's tedious winter air inversions gradually gave way to the warm, clearing breezes of late spring, some of Elder Maxwell's attention turned, with great zest, to tennis. Inside the honed discipline of this man's public demeanor lurks a competitive spirit that has regularly found a way to "let go" on the tennis court in a playful intensity that might surprise the average general conference goer. For nearly half a century, he has frequently played sandlot tennis (earlier it was basketball) with such partners as Oscar McConkie, a lifelong friend.

When spring finally yielded to summer, Neal's other, less-concealed juices began their rhythmic flow. For him, when July approaches, it's time for some serious writing. Since coaxing him to write his first book, Colleen wondered if she should now try harder to slow down his intoxicating, almost annual exercise in self-expression. But she had seen the value of its fulfillment, for both reader and writer. Still, she was relieved that this summer he wasn't ready to tackle a whole book.

This year he actually seemed to relax into the more modest project of drafting a talk called "The Education of Our Desires," a favorite Maxwell idea, for Education Week at BYU-Hawaii. And rather than planning the usual big vacation trip for their entire family, it was enough for 1996 to celebrate his seventieth birthday on July 6 with a family ride on the Heber Creeper antique train, followed by dinner in nearby Midway.

In June, Elder and Sister Maxwell traveled to a conference in Sapporo, Japan, and then attended the dedication of the Hong Kong Temple. Traveling to Japan was always emotional for him, because the trauma and the spiritual epiphany of his youth in a muddy battlefield on Okinawa were etched into every cell of his body. As for Hong Kong, having a temple in what would soon be part of the People's Republic of China fanned the embers of a spark he had felt as a personal quest since his first visit to China in 1982. He hungered to share the gospel with the mainland Chinese, but his political realism kept his inborn impatience under control.

Throughout these months, sandwiched between meetings, speeches, trips, and writing, Neal and Colleen would, as their highest priority, assemble their extended family in evenings with their children and spouses for a "Grandpa Neal's fireside" with the grandchildren. And somehow, in the invisible corners of such a schedule, he and Colleen were always showing up in hospitals or on telephone calls, in a private ministry to a throng of people whose physical and spiritual well-being had come to have a permanent claim on their attention. By now, the regular rhythm of these familiar patterns flowed freely from his heart's earth like a mountain spring.

Oddly, this summer, as the reduced writing output hinted, Elder Maxwell's flow of energy seemed to be diminishing. He had always been so fit, his circles of concern so large and so full, that he simply shook off a pesky sense of fatigue. One day he leaned slightly against the doorway to his office and asked his secretary, Susan Jackson, to "remind me to ask the doctor when I go in for my physical why I'm so tired. Maybe I'm just getting old."

In early September, he met his politically astute friend, Bud Scruggs, for lunch the political version of his occasional escapes to tennis. Neal would drain Bud with as many questions as the time allowed, feeding his insatiable curiosity about every nuance in current events. Bud enjoyed the mentoring his friend gave him, a lens that enlarged his view of every subject. As they paused between topics, Bud asked routinely, "So how are you feeling these days?" Neal hesitated before replying. "I just had my annual physical, Bud. The doctor tells me I'm anemic."

"That's not a big deal," said Bud. "You just need some iron pills."

"No," said Neal, "for a man my age, anemia may be bad news." He didn't know yet how bad the news would become, but he didn't like what his instincts were sensing.

His internist, Dr. Larry Staker, didn't like what he was sensing, either. Neal's blood wasn't yet seriously anemic, but Dr. Staker wanted to measure further blood counts while sending him to specialists who checked for such possibilities as thyroid problems, bleeding ulcers, and vitamin deficiencies. During the next few weeks, his white blood count dropped steadily. Feeling more concern than he let on, Dr. Staker sent Neal to Dr. Clyde Ford, a Latter-day Saint oncologist at the Salt Lake Clinic, for cancer tests. This was his first referral to Dr. Ford in more than ten years of Salt Lake City practice, but Dr. Staker felt a prompting to call him.

After further investigating the abnormal blood tests with a bone marrow biopsy, Dr. Ford called his findings to Neal and Colleen on a speaker phone in Neal's office on Wednesday, September 11, 1996. They leaned forward and listened with careful attention to the doctor's restrained, matter-of-fact diagnosis. It looks like myelodysplastic syndrome, he said, an aggressive, deadly disease that is hard to treat, especially in older patients.

Technically, Dr. Ford explained, Neal's was still a "preleukemic condition," because the "blasts," or abnormal blood cells forming in the bone marrow, were still only 18 percent of the cells. "But if the blasts reach thirty percent, it will be, by definition, full-blown leukemia. And if you get leukemia at age seventy, you're too old for a bone marrow transplant so you could be . . . not necessarily, but you could be . . . looking at a life expectancy of three to twelve months. We need to watch it carefully for a few weeks and pray it doesn't develop as we fear it could."

Neal and Colleen hung up the phone and looked in silent shock at each other. Soon Colleen's gentle fingers were wiping away a tear that ran down Neal's cheek, her vision blurred by her own tears. She began to whisper that it would be all right, that they needed to wait and see, learn more about it. Modern medicine can do so much now. The Lord will not forsake us, not now.

Surrounding them there in the office, even enveloping them, were the familiar echoes of past years: the faded, autographed picture of Neal's mentor Harold B. Lee; the photo of Flat Top Hill in Okinawa; the small but elegant bronze statue of Joseph Smith; the group picture of the Twelve when Neal joined them in 1981; mementoes from friends in the Church Educational System, the Pacific Islands, Europe, Africa, Asia, the University of Utah, and elsewhere. On the credenza behind the tidy desk stood his ancient manual typewriter, flanked by the pictures of Becky and Mike, Cory and Karen, Nancy and Mark, Jane and Marc and the loyal little band of grandchildren. And, where Neal could always see it from his swivel chair at the desk, a rendering of the outstretched arms and penetrating gaze of Bertel Thorvaldsen's Christus.

"You know, Neal," said Colleen, her voice still close to a whisper, "you've talked and written so much lately about trials and suffering. Maybe the Lord wants to let us see how we can deal with that ourselves."

"Maybe so," he returned. "Maybe so."

Moved by his instinct to share what people ought to know, he urged that, despite the uncertainties, they had to tell Becky, Cory, Jane, Nancy, and their spouses and families, tonight. Also, he had to tell the Twelve, who were having their regular temple meeting the next morning. He didn't want any of them hearing the news from someone else. And he wanted a blessing at their hands. Now he and Colleen, the comforters of so many for so long, stood in need of comfort. Who comforts the comforters? They knew the rational answer to that question. But they hungered for more than rationality.

Early Thursday morning, the Twelve filed into the historic upper room of the Salt Lake Temple, with its antique doors and the fixtures of Church history. After warm personal exchanges, they took their places in the semicircle of large chairs. The portraits of each President of the Church, beginning with Joseph Smith, stood on the wall behind them, seeming to join their little circle of disciples. In front of them, above the three chairs that awaited the First Presidency, restful paintings of the Savior graced the wall, completing the room's circle of discipleship. Fifteen years earlier, Neal Maxwell had been ordained an Apostle in this same room.

He had asked that a personal matter be added to the meeting agenda. When the time came, after the First Presidency had joined them, he told them the news what he knew, what he didn't know, and how serious he thought it probably was. Elder Jeffrey R. Holland said of this dreadful surprise, "I will never forget the morning he announced [his illness] in the temple. I started to cry. I could not conceive of a Quorum of the Twelve in which Neal Maxwell wasn't present. I just thought, 'He is too good. He does too much.'"

After Elder Russell M. Nelson anointed him with consecrated oil, President Boyd K. Packer gave him a blessing as all of the First Presidency and the Twelve joined in placing their hands on his head. After the blessing, each one embraced him, sharing tears and private words of love, each in his own way conveying a spirit of peaceful confidence.

It had been more than fifty years since Neal had first discovered the security of an unseen peace that was stronger than very visible fears on Okinawa, in miserable battlefield conditions, with shells raging and exploding all around him. That was the only experience in his life that could compare with what he felt now, and the comparison was eerily close. Already he found himself drawing again on what he had discovered so long ago about the Lord's awareness of him. The warm, steady hands of his brethren felt like a tangible symbol of that awareness.

In the astonished gratitude of his youth, shaking and crying in a foxhole full of mud and foul water, he had pledged his life in service to the Lord. He had no clue in those days what such a promise meant or where it would take him, but none of that mattered then. And it didn't matter now. The point was still the same. Whatever the details and the unanswered questions, Neal could say to himself with unqualified assurance: "I know that [God] loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things" (1 Nephi 11:17). He had read that passage often in recent years with people in trouble. Now it spoke to him with surprising freshness, like a letter from home, the kind his gentle father so often used to send him during the war.

It was not lost on him that he had spoken with increasing frequency, it seemed, about what he has called the postgraduate course in the curriculum of discipleship, teaching the Latter-day Saints that God sometimes gives tutorial afflictions to those who have tried hardest to follow Him. Neal titled the last book published before his illness If Thou Endure It Well, which, he said later, was almost an invitation to his own experience with adversity.

That theme had even earlier roots. Nearly twenty years before, his book All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience described three sources of suffering: Our own mistakes, life's adversities, and afflictions that "come to us because an omniscient Lord deliberately chooses to school us." Of the third category, he wrote:

The very act of choosing to be a disciple . . . can bring to us a certain special suffering. . . . [Such] suffering and chastening . . . is the . . . dimension that comes with deep discipleship. . . .

It appears to be important that all who will can come to know "the fellowship of his sufferings." (Philippians 3:10.) At times, we are taken to the very edge of our faith; we teeter at the edge of our trust . . . [in] a form of learning as it is administered at the hands of a loving Father. (Helaman 12:3.)

In 1991, Elder Maxwell had quoted this "wintry verse": "The Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith" (Mosiah 23:21), noting that this "divine purpose ought to keep us on spiritual alert as to life's purposeful adversities, especially as we seek to become more saintly." And in April conference 1990, he had said: "The enlarging of the soul requires not only some remodeling, but some excavating. . . . Even the best lectures about the theory of enduring are not enough. All the other cardinal virtues . . . require endurance for their full development. . . . He [Jesus] was determined that He 'not drink the bitter cup, and shrink' (D&C 19:18) or pull back."

As he now traveled the well-known path from the temple back to his office, Neal Maxwell, the ardent student of discipleship, sensed that his new course of study had just begun. Perhaps he should have seen it coming but he hadn't, even though he knew that the very act of choosing to be a disciple can bring to us this special suffering.
