Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Two

Wintry Doctrine

Over the next few days, Neal and Colleen forced themselves to maintain the appearance of a normal routine. But as the wheel of their consciousness made its rounds, like the fixed hour of a clock, the stark dread of the unknown rang its dark chimes. Then that, too, would pass while they attended to other things, until the wheel came round again.

The afternoon following the temple meeting, Neal went, like any good grandpa, to see his grandson Brian play football for the East High sophomores. A few days later, he played tennis with Oscar, Dick Boyle, and Bill Bailey. After the doubles match, Neal shared the news with them. He told others with whom he had frequent contact members of the Seventy and other people at Church headquarters.

For example, he invited Bruce Olsen, managing director of Public Affairs, to his office. As Bruce sat in the outer office, he sensed that "something awful was going on." Neal invited him in with his distinctive cordiality and then, as they sat at the little table in his office, told Bruce "gently and simply" of his condition. He wondered aloud whether the Church should make some public statement, so that whatever the rumor mill said, the members of the Church could hear the news accurately from those who knew it best. Eventually, on October 26, the Church did issue a statement that he had a "pre-leukemic condition," was "receiving excellent medical help," and was "going about his duties."

Bruce couldn't deal with the Public Affairs dimensions just then. Unable to control his emotions, he groped for words, trying to focus his thoughts. Instinctively empathizing with Bruce's shock, Neal kept control of the conversation. He spoke warmly of his affection for Bruce and his wife, Chris, reflecting his habit of tracking the details of other people's lives so attentively that it often surprises them. Bruce embraced him with words of encouragement but felt he'd been "comforted by the afflicted." As he left the office, he tried to regain his composure, standing by a filing cabinet trying not to sob.

That weekend Elder Maxwell flew to Lethbridge, Alberta, for his assigned stake conference. On short notice, President Boyd K. Packer asked Neal's good friend and a Canadian, Alexander Morrison of the Seventy, to go along, just to be with him. At home in the familiar conference pace, Neal gave no hint to the congregation about his inner turmoil, even though he confided to Alex that he believed he would live only another few months.

Elder Morrison and others close to Elder Maxwell soon learned that he felt he had no claim to a special miracle. He would talk about such people as Richard L. Evans, Bruce R. McConkie, A. Theodore Tuttle, Marvin J. Ashton, and other General Authorities who had met death early. They were better men than I am, he would say. He didn't want to give anyone false hopes, and, as one friend put it, he didn't want "to promote a fan club to demand a miracle."

This attitude explains what looked like pessimism to some in his closest circle. He had worked so long on making himself "willing to submit" to the Lord (Mosiah 3:19, a verse he had quoted often), that some people thought he was actually too resigned, too ready to yield. He had a related tendency that prompted some to lecture him a little. Since boyhood, he was ever the anticipator impatient, anxious to get on with whatever was to come next. His typical remark was, "Let's get this show on the road." And if it was time to face death, he had no need to argue or, for him, much worse, to shrink from drinking whatever bitter cup was his.

Colleen saw things differently, and she didn't hesitate to coach him with the loving directness she had long cultivated. She could see that in his desire to accept what had been allotted to him, he was reluctant to importune the Lord with much pleading. But she pointed out that Jesus' first cry in the Garden of Gethsemane was, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me." Only after he had made this earnest plea did the Savior finally submit Himself with, "Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt" (Matthew 26:39). With Jesus as our example in all things, she said, it must be permissible to plead. Then of course we submit, as He did. Neal saw her insight and agreed.

When they reviewed the statistical tables and other material Dr. Ford gave them, Neal was quick to point to graphs showing that at his age most people with leukemia just didn't make it. But Colleen, not usually a fan of statistics, noted the data showing that chemotherapy brought remission to 25 to 50 percent of older patients. If the "blasts" went up, of course he should try the chemotherapy, she said. Then she showed him her tough-love side: "And if you've only got a short time, we'll deal with it. What do you want most to try to do?"

In November, the Maxwells traveled to Europe for meetings with mission presidents and other leaders. President Packer phoned Elder Cecil Samuelson, who was Area President in England and a longtime friend of the Maxwells, urging him to make sure Neal took it easy in the unforgiving pace of normal meeting schedules. Cecil, a physician, already knew about the illness, having talked on the phone several times with Elder Maxwell about it. He arranged a visit to the Preston England Temple, then under construction, and also to Chester, a charming old English town he thought the Maxwells would enjoy. But after a few minutes there, Neal was ready to move to something he found more substantive.

By December, further blood tests and bone marrow biopsies showed that the blasts were now above 30 percent. This result upgraded his official condition to acute nonlymphocytic leukemia. Dr. Ford gave in to Neal's desire to make one more trip an assignment in Hawaii, where he'd promised to take Jane and Marc with their baby. By the time they returned, his blood condition demanded immediate hospitalization. It was time for all-out chemotherapy.

On January 17, 1997, he entered the hospital isolation ward where bone marrow transplants are performed. There he would remain for forty-six days of intense immersion into a world of trauma unlike anything he'd ever known, even in the war. He was no stranger to hospitals, having supported an uncounted number of people in their agony there, often through afflictions that lasted for years. But he'd never gone down that fearful road himself.

A bright and seasoned oncologist, Dr. Ford has at close range watched many patients endure chemotherapy and cancer's other terrors. Asked what the treatment is like for the people involved, the doctor says quite honestly, "I have no concept. It really can't be described unless you've gone through it." And even those who've been there cannot really explain it.

As the wintry day descended toward its close, Neal and Colleen drove up the streets of Salt Lake City's Avenues district to LDS Hospital. They were anxious but not perplexed. Perhaps they were comforted by the sight of the grand old homes, the fresh snow on the stately trees, and the familiarity of so many past visits to patients in that hospital. Then too, LDS Hospital is close to the spot where, a century earlier, Neal's great-grandfather Thomas Ash owned a tiny cobbler's shop, where he taught his five sons the shoemaker's trade he'd learned as a young apprentice in England. Neal Ash Maxwell had always liked the theme of masters, apprentices, and tutorials. As they pulled into the parking lot, Neal breathed a deep sigh and looked at Colleen. He reached for her hand and said, once more, "I just don't want to shrink."

Shortly before learning of his illness, Elder Maxwell had prepared an article for the April 1997 Ensign called "Enduring Well." There he wrote, "Certain forms of suffering, endured well, can actually be ennobling. . . . Part of enduring well consists of being meek enough, amid our suffering, to learn from our relevant experiences . . . in ways which sanctify us." There was no doubt in Colleen's mind that day that her companion of forty-seven years had become meek enough to learn from the tutorial that awaited them inside.

Almost immediately, Neal faced the full fury of chemotherapy's side effects. His blood pressure plunged, his temperature jumped with fever, and his body struggled to retain fluids. Some conditions soon improved, but other troubles followed. The first night, a doctor entered his room at midnight and plopped a huge sandbag on his chest to help stop bleeding caused by I.V. lines in his chest and by his lowered platelets. Later on, just when he was learning to live with other unpleasant side effects, he developed a painful sore in the roof of his mouth that made it feel impossible for days to eat, drink, or even swallow.

For a week, the flow of chemotherapy drugs, antibiotics, and transfusions was continual and then became intermittent as periodically the doctors called a halt to test whether the powerful drugs were killing the leukemic cells without killing too many good cells. The first tests were encouraging, but the chemicals continued to pound him, pushing his physical stamina to its limits.

Because few visitors except immediate family were allowed for the first month, Neal felt cut off from his loyal network of extended family, Church colleagues, and other friends. He was heartened when his dear friends Thomas S. Monson and James E. Faust came to give him a blessing. He had a constant yearning to thank the many others who, he knew, were fasting, praying, cheering. He seized any moment of temporary respite to dictate notes by phone, which his secretary prepared and mailed. To two grandchildren who were baptized during his confinement, Timothy and Katie, he wrote, "Please know that I will be thinking about you while you are at the Tabernacle, and probably shedding a few tears. . . . I am so grateful that we are a forever family, and this ordinance of baptism and receiving the Holy Ghost are two more steps in that marvelous process."

He became acquainted with two young fathers, Richard Nebeker and Gordon Hillier, who were being treated for leukemia in the same hospital ward. One night a nurse came into Neal's room and found him pleading in prayer for Richard's life. Unknown to the nurse, this moment echoed a night when young Neal had come home and overheard his parents in their bedroom, praying for him and his sisters. Richard and Gordon both died while Neal's chemotherapy continued. His dictated letters were read at both funerals. The Maxwell family knew he meant it when he said he really should have gone before Richard or Gordon did.

On February 26, Truman and Ann Madsen in Provo listened to his voice tender but faint with fatigue in a recorded message on their answering machine:

Truman and Ann, this is Neal. You've been so kind to inquire and to write. I feel deprived of a chance to talk with you personally but wanted to tell you how much I love you. We're in this interesting valley, and hoping we can get extracted, with the key things that my body needs to produce, which can't come from the outside. . . . We're not releasing the hospital number, but I may try again to get to you. This is Wednesday afternoon about 3:25. I love you both so much. It's the kind of experience [pause] in which I need some tutoring; and yet, at the same time, [a tired chuckle], I won't mind when the course is over. We love you.

Late the next night, Dr. Larry Staker made one of his frequent visits to Neal's room. The two were longtime friends, but Larry's intimate involvement with Neal's illness brought them very close now, like buddies in combat. Larry entered the room, its dim hush punctuated only by the colored numbers that flashed like heartbeats on the monitors surrounding Neal's bed. Neal was awake and conscious but likely unaware of Larry's presence or much else. Larry spoke his name. Neal tried to look up, but he was so utterly spent that he couldn't even raise his head. Larry ached at his friend's pitiful condition, "the weakest that a person can possibly be" and still be alive.

He thought Neal might respond to serious conversation. Good questions grabbed his attention when food or television never could. He pulled a chair up close. "This is Larry. I wonder if you know what day this is." Neal looked back at him, his eyes trying to focus. "It's forty days," Larry said. "Forty days you've been in this wilderness. You've endured it well." Larry paraphrased some Bible verses. Neal tracked him exactly. The conversation was launched.

As Neal found enough energy to talk, he shared what he'd been thinking during the unknown hours, not sure whether it was day or night. "I want to play in the game," he said, barely audible and only partly to Larry. "I want a jersey. On the team, on this side or that side. I don't want to sit on the sidelines." Larry recognized the prayer embedded in his plea. So typical of Neal Maxwell. He wanted to be where the action was. Better to be suited up and playing on the other side of death's veil than to be benched on this side. But Larry didn't know the connections between these earnest words and Neal's past.

One primary theme of Neal's life is that he has always been passionately engaged in causes that mattered to him. As a boy, he prepared himself for years with his backyard hoop and worn leather ball. He was determined that nothing would keep him from playing basketball on Cec Baker's celebrated teams at Granite High in Salt Lake City. His greatest boyhood disappointment came when he didn't make Baker's team. The pain of that loss has remained with him so long, one senses it's still there. "I want a jersey. Let me be on the team."

Then came his time in the infantry, then fighting in the Lord's army as a missionary, the intellectual engagements of university studies, the political skirmishes in government and education. And then, on an ever-broadening scale, the struggle between the sacred and the secular in American life, the tension between faith and reason in Church education, and finally, his greatest cause his full-time spiritual ministry. With every breath, Neal had embraced the engaged life of which Oliver Wendell Holmes said, "It is required of a man that he share the action and the passion of his time at the peril of being judged not to have lived."

There was another echo in Neal's plea for the Coach to play him. He had ministered over a span of several years to a young father in Provo named Joe Clark, whose quadriplegic paralysis had been caused by a rare brain virus. Joe's wife, Janice, was the daughter of Doug and Corene Parker, friends of Neal and Colleen from college days.

When Neal gave Joe a blessing in the early stages of his illness, some within the family circle thought Elder Maxwell's apostolic power would surely liberate Joe from his awful bondage. But Neal told them it doesn't work that way. The righteous are not always spared. Once inside Joe's room, Neal focused intently on him. Verifying that Joe could hear and understand him, he pronounced a blessing that said nothing definite about his recovery but included this thought: God would not leave him abandoned between two worlds where he could participate in neither one. Rather, the Lord would walk with him now, through the dark valley. Joe would be consulted and his voice heard in spiritual decisions about his life and which world might be his.

Over the next five years, Joe gradually recovered modest powers of speech and a little upper body movement just enough to maintain a "constant conversation of love" with his family. Then he passed quietly away. Doug Parker said at Joe's funeral that he "probably changed more lives" for good in those five bedridden years "than most people do who live to an advanced age." In his remarks, Elder Maxwell said: "Joe had a special consultative arrangement with the Lord on whether he would stay or go and when he would go. Not many people have that. I think it was . . . bequeathed to Joe because of his purity and goodness." Then he said:

There are in the gospel warm and cuddly doctrines, and then there are some that are just outright wintry doctrines. [These doctrines are true, but] we avert our gaze [from them], because we don't wish to contemplate them. One of them, frankly, is that we cannot approach the consecration that Joe has achieved without passing through appropriate clinical experiences [because we don't achieve consecration] in the abstract.

[Sometimes the Lord hastens His work in] our spiritual development [by] a compression of experiences. . . . Sometimes the best people . . . have the worst experiences . . . because they are the most ready to learn.

Perhaps when Neal asked the Coach to play him that night in the hospital, on one team or the other, he too was having a consultative conversation the apprentice asking the Master to guide his faltering steps, like Peter on the sea, as he learned the wintry doctrine of consecration.

What is it about forty-six days of chemical bombardment that can turn a hospital into a clinic for spiritual development? It can't be mere physical pain, as much as that may test us. The larger context of life creates the conditions of exquisite mental pain feelings that your life will never again be as it was and may well be nearly over, dashing all hopes about tranquil twilight years or about continued senior service among the Lord's anointed. For Neal, that included not only the fear of a shortened mission but also an inner worry that he had somehow not measured up. Doesn't the coach take you out of the game only when you're not playing well?

Psychic pain runs bottomlessly deep. There you are, drugged up and cooped up for a month and a half, confused whether it is day or night, unable to rest or to turn off either the pain or your darkest thoughts. The constant threat of death keeps crashing through your barriers of mental resistance. Does such suffering somehow teach everyone who tastes it? Anne Morrow Lindbergh didn't think so. She wrote, in lines Elder Maxwell admires, "I do not believe that sheer suffering teaches. If suffering alone taught, all the world would be wise, since everyone suffers. To suffering must be added mourning, understanding, patience, love, openness, and the willingness to remain vulnerable."

Because he knew all this, Neal's spiritual submission was not passive. He and Colleen worked to learn whatever the experience might teach them, an attitude that reflected decades of exertion to master the Lord's curriculum for the school of mortality. That commitment alone distinguished him from many cancer patients. Dr. Staker said that many "probably terminal" patients become consumed by their trauma and slip into inevitable self-absorption, unable to see, let alone attend to, needs beyond their own. Dr. Lyman Moody said that as soon as some patients hear "the awful C-word," they begin to die. But others begin to live, often more fully than ever before; for life has suddenly become more precious.

For Neal, the question was not just about a richer life but always about discipleship, trying to be like Jesus. As his treatment began, he wanted to learn more empathy and "to learn still more of Jesus by taking upon me a very small version of His yoke." During Neal's treatments, Dr. Staker watched him extend himself with concern for other patients or members of his family a personal effort he seldom saw in such a disabled patient. "That's what Jesus did at the Last Supper," said the doctor. "He knew that tonight was Gethsemane and tomorrow was the cross." Yet in the hours just before, he gave his disciples his "most sublime, most powerful teachings." Neal would later marvel how Jesus, in his hours of greatest agony, attended to individuals the guard who lost his ear, the thieves on the nearby crosses, and Mary, his mother.

Colleen chose to make their season of wintry doctrine a winter of her contentment. She believed she had a doctrinal mandate to be cheerful. The Savior, she would say, often "instructed his disciples to be of good cheer," even when there seemed "little to be cheerful about." But he had "overcome the world." So Colleen consciously chose to brighten Neal's room and cultivate her gratitude toward his nurses and doctors. She admitted she was a total "bluebird of happiness" during Neal's hospital stay, even though she knew "many people felt we were in a serious state of denial." But she knew that in dealing with cancer, "attitude is everything." She wanted to "speak of the joy to be found in all of life whether amidst pain or [life's] pleasures. . . . And there is joy in both." She found, through experience, that "it is more difficult to maintain the spirit of gratitude and humility when times are easier than when times are difficult." She remained "realistic about what we were facing," but with her native "optimistic temperament," this "seemed [like] the time to summon all the . . . good cheer that was in me. After all, there is little to be lost and much to be gained."

Colleen's attitude drew on the inner wellsprings of her nature lifting, encouraging, and choosing to view the bright side of people and events but not because she didn't know better. She knew exactly what she was doing, and why, and for whom. To her, it is vital that women "convey hope to our families."

Shadowlands, a movie on the life of C. S. Lewis, one of Neal's favorite authors, imagines a conversation between Lewis and his wife, Joy, who has a terminal illness. As they talk about Lewis's fear of losing her, Joy tells him, "The pain then is part of the pleasure now. That's the deal." Neal and Colleen understood the same deal our peripheral awareness of impending separation enriches our savoring of the love we may still have.

In early March, Neal left the hospital. The therapy had been successful his leukemia was in remission. He was weak, he would need further treatment, his hair was gone . . . but, for now, the winter was past. His suppressed immune system left him vulnerable to infection until his red blood count could return to normal. Among his first outdoor ventures, he went with Dr. Staker to speak at more than arm's length to the doctor's daughter's early-morning seminary class at Skyline High. It felt sweet to be back in the classroom. Back in the ball game. He lifted the students, but they wouldn't understand how much they lifted him.

This experience whetted Neal's appetite to speak at April conference, and he wanted to share what he was learning about the Atonement. He was realizing that his ordeal could admit him into "the fellowship of [the Savior's] sufferings" (Philippians 3:10). He'd found that if a person's heart is receptive enough, those who taste this peculiar fellowship begin to appreciate not only Christ's suffering but also His "character" which helps them not only adore but emulate Him. So, as he said at conference, "Jesus knows how to succor us in the midst of our griefs and sicknesses precisely because Jesus has already borne our griefs and sicknesses. He knows them firsthand; thus His empathy is earned." Then he cited but didn't read Alma 7:11-12:

And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind . . . that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people.

And he will take upon him death . . . ; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities.

Neal was finding new meaning in Alma's idea, which he had talked about for years but which his firsthand experience was now changing from theory to practice. He was discovering that in his own suffering, in a small way, he could learn about emulating Christ not by suffering alone but by letting his grief give him a "feel" for what other people taste in their sorrow. He could see more clearly that those who let themselves become "afflicted in [the] afflictions" of their loved ones (D&C 30:6) are doing something Christlike really following Jesus (see D&C 133:53).

Trying to become a true follower of Christ discipleship is the central message both of Neal Maxwell's teachings and of his life story. The meaning of that message has developed for him through his personal experience. Having now seen glimpses of this process since 1996, let us go back and walk the winding path that led him there and to what happened next with his illness. Then perhaps it will be more clear why he feels he should not have been surprised when leukemia arrived at his door.
