Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Three

Convert Origins

One vivid metaphor for the journey of discipleship is the idea of going to Zion. Neal Ash Maxwell's birth in 1926 united two primary paths that lead to Zion the path of the convert (the ancestry of Clarence Maxwell, his father) and the path of the pioneer (the ancestry of Emma Ash, his mother). Along those paths, Neal's heritage would teach him about the links between faith and sacrifice, about the temptation to shrink from bitter cups, and about the fruits of going to Zion or choosing not to go.

Clarence Maxwell came from convert stock. He was born in 1902 in Bozeman, Montana, a wildly beautiful place that still surged with the untamed flavor of the Western frontier: trout-filled rivers, stunning mountains, scary saloons, and small country church houses. Young Homer Maxwell (Clarence's father, 1867-1933) taught a Sunday School class in the Butte, Montana, Methodist church, where he met and then married Ellen Lundwall (1873-1956). Clarence, their son, would also come to know more about his own future wife (Neal's mother) by listening to her teach Sunday School in an LDS church.

Homer's parents, John and Minerva Maxwell, had reared their five sons on a rocky farm in Vermont. In 1879, when John was sixty, the family moved to Kansas. Within a few years, four of the sons went to seek their fortune in the big sky country of Montana. Gold had been discovered there in 1862, not far from Butte, attracting Civil War deserters from both the Union and the Confederate armies.

By 1890, John and Minerva joined Homer and their other sons in Bozeman. Both parents were religious. Minerva had been "a Christian from early girlhood, being of staunch Puritan ancestry." The Methodist pastor who penned John Maxwell's obituary in 1896 described him as a "man of strong character" who battled "against the forces of evil . . . particularly . . . the saloon." John was known in Bozeman as 'Father' Maxwell, because the community knew him as the "father of the four Maxwell brothers of this city." The pastor interpreted the attendance records with optimism: John was "always seen in the house of God on the Sabbath, when able to get there."

Perhaps the most poignant story in Clarence Maxwell's heritage involves the family of his mother, Ellen Lundwall. Ellen's father, Martin Lundwall (1842-1912), along with his family, joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Sweden at the age of fifteen. Even as a boy, Martin had a testimony of the Restoration that was clear and strong. He "was brought up poor" and "worked with my hands for my support." But he had also "studied the Mormon faith as the Lord knew that I wanted to serve him and do his will." Five years later, in 1862, Martin and his family decided he should remain in Sweden to serve a three-year Church mission while his family sailed for Zion.

The voyage turned out to be so traumatic that it shook the faith of this family of Swedish converts. Anders Lundwall, Martin's father, discovered after the Humboldt set sail that he should have brought more food to sustain his family during the forty-day trip. The crew was supposed to provide essential rations, but the ship's provisions "gave out before half the journey was over." The sea was rough, everyone became sick, and the Lundwalls had virtually nothing to eat for the last twenty days of the crossing. Reflecting his knowledge of the Book of Mormon as well as his humiliation as the failed provider for his family, Anders wrote, "It pained me to have my small children call on father for something good to eat and I couldn't get it for them before I reached land. . . . [By comparison, however,] I think that the Jaredites when they came over were denied even the privilege of going upon deck to get fresh air."

After at last arriving in New York, the Lundwalls made their way to Florence, Nebraska, the departure point for overland trips to the Salt Lake Valley. A late winter and unexpectedly high water along the intended route then delayed their departure. These factors, combined with the debilitated condition of his wife, Hanna, and two young sons, persuaded Anders to stay in Florence. Then in nearby Omaha, he found a four-acre farm he could work to save money and help his family recover their strength, both physical and financial.

Anders's letters to Martin in Sweden show that the idea of now taking another leap of faith across the vast American wilderness was just too much. What if they ran out of food, again, halfway across the plains? No one could guarantee their protection. Anders began to shrink at the prospect of one more bitter cup, at least right then. He wrote to his son that he had decided to stay in Omaha a while rather than head for Zion then, because if he "worked and saved $160" he could "buy oxen, a wagon and cow . . . and then when I get [to Zion] it will be mine." He realized that "some of my brethren . . . think I am a poor Latter Day Saint to stay here," but he wasn't ready to leave. Besides, his daughters could work for a dollar a week, and "we have good people here."

Martin, the clear-eyed missionary, wrote back with great concern. He thought his family should push on to Zion, where they could all be reunited after his mission. Anders replied that Martin's mother and small brothers had suffered from the ocean trip, yet "now thanks to the Lord, . . . we have our physical needs supplied and our spiritual condition has never been better. . . . I understand that you are somewhat concerned because we have stayed in Omaha, but . . . I thought it was my duty to take care of my children's health and life." He added, candidly, "I didn't have faith enough to travel over the burning desert in the condition their health was in. . . . I can't write the kind of a letter that I know you expect from me."

His father's hesitation about going to Zion alarmed Martin, so he decided to leave his mission early and go to Omaha. "It was mostly for the sake of my parents that I wanted to go to bring them back to the faith," he wrote. But when he couldn't raise funds for a ship ticket, he could only write his family "for their good that they might come back to the right way again."

Within a few months, Anders sent good news to Martin. The family was headed to Zion almost. They kept encountering obstacles that seemed so reasonable. When Martin's sisters bade farewell to their employers, "they persuaded them to stay till next year." Moreover, Anders had been hearing rumors that "the reputation from there [Utah] isn't the best but I want to try for myself and if it is a good place I want to let you know as soon as I get there." He thought "we are just as good Mormons now as we were five years ago [but] I have believed the bad as well as the good things."

In an apt symbol of Anders's apparent state of mind, the family record then becomes cloudy. Martin's journal offers only this clue: "They had left Utah and were [again] living in Omaha, where they fared well in material things." Evidently Anders had spent some time in Utah, but it is unclear what he found there, how long he stayed, or why he returned to Omaha.

Martin finally finished his mission and joined the family in Nebraska in May 1865. We do not know whether he tried to persuade his family to try for Zion once more or why he decided to remain with them. Whatever the reason, he stayed in Omaha, married Hanna Larsson, who was not a Latter-day Saint, and worked as a bricklayer.

Anders died in Omaha in 1871 at age fifty-two. His widow, Hanna, soon took all of the family except Martin to Montana. Some time later, in a journey as filled with irony as with adventure, Martin also removed his family to Montana. In 1880, they traveled eight hundred miles by train from Nebraska to Corinne, Utah, not far from Promontory Summit, where Charles Cobbley, Neal's pioneer great-grandfather on his mother's side, had helped complete the first transcontinental railroad in 1869. There Martin and his family changed trains and took the northern rail line as far as it went to Red Rock, Montana. From there they found their way to Bozeman, where they remained until Martin's death in 1912. They had traveled not to Zion but through it.

Yet the hunger for Zion never fully left Martin Lundwall. Perhaps because Bozeman had no branch of the LDS Church, Martin affiliated with the local "Josephites" the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. But he was not content with what he found there. In 1906, he was rebaptized into the Church he had first embraced in his native Sweden as a boy. Hanna, his wife, never did join the Church. In 1908, at age seventy, four years before his death, Martin took the train to Salt Lake City, where he was endowed in the Salt Lake Temple. After a lifetime of longing, wondering, and wandering, Martin Lundwall had come at last to Zion.

Martin and Hanna's daughter Ellen Lundwall enjoyed Homer Maxwell's Methodist Sunday School class enough to marry him in Butte in 1900. Two years later, Ellen bore a son, Clarence, the second of three children. Homer made his living by running a corner grocery store in Butte, where the family lived for a time in an upstairs apartment next to a saloon. Clarence remembered Butte as a noisy, crowded mining town with few lawns and trees. He could barely wait until summer each year, when the family returned to the Lundwall ranch near Bozeman. After his grandfather Martin Lundwall died in 1912, ten-year-old Clarence rejoiced at the news that his family would move to the ranch to be with his grandmother Lundwall.

The next seven years were the happiest of Clarence's boyhood. He reveled in caring for the farm animals in a bucolic atmosphere that later influenced Neal Maxwell's home environment including Neal's 4-H pig-raising project. For all the rancher's joys of fresh air and open space, however, the Bozeman winters were often severe, with deep snowdrifts and icy wind blasts barring the way to school, neighbors, and town. Grandmother Lundwall died in 1915, leaving the ranch to Ellen and Homer. They kept the ranch but moved into Bozeman just when the influenza epidemic of 1918 hit the town, closing its schools. The flu took the life of Clarence's younger sister, Edith, to whom he'd been very close. "Nothing seemed to be the same again with Edith missing," he wrote.

In 1920, Homer and Ellen sold the ranch and took Clarence, his older sister, Edna, and everything they owned on a train headed for Salt Lake City. It wasn't a happy move for Clarence, who yearned for the wide open spaces of ranch life. With a population of 100,000 people, several miles of paved roads, a trolley system, and even a new airport, Salt Lake was the Intermountain West's largest population center. To eighteen-year-old Clarence, though, those were all reasons to avoid the place.

As the train chugged and whistled its way southward from Montana's big, mountain-studded skies, Clarence would have been astonished to know what he would one day say about this move why his parents moved to Utah, and why in their first year in Salt Lake City they moved to four different locations, until finally arriving in the Wandamere Ward. He would conclude, "[I] am sure my parents were guided when they purchased [our home] so that I might be exposed to the Gospel and become a member of the true Church, and to meet and marry the girl chosen for me in accordance with Neal's patriarchal blessing, which states, 'Your line of descent has been prepared before hand.'"
