Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Four

Pioneer Origins

Neal's mother, Emma Ash, was from Mormon pioneer stock. Indeed, Emma was "four-square British" three of her grandparents were born in Britain, and then they sailed, rode, and hiked to Zion; her other grandparent was born shortly after her English pioneer parents arrived in Utah.

This flow of believing blood in Emma's veins followed directly from the historic English missionary harvest of 1839-41. In fact, as the first of Emma's grandparents headed for Zion in the 1850s, more members of the Church lived in the United Kingdom and Ireland (35,000) than in Utah (12,000). This ratio gradually reversed itself as vast numbers of British and other European converts streamed across the ocean and the plains to Zion. Thus the stories from Emma Ash's ancestry reflect the very mainstream of Latter-day Saint pioneer history from 1850 to 1900 the gathering of Israel, especially from Europe, to the valleys of Utah.

Thomas Ash (1833-1907) was Emma's paternal grandfather. His family's story captures the grinding tension many English Saints felt between their poverty and their yearning for Zion which sometimes went many years without fulfillment. Born in Cheshire, young Thomas began an apprenticeship with a shoemaker soon after his parents joined the Church. His master was so disagreeable that he ran away to Birmingham to find better tutoring. There he married Sarah Ann Hick (1838-1911), and they eventually had twelve children. A stalwart in the Birmingham branch, Thomas often tucked missionary tracts into his customers' shoes, he freely repaired missionaries' shoes, and he led the choir.

Thomas was a man of slight build, about five feet, four inches tall who, despite little formal education, had a "literary turn of mind and loved all kinds of books, especially histories. He would frequently sit up until daylight reading" books borrowed from neighbors. Sarah, by contrast, was never able to read or write. Thomas was "gentle and refined" by nature, not really "adapted for the life of misery and struggle which he was called to endure."

The Ash home was in a typical working-class neighborhood in sprawling Birmingham, that smoky urban symbol of the Industrial Revolution. Row upon row of housing clusters high, soot-dusted brick houses were joined together in quads of sixteen homes, like ancient condominiums, sharing a small common backyard. Alma Ash, Thomas's son, called this neighborhood "a nest of poverty and barbarism," with a "continuous fight against temptations to bad habits."

Despite Thomas's continued work as a cobbler, his family remained so poor that they often had to take clothes and even bedding to the local pawnshop to borrow money to pay their rent or buy food. Each week was a struggle to earn enough shillings to "fetch our clothes" by paying off the pawnbroker. Almost every Saturday night, one or more of the Ash children would be designated to stay home from church and anywhere else the next day, because the family couldn't pay enough to redeem all their clothes. Nothing was harder for Sarah Ash than sending her baby clothing to the pawnshop, for fear she wouldn't get it back.

As time went on, the Ashes watched a steady stream of fellow Latter-day Saints leave for Zion. For twenty years, the children often played a game they called "Going to the Valley" by lining up the kitchen chairs in a journey of fantasy. They gradually despaired of ever seeing Zion, yet they prayed continually, feeling it would take "a stupendous miracle" to deliver them from "Babylon." In 1880, the branch president visited the family with the news that, as the ones "most entitled to be emigrated that season," they would receive that year's allotment from the Church's Perpetual Emigrating Fund. The family was "overwhelmed with joy." Then the plans suddenly changed. Feeling that the allotment should be shared with other families, the mission president offered Thomas only enough money to take himself to Zion, where he could earn enough to send for his family after him.

Thomas and Sarah were despondent. Their children were old enough that if they didn't go now, some might marry outside the Church and stay behind forever. They had no assurance that Thomas could find work in Utah, had no idea how long it would take to save the cost of tickets for the whole family, and felt torn apart at the thought of indefinite separation.

In the end, Thomas went alone, embarking for Zion with the family cheering him on, reassuring him that he could soon bring them all along, too. He found work in Utah but soon learned from a mutual friend that he and Sarah were expecting another child. Meanwhile, Sarah and the children had written a letter advising of the pregnancy but begging Thomas to stay in Zion a letter he never received. Torn by conflicting emotions, he was eventually overcome by his sense of duty to Sarah. Unable to borrow money for the family to emigrate, he decided to return to England on a cattle freight ship, which nearly sank in a vicious storm.

When Thomas reached Birmingham, he was greeted by cynics in his crowded neighborhood with, "Well, Sir Thomas, old chap, you didn't stay long in the Holy Land." More difficult was the response of Church members, some of whom "received [him] rather coldly," presumably judging him to lack sufficient faith. Some taunted him afterward about not having taken his family to Zion yet. With restraint, Thomas would say, "No, but I shall go someday." And some of them would reply, "You have been saying that for twenty years."

In 1885, Thomas's third child, Alma, sailed for America, determined to send for his family later. As his train puffed into the Utah landscape, Alma was shocked with disbelief. He had expected "Zion" to look far more inviting: "It seemed so rugged and barren and the whole country looked as if it had leprosy, being covered with white alkali and nothing visible but a few huts." He "longed to gaze on verdant and smiling [green] fields once more."

Alma was befriended by missionaries he had known in the old country, and soon he had his first look at the Salt Lake Temple, still under construction after more than thirty years of work. Before long, he landed a job interview at the ZCMI shoe factory, where he was asked to make two pairs of shoes. He found others' tools strange to use but met the test. Wrote Alma, "Oh, how the Lord works in his might and power. He aided me in the making of those two pairs of shoes, for on that one effort depended the emancipation of my father's family from England." After working a short while, he was able to borrow the money needed to bring his family to Zion.

Thanks to his enterprising son Alma, Thomas could now open his own tiny shop on Seventh Avenue in Salt Lake City, where he made boots and repaired shoes. His grandchildren saw him often there, noting his "genteel, kindly manners, his hair and skin so white and so frail looking."

Sarah, Thomas's wife, was memorable in her own right. She was five feet tall, had a reddish cast to her hair, and possessed great energy. She "believed in expressing her opinion," a trait she passed along to her granddaughter Emma. When she first tasted ice cream, she thought it was too cold so she put it on the stove to warm. She was a delightful mimic and on demand would perform skits, playing all the parts and dropping all the h's. A favorite line was "By 'Arry, we shan't give up if the rich lord on the 'ill would only pay us, which 'e never will."

In 1898, at age sixty-eight, Thomas was called on a mission back to England and assigned to his home city of Birmingham, where he served for two years. He died a few years after returning to Utah, the deepest desire of his heart fulfilled: Thomas Ash really had come with his family to Zion.

Thomas and Sarah's son George Albert Ash (1878-1933) was seven when the family came to Utah. He was excited at seeing his first Indians and buying American chewing gum. Assisted by his father, George perfected the cobbler's trade at the ZCMI shoe factory. He later owned the Monarch Shoe Shops, with stores in Salt Lake City, Ogden, Provo, and Eureka. At the height of his business success, George amassed a profit of two thousand dollars. He suggested to his wife, Sarah Cobbley Ash (1881-1958), that they use the money for a trip to California, which he had always wanted to see. But she hankered for an automobile a rare treasure in those days. Not finding agreement a necessity, George went to California with his brother, and Sarah used her half of the money to buy a Model A. She learned to drive (which George never did), loved the car, and did her own automotive repairs. Sarah was always independent and resourceful. After the family had lived in a series of small apartments and homes in Salt Lake City, she surprised George by announcing that she had saved enough of "her money" that she'd just bought a building lot for the family at the end of the streetcar line at Twenty-Seventh South on State Street, where they later built a home. Soon, however, the Great Depression wiped out the Monarch Shoe Shops, along with all their other assets except their home. They never again knew financial security.

George had inherited his mother's wit and dramatic flair, which he sometimes put to practical uses. For instance, as a young man he sold homing pigeons, some of them over and over. After buying the same pigeon several times, one customer finally told him, "I don't want that pigeon no more!"

George's use of his imagination also anticipated what his grandson Neal would later do with his own children. George loved to make up stories for his children, such as "Goldilocks and the Three Ball Bearings." Neal's later version would be "Tweedledee and Tweedledum," which featured the "Friends of the Forest."

Whenever George read about anything educational, the children "had to discuss it and play act it or have fun that way. We were practically as well informed as the teachers on history and geography," his favorite subjects. When he wanted his children to experience the Amazon River, he turned their old kitchen table upside down, invited the family aboard, and pretended they were sailing in South America. He taught them the history of the American colonies and "the Spirit of '76" in the same way.

George Ash died at age fifty-five in 1933, when Neal was seven years old. George had had stomach pains for years but never severe enough, in his view, to warrant a trip to the doctor's office. Not long afterward, at age fifty-two, Sarah had a stroke and later developed Parkinson's disease. She was an invalid for the next twenty-five years, with the family caring for her most of that time as she lived near the home of her son Herman ("Herks").

One day in 1958, Neal felt prompted to go see Sarah, his grandmother, who by then had been in the hospital for several years. He had always felt an unusual closeness to her and to her father, Charles Cobbley. As he stood alone at her bedside that day, he felt impressed to give her a blessing, in which he asked the Lord to release her from her suspended state. She passed away a few weeks later at the age of seventy-seven.

George Ash had married Sarah Cobbley in 1902, and their daughter Emma, Neal's mother, was born the next year. Sarah's father, Charles Cobbley (1855-1937), became an important figure in the life of his great-grandson Neal Maxwell. When Neal touched his great-grandfather Cobbley's old hands, marked with the toil of carving a life for his family from the desert, he clasped his own tangible bond to the real pioneers. That linkage was represented by Charles's presence in the circle when Neal was blessed as a baby in Salt Lake's Wandamere Ward in 1926 and again when Charles laid his pioneer hands on Neal's head to confirm him a Church member and give him the gift of the Holy Ghost eight years later.

After sailing the Atlantic in 1855 with the "wind-rocked" ship Thornton as his "cradle," Charles spent his first five years in Pennsylvania, where his parents worked to save the money needed to travel onward to Zion. When the family finally set out from Florence, Nebraska, in 1861, they had just buried two of their seven children, and six-year-old Charles was near death. He soon recovered enough that his "small legs trudged almost the whole of the one thousand miles across the vast plains" to Utah. The Cobbleys settled in Pleasant Grove, south of Salt Lake City.

Charles grew up knowing "the privations . . . incident to pioneer life" and also the "simple . . . joys" of that life. His first home in Utah County had a dirt floor and a partly dirt roof. The family grew subsistence crops and took their wheat on an all-day wagon trip to Springville to be ground, a two- or three-day process. They brought in wood from the nearby mountains to cook food and heat their little home. Some winters were so cold their wood would run out, and then they had to walk to the foothills of Mount Timpanogos to gather sagebrush for their fires.

At age eleven, Charles witnessed the Black Hawk War of 1866, the largest conflict between the pioneers and the local native Americans. By age thirteen, he was carrying tools to the blacksmith shop for a Latter-day Saint crew working for the Union Pacific, because Brigham Young had arranged to build the "forty miles of the worst road" of the westbound railroad. Charles and his father soon helped finish the first transcontinental railroad near its famous joining place at Promontory Summit in northern Utah.

Charles marveled at the new day brought by the railroad to Utah's once-isolated valleys. Now the Saints had broader markets for their grain and other crops. Sawmills opened, so they could build homes of lumber, and trains could bring coal to heat their stoves. Mines were opened nearby, boasting fabulous discoveries of gold, silver, lead, and copper. Mining attracted new elements to pioneer Utah new kinds of people and new forms of greed. Watching his world change, Charles was cautious: "I believe there was nothing any safer for a man than to stay with his farm. . . . I have seen lots of money lost in mining." Because mining requires so much capital and entails so much risk, he thought, it is "no place for a poor man."

On June 28, 1878, Charles married Emma Louise Davis, whose mother had helped Charles's parents care for him during their ocean voyage from Liverpool twenty-three years earlier. Emma was only sixteen when they married, but the young couple were well prepared to begin their life together: the enterprising young Charles took Emma to his thirty-acre farm, where he had already built a small house for their future family.

The Cobbleys eventually reared ten children in Pleasant Grove, where Charles worked as a blacksmith and a farmer. After the harvest each year, he would "fix up a freight team" and haul goods between Lehi, the end of the railroad line, and Pioche, Nevada, along with trips into Wyoming and California. At the Pony Express station in Pioche on one trip, Charles had the experience his posterity, including Neal, would always coax him to retell: "One of the drivers of the Wells Fargo Express threw off a box of money and it broke. [Gold coins] scattered all over. If I had wanted to be dishonest, I could have been a rich man . . . no one else was there, only me and [a drunk] fellow. But it didn't even tempt me. We gathered all of it up and put it back."

A hard test for Charles and Emma arrived in the mail three days after Christmas in 1892. The stately signature "Wilford Woodruff" rested at the bottom of a letter calling Charles to serve a two-year mission in the Southern States. With a houseful of young children, an unpaid debt from having just expanded their home, and no way for Emma herself to do the blacksmithing and freighting work that had kept food on their table, the couple were driven to their knees.

Charles could have felt himself shrinking a little at the thought of leaving his family right then. But Emma was an "intrepid soul, energetic and prudent," and she encouraged Charles to accept the call, knowing fully what the Brethren asked of her as well as of her husband. So, "being moved" by her support and his own "devotion to the gospel," he posted a letter to the First Presidency on a wintry January 7, 1893:

I will merely state my circumstances and then leave the matter as to my going entirely with my Brethren over me.

I have seven children under the age of thirteen, the oldest boy is six years old. I have a small farm. I also do some black smithing for my neighbors. During the last two years . . . with my work and farm and by using the strictest economy, I have been unable to make ends meet.

During that time I have put a small addition to my house which I am still indebted for, not able to pay before the coming summer. These are the facts in regard to my condition and while not wishing to shirk any duty to which I may be called, . . . I will leave the matter entirely to your wisdom and judgment.

After the Brethren received this letter, a note was penned at the bottom, followed by the initials "JFS" (likely Joseph F. Smith of the First Presidency): "I would not ask him to go now, but leave him to decide whether he can go or not and when he concludes, let him report." Charles did accept the call, serving for two years "without a five-cent piece in my pocket." His "only means of transportation was my two legs." He never rode a train and once walked eighty miles to reach a new field of labor.

Emma and the children shouldered their own missionary burden, sustaining Charles's call both physically and spiritually. Emma, who "had little time for the tinsel and bubbles of social life, but [who] had a zest for genuine fun and the companionship of friends," simply went to work. For two years, she drove a team of horses between Pleasant Grove and Provo, selling butter and eggs from the Cobbleys' farm. She also found work cleaning houses, and the children helped out from jobs of their own. By the time Charles returned, the family had not only taken care of themselves but also paid off the ninety-dollar debt for their expanded home.

In 1902, Charles and Emma Cobbley's daughter Sarah married George Albert Ash and moved to Salt Lake City. A year later, Sarah and George Ash became the parents of Emma, named for Sarah's mother. During her childhood, Emma (who would become Neal Maxwell's mother) looked forward to occasional wagon trips from Salt Lake to Pleasant Grove to visit her Cobbley grandparents and enjoy the farm animals and other delights unknown to a city girl.

The Cobbleys lived in Salt Lake City's Wandamere Ward during the last few years of Charles's life and the first few years of the life of his great-grandson Neal. Emma was glad to be closer to her Cobbley grandparents. She was always stirred by the "fervency" of her grandfather's ongoing "tribute to his wife as a help meet and homemaker." Emma also drew spiritual support from her grandmother Cobbley, who accompanied Emma to the Salt Lake Temple on the day she married Clarence Maxwell in 1923.
