Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Five

Clarence and Emma

It was still dark outside in Salt Lake City as nineteen-year-old Clarence Maxwell hurried along the snow-crusted walkway toward the trolley stop at Twenty-Seventh South. The new year, 1922, had just begun. The morning was chilly by Utah standards, but these winters were nothing compared to the freezing, massive drifts that buried the fence lines around Bozeman for weeks at a time.

As Clarence stood waiting in the cold for the streetcar, "an event took place which changed the course of [his] life and put purpose into it." A man just younger than Clarence arrived to wait for the same trolley. He said his name was Judd Flinders. Judd and Clarence climbed aboard, chatting over the noisy clatter of the metal streetcar wheels as they rode into town. Judd said his youth group was having a social that evening at the Wandamere Ward, not far from Clarence's home. "Mutual," Judd called it, inviting Clarence to come along.

Clarence wouldn't usually have been looking for anything new to fill his evenings, but just a few days before he had heard "by way of her mother" that the young lady he had been dating was no longer interested in him. So with "time hanging heavy on [his] hands," he told Judd yes, he'd be glad to go. This was a good night for that.

Before beginning the social part of the evening, the Wandamere M-Men class took a few minutes to choose new officers for the coming year. In 1921, a year earlier, the Church had adopted a program called M-Men and Gleaners for young people aged seventeen through twenty-one. Even though this was his first meeting, and even though he wasn't a Latter-day Saint and really knew nothing about the Church, the group invited Clarence to be the M-Men class secretary. They wanted him to feel welcome, and he did.

A few days later, Clarence attended a meeting of the class officers to plan a trip to Pine Crest Inn up Emigration Canyon. Emma Ash was there from the Gleaners with her friend, Gladys Rutter, whose English mother operated a little store next to the chapel. Emma and Gladys always made each other more "impish," and this night they directed their impishness at Clarence. They sat on either side of him on the couch, teasing him and sitting ever closer to him. "He sat very upright," said Emma, then "finally smiled and talked a little with us."

Clarence had seemed so shy that Emma was surprised when he asked to walk her home after the meeting. After they had talked playfully on her front porch for a few minutes, Emma related, "Surprise! He leaned over and kissed me! I wondered, 'Shy??' I couldn't wait to tell [Gladys]." Emma just stood there. "I didn't know what to do and I thought, 'Well, you can't tell a book by its cover.'" Later she learned that Clarence really was shy and quite proper. So proper, in fact, that he had just thought the kiss was expected of him.

The ward chapel was the social center of the neighborhood that surrounded the big Wandamere Resort on Twenty-Seventh South. The ward held a Valentine's Day dance on February 14, 1922. By then Clarence and Emma were seeing each other often. Clarence hadn't missed a Sunday in going to church. It helped that Emma taught the Sunday School class he attended.

Meanwhile, Clarence was also feeling drawn to the Church's teachings. He began attending the priests quorum meetings before Sunday School, and Bishop Arthur Shurtleff took a personal interest in him. His work with the M-Men officers put him in touch with MIA leader Jesse Fox, who enjoyed answering Clarence's frequent questions. Clarence found these two men "very considerate of me." They encouraged him to keep coming and "to become one of them."

Years later, Clarence's son, Neal, would say that when Clarence was introduced so naturally to the Church, "he had a friend and a job and was nurtured." No one gave Clarence any formal missionary lessons, but his feeling about the rightness of the Church's teachings just kept growing. Later that spring, he asked Bishop Shurtleff about becoming a member. He was baptized in the font at the Salt Lake Tabernacle on June 24.

At Judd Flinders's funeral more than seventy years later, Neal Maxwell would say, "When Judd Flinders reached out his hand in greeting . . . to my father, he [took] not only . . . the hand of Clarence Homer Maxwell, but . . . four subsequent generations" by then nearly a hundred people. Clarence eventually shared with his own family what he had found, baptizing his parents in 1933, just before his father's death, and his sister Edna a little later. Once he knew the Martin Lundwall story, perhaps Clarence felt that these steps reconnected his mother's Lundwall ancestry to its original but interrupted yearnings for Zion.

By the time Clarence joined the Church, he and Emma were seeing each other almost every day. Emma worked in her father's shoe repair shop at Second South near Main Street, and Clarence worked at Booth Fisheries, just around the corner from First South and Main. She had no trouble convincing her father's errand boy to make detours from his trips about town to deliver her notes to Clarence and to bring back Clarence's replies.

As the courtship grew more serious, there were also occasional moments of misunderstanding. One night when Clarence was at Emma's house, their conversation turned into a disagreement. "Angrily I went out the back door," he said, "thinking this was the end." He walked off the doorstep into the mud and wet of a heavy rainstorm. Looking at his shoes, Clarence realized he'd left his rubber overshoes inside Emma's house. He was perturbed, but "because of my Scotch descent and dislike for muddy shoes" he went back for them. Emma welcomed him, both apologized and began talking, and Clarence returned home, retiring "for the night at my usual late hour." Years later, he was amazed at what he had almost lost and how his budding relationship with Emma was saved by a pair of shoes.

The Wandamere Ward could have thought that the wedding of Emma and Clarence was arranged by the ward activities committee. They met in the ward, they courted in the ward, and they shared their company with the ward. One night during their courtship, they together won first prize for best costume at a ward costume ball. They kept up their work on the M-Men and Gleaner committees. And the night before their wedding on February 28, 1923, they both acted in the ward play. Clarence, who played the role of an English butler, still had flour makeup from the play in his hair when they went to the temple the next day.

That next morning they rode the streetcar up Seventh East and along South Temple to the Salt Lake Temple, accompanied only by Emma's grandmother Emma Louise Cobbley and Clarence's friend Bill Rutter. No one else in Clarence's family was a member of the Church, and Grandmother Cobbley was evidently the only one in Emma's family who could go. Joseph Fielding Smith of the Twelve, whom they had never met, was assigned to perform their sealing that day. Afterward, the newlyweds celebrated by going to a movie. Then they rode the streetcar to the home of Clarence's sister Edna, who lent them her place for their honeymoon. Ever conscientious, Clarence had asked for only two days off work from his job at Oxweld Acetylene. Then he was smart enough to suggest that Emma call his boss to ask for a third day which she did, successfully.

In the Maxwell-Ash marriage, the pioneer stream and the convert stream converged in a river of harmony. Emma and Clarence were part of what their son Neal calls that "critical mass" of decent people who hold together families, neighborhoods, communities and the Church. "He comes from a very humble beginning," said President Boyd K. Packer, "and it shows in his sensitivity to people." Within three years, on July 6, 1926, Neal would be born into this welcoming cradle of values and attitudes a modest, sunny environment that built the earliest pathway for his spiritual journey on a foundation of peace and security.
