Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Childhood Stirrings

Six

Born in Salt Lake City's Roaring Twenties

The decade of the 1920s was a brief, carefree, and sometimes heady window of time for most Americans. As frightening as World War I and the national influenza epidemic had just been, both the nation and the world now seemed safer and stronger. For the first time, there were more than 100 million Americans. Constitutional amendments had recently said yes to women's right to vote and no to the sale of intoxicating liquor. Babe Ruth was hitting more home runs than anyone had thought possible, the automobile worked so well that it promised to put the whole nation on wheels, the stock market just kept moving up, and people flocked to the movies especially when the "talkies" replaced silent films in 1927.

Meanwhile, in an event whose future significance was not yet foreseeable, Lenin and the Bolsheviks had toppled the czar in Russia. Totalitarianism was barely beginning to cast dark shadows across the world, as the figures of Hitler, Stalin, Mussolini, Tojo, and Mao Zedong prepared their moves toward the center stage of world history. Some future historians would say that the U.S. withdrew in the 1920s from its responsibility to protect the world's peace. "Emerging from World War I as the leading world power, the United States proceeded to dissipate that power," as it declined to help maintain security in the postwar world.

But at home, Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney boxed with a muscle that reflected the nation's growing confidence, and the Four Horsemen played football at Notre Dame the same way. Clarence Darrow and William Jennings Bryan brought eloquence to both sides of the Scopes trial in Tennessee, Eugene O'Neill's plays brought a rich depth to Broadway, and F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby did the same for American literature. And thousands of flappers danced away their cares with the Charleston.

By the time Neal Ash Maxwell was born in 1926, Calvin ("Silent Cal") Coolidge was a "benign presence in the White House, content to let the bankers, industrialists, and speculators run the country as they saw fit." No one could have predicted the calamities that waited just around the corner of history the Great Depression and yet another great war, either one of which would threaten the very survival of the American experiment in self-government more seriously than anything since the Civil War.

Heber J. Grant had been President of the Church since 1918, Church membership stood at just over 600,000, and about 2,500 full-time missionaries were serving. The Church was still largely agrarian and rural, with 75 percent of its population living in Utah and the Intermountain states. Yet the Church had its own reasons for renewed confidence in 1926, as important long-term developments were taking root.

Salt Lake City, for example, was becoming urbanized. The location of Clarence and Emma Maxwell's home on Twenty-Seventh South and Seventh East symbolized the change. Their house almost straddled the boundary between Salt Lake City and Salt Lake County and the city part was expanding. That line also captured the point where city life and country life intersected. Each spring and fall, in their early years, the Maxwell children would watch as local stockmen drove sheep past their home, to and from the nearby mountain grazing land. Emma always worried about errant critters trampling on her tulip beds when the street was "covered from one side to the other with moving herds of sheep."

The Church itself was also in a transition time. The Saints' geographical and social isolation from United States society during the latter half of the nineteenth century had gradually come to an end. This process had been hastened by the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869, the general settlement of the West, Utah statehood in 1896, the development of local mining interests, and the emergence of Salt Lake City as a major economic center in the Western region.

Utah was among the world's largest producers of silver, lead, and copper by 1920 and only 40 percent of the population of Salt Lake County was Latter-day Saint. Also, just as more people of other faiths were making Utah their permanent home, the Church and its members were becoming more assimilated into the larger American society. In one symbol of these movements, Elder Reed Smoot of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles had successfully represented Utah in the United States Senate since 1903 and would remain there until 1933.

In a field that would affect Neal Maxwell's future life as commissioner of education, Utah was developing a strong state educational system to meet needs once served almost exclusively by Church schools. So the Church scaled back its involvement in schools and began to emphasize religious education. The seminary program had begun as an experiment in 1912 at Granite High School, located within walking distance of Neal's home. This was the high school and seminary he would attend in the early 1940s.

David O. McKay became the first General Authority to serve as Church commissioner of education in 1919. During the 1920s, the Church expanded the seminary program throughout the Intermountain area and launched the first institute of religion at the University of Idaho in 1926, the year of Neal's birth. By the early 1930s, the Church had donated all of its colleges except Brigham Young University, Ricks College, and LDS Business College to the states where they were located. In Utah, these schools included Dixie, Snow, and Weber colleges.

The Church was also on the cusp of a major shift in the meaning of "gathering to Zion." Historically, Church members were concentrated in Utah and contiguous states because the Church had expected its converts to "gather" to the center stakes from all over the world. Now, however, those stakes had become mature enough that it was time to look toward establishing a permanent Church presence in other locations. These were the early stirrings of what would become a truly global Zion during Neal A. Maxwell's lifetime.

For example, the Hawaii Temple was dedicated in 1919, followed by temples in Cardston, Alberta, Canada, in 1923 and in Mesa, Arizona, in 1927. The Los Angeles California Stake was created in 1923. Church membership in North America increased by almost 25 percent during the decade of the 1920s. On May 6, 1922, President Grant delivered the first gospel message over the air waves by means of radio. People heard him for a thousand miles in every direction, speaking from atop the Deseret News Building. General conference was first broadcast by live radio in 1924, and the Tabernacle Choir began its still-running weekly radio broadcasts in 1929.

Church leaders in the 1920s were discouraging people from migrating to be with the main body of the Saints in the Intermountain region; however, European members suffering from the dislocations of World War I understandably continued to flow to the United States. The subsequent shocks of the Depression and World War II undermined the conditions needed to establish permanent communities of Saints in Europe and elsewhere. The Church had not grown much in Latin America by the 1920s, and the Japanese Mission was closed in 1924 after twenty-three years of very limited growth in Asia. Yet long-term centers of Church strength had already taken root in Polynesia Hawaii, New Zealand, Tonga, Samoa, and Tahiti.

The Wandamere Ward, where Neal spent most of his growing-up years, reflected the early twentieth-century gathering. Latter-day Saint emigrants from the great cities of Europe gravitated to the edges of Salt Lake City, where they could be close enough to find work in the city but live far enough away to find affordable housing. Neal found his ward was "loaded with converts from Europe: Swiss converts to the south, Germans to the north, and Dutch just north of them."

The European converts retained their national character, which included a strong work ethic. For example, Rutters' store, located next to the Wandamere chapel, was operated by an English convert couple whose children were good friends with both Clarence and Emma. Neal and his friends would press their noses against the glass covers that arched over the Rutters' candy counters, able to buy several treats with one nickel. Sister Rutter would never go to the ward old folks' dinners, because she was too busy running the store even in her early eighties.

One of Neal's youth advisers was another British convert with thick glasses. He was a strict theologian who didn't relate well to young men but no one doubted the depth of his faith. Having once trained for the ministry in England, he'd "preach to us the whole class period with his chin resting on his cane" and "give unrequested encores at testimony meetings."

Young Neal's ward teaching companion was a German convert who "talked too much when we visited the homes," gave "regular orations" in fast meetings, and "would have been genuinely puzzled by the concept of two-way communication." Yet the youth of the ward, including Neal, knew that he loved both them and the gospel.

New buildings rose on the Salt Lake skyline as the city grew from 100,000 to nearly half again that many people between 1920 and 1930, in part because Utah's birthrate led the nation. This growth came not with blight but with beauty, as a local "city beautiful" movement tried to make the city "second to none in the United States." The city boasted the "broadest and most beautifully laid out streets" anywhere and was said to be one of the country's "most scientifically arranged cities."

An example of the city's commitment to its quality of life was the Wandamere (meaning "beautiful lake") Resort, the central backdrop for the stage on which Neal Maxwell grew up. Located just down the street from his home, the resort opened in 1907 as a recreational center, with concession stands, "airplane" rides that swung out over the lake, a theater pavilion, a zoo, and a small train that circled the park. The city boundaries jogged south at Seventh East just enough to include the park within the city limits. Emma Ash Maxwell had girlhood memories of people coming from all over the valley to the dances, picnics, and summer theater productions. The city eventually sold Wandamere to Charles W. Nibley, Presiding Bishop of the Church, who later donated it back to the city in 1922, hoping that coming generations would find "healthful enjoyment and rare pleasure here in playing that splendid outdoor Scotch game known as golf."

Wandamere then became Nibley Park, a golf course, where young Neal Maxwell had his first personal though brief conversation with a General Authority, President Heber J. Grant, in his red golf sweater. Neal and his friends would wait at the ninth hole to shag any stray golf balls hit over the park fence. When President Grant played, he hit the ball with consistency, perhaps because he played only with his irons. Most golfers would pay the self-appointed crew of ball retrievers a nickel per ball, if anything. But if he hit a shot off course, President Grant "was good for about fifteen cents, and that was really good!"

It was at Nibley Park during this era when President Grant finally enticed the office-bound James E. Talmage out for his only try at golf. Elder Talmage went, on the condition that he could quit whenever he chose. President Grant, confident that Elder Talmage would fall in love with the sport, agreed not to bother him again about playing. After watching President Grant hit a couple of practice shots, Elder Talmage seized a club, hit his tee shot straight down the fairway, put his suit coat back on, bade his brethren adieu, and returned to the office.

The city's Main Street in those days was a "maze of urban technology, with trolley wires and rails lacing the centers of streets lined on both sides by parked automobiles." The Hotel Utah had been completed in 1911, and on October 2, 1917, the stately new Church Office Building was opened at 47 East South Temple Street. Paving gradually transformed city streets "from thoroughfares for pedestrians, trolleys, and horses into auto roads." Salt Lake City's prominence was suggested by its new airport, which brought both airmail and passenger service to town. The region composed of Utah, southern Idaho, eastern Nevada, and southwestern Wyoming had a population of 700,000.

Air pollution may seem like a modern Salt Lake City problem, but concerns about that issue ran high in the 1920s. The leading local figure in addressing that and other public health issues was Amy Brown Lyman, first secretary and later general president of the Relief Society, a member of the Utah legislature, and the wife of Apostle Richard R. Lyman.

The city itself was expanding to the south and southeast of its original core toward Sugarhouse, Murray, and Midvale. Some "country living" estates began to emerge in the Holladay-Cottonwood area, interspersed with the farms that dominated the larger valley. Wandamere remained rural enough that, on a good day, Neal could still go catch a trout in a stream that ran fifty yards from his house.

Into this place of peace, in a season of both promise and risk, Neal Ash Maxwell was born early on the morning of Tuesday, July 6, 1926, the first of six children. A friend drove Emma and Clarence to the hospital. Having used up his allotted vacation days the previous week in premature anticipation of the baby's arrival, Clarence went back to his job after the delivery and "didn't lose any time from work." The delivery "cost $50 for each the doctor and hospital" left them enough to buy "a nice wicker baby carriage brown in color" for baby Neal.

The same day, Neal's five Ash uncles all went out to their sandlot basketball court behind the family home on Leland Avenue and gave a collective cheer. Because Emma had had a boy, they intended to make sure their first nephew became an all-state basketball player.

Neal was an ordinary boy, not born under any condition that would make him feel entitled to anything in particular. The main thing was that he was born of decent, good parents who tried to teach him all they knew. And, like Abraham of old, he soon concluded that "there was greater happiness and peace and rest" for him in seeking for "the blessings of the fathers" (Abraham 1:2). For Neal would grow up with an unspoken sense in some uncharted region of his heart that as much as he would come to love basketball and as much as he would come to hate war, he wanted more to become a disciple, "a follower of righteousness, desiring also to be . . . a greater follower of righteousness, and . . . desiring to receive instructions, and to keep the commandments of God."
