Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Seven

Clarence Maxwell and Son: Master and Apprentice

Neal enjoyed an unusually secure, open relationship with his parents, especially his father though because that all seemed so natural, they hardly sensed its significance. So Neal's primary spiritual mentor was a self-effacing convert who never held a highly visible position, never knew material wealth, and had only a high school education. It probably never crossed Clarence's mind (or Neal's, for that matter) that he was the master for an energetic young apprentice who was unconsciously modeling every shade and hue of his father's discipleship which is one reason Clarence fit the role so well. His unawareness of his own meekness was one hint that it was genuine.

Clarence was a shy and unassuming man of slight build, about five feet, eight inches tall, with light brown hair. Carol, Neal's sister, has a favorite, typical memory of their father sitting on the couch in their living room, his daughters laughing and repeatedly combing his sparse hair while he read the Sunday "funny papers" aloud to them, changing his voice for each comic strip character. "Dad didn't need many worldly things," said Neal's sister Sue. "In fact, he often didn't even seem aware of them. His eyes saw only the meaningful things in life, and almost all conversations were related to the gospel."

For Clarence, then, having a gospel conversation was no big deal that was just what you talked about, because that was real life. He was also methodical, orderly, and frugal. He used his pencils down to practically nothing; he wanted all of his tools kept in place and not left outside; he wasn't judgmental; he didn't raise his voice or speak unkindly of other people. He ate his lunch at his desk while at work, and he read Church books as he ate there. He would wait on customers during his lunch hour and not count that as company time. He went on his lunch break to his daughter Sue's baptism and then returned to work while Sue and her mother went out for lunch to celebrate.

Looking back, Neal doesn't think his father enjoyed great job satisfaction, partly because in the days of the Depression, he was grateful to have a job at all. Clarence learned on the job to be a stenographer and a meticulous bookkeeper. For the first twelve years of Neal's life, Clarence worked for a subsidiary of Union Pacific railroad, taking that same Seventh East streetcar every day into town to work. Neal remembers going often to meet his father at the trolley stop after work to walk home with him, "which gave me real joy."

When Union Pacific moved its office to Omaha in 1936, they told Clarence he could move to Nebraska with them, or he could leave the company and receive fourteen hundred dollars a year's salary as severance pay. Clarence might have thought of his grandfather Martin Lundwall as he considered moving back to Omaha. He showed his ten-year-old son the check and "even let me hold it for a brief moment." Neal thought he'd never see a check for so much money again. Going with the railroad hadn't been a close question for Clarence, who stayed in Salt Lake City and found another job. He later worked many years in the office of Sterling Furniture Company.

With the Maxwells' modest financial station, aggravated by the depressed economic climate, the family had no car and few other material goods. Most others in their neighborhood were in the same fix they were all poor but hardly knew it. Neal doesn't remember ever going out to dinner with his parents. They couldn't have afforded it, nor could most others then.

Yet Clarence maintained his sense of humor. One Sunday when Neal was a baby, Clarence and Grandfather Ash heard a crackling sound, smelled smoke, and discovered that a small fire had broken out in the attic of the Maxwell house. Clarence climbed upon a stool he'd placed on a chair so he could look through the ceiling trap door into the attic. When Clarence yelled "Fire!" Grandpa Ash ran for help. In his haste, he let go of the stool, which fell over, leaving Clarence dangling from the rafters. Clarence would laugh remembering that incident, telling Neal that "your part in the story" was "a rough ride in that new baby buggy down the six or seven front steps," after Clarence dropped to the floor. Another treasure he rushed to safety was the bureau drawer that contained the tithing and fast offering money, which Clarence, the ward clerk, had brought home from church that day. In the end, the fire didn't damage the house significantly.

Clarence enjoyed recalling that Emma's doctor had predicted Neal would be born on July 4 but, in fact, he arrived two days later. "It wasn't your fault," Clarence wrote, "that you were not a firecracker as Dr. Pinkerton predicted." He also smiled at the coincidence that Neal was a patient in Holy Cross Hospital only twice once when he was born and once when he was called to become an apostle in 1981.

Despite the family's economic circumstances, Clarence was happy with everything that mattered to him his family, his Church assignments, his farm animals, and his garden. His attitudes rubbed off onto his son. Neal's daughter-in-law, Karen B. Maxwell, thinks Neal learned "his gentleness with children" and his "lack of ego and self-importance" from Clarence, who worked hard behind the scenes for the railroad and the furniture company, innately meek and loyal about fulfilling his duties. Those attitudes were linked in Clarence's world to his "dedication to doing things right" and his "love for the doctrines of the gospel."

Clarence and Emma valued education, and both read often to Neal. With their parents' encouragement, nearly all of the Maxwell children would graduate from college. Scriptures, Church manuals, and other books were open and accessible around the house, like welcome friends. And whether his parents read to him from the Bible, The Secret Garden, or Kidnapped, the books conveyed to Neal a message much like the one he received in the family's continual, informal gospel conversations: learning and literature were worthwhile and beyond that, or as part of it, "life seemed to have an overall, purposeful, and divine design. Some things were right and other things were wrong."

Clarence always read the daily newspaper, a lifelong habit Neal acquired early and ardently. His parents both prized their Book of Knowledge set and used the books often. The children found that Emma was much quicker to answer their questions, because Clarence always wanted to think about it, which gave him time to look in the scriptures or other books for the most reliable answer.

Neal was never very adept at mechanical things, so he's not had the skill he wishes he'd had in solving his own household problems. Colleen said, "Neal was not as methodical as his father and neither gifted nor interested in working with his hands, yet he "really wanted to please" his father. Pleasing Clarence was one reason Neal became interested in his purebred pig project. Whatever the job, he could see his father's approval, or lack of it, in one glance at his face.

In his early years, Neal sometimes thought his father was too fussy about his expectations for work quality, which may be one reason that mechanical things didn't seem to come easily. Neal would have been content to follow his mother's more relaxed style, which sometimes meant "just throwing things together and saying, 'Let's get this thing done!'" Emma thought it wasn't worth the trouble to build pigpens to Clarence's high standards, because "the pigs wouldn't care if things weren't exact."

But Neal's earliest work experiences were under Clarence's watchful eye, "loving but exacting." And though Neal "worked hard, my work was often not carefully done. I was a stranger to excellence." One thing he didn't like about farm work is that "you were never through with it." Irrigation turns always seemed to come in the middle of the night; and even if he had just fed the animals, it was always about time to feed them again. As one dairy farmer put it, the trouble with milking cows is that they don't stay milked. So, while young Neal didn't always put his shoulder to the wheel with a "heart full of song," he did "learn about shoulders and wheels, which helped later in life, when the wheels [of work] grew larger."

One day, Neal gave his best to satisfying Clarence's high standards in putting in a row of fence posts on the little farm plot near their home. He worked all day to align the posts in a straight row, burying each one at exactly the same depth. When Clarence came home, Neal "watched anxiously as he carefully inspected the fence posts, even checking them with a level bar before pronouncing them to be fully satisfactory. Then came his praise," which Neal knew he never got unless he'd earned it. "My sweat of the brow had earned Dad's commendation which, in turn, melted my heart." When that happened, "the importance of pride in workmanship . . . finally reached me. . . . The posts were not the only thing that fit into place that summer."

Neal also felt over his shoulder the same look of Clarence's well-calibrated eye when he was keeping records on his 4-H purebred pig project. Neal's annual report to his 4-H leaders when he was sixteen states that he was "constantly faced by an experienced bookkeeper" "my Dad," who records "the most minute details." He acknowledged Clarence's help when he won two state championships in the record book contest for livestock production projects.

Later on, Elder Maxwell would often talk about work to Church members. He had first learned to value work because his father did, and then he discovered its value for himself. So, he would teach, work is a spiritual necessity, even if it weren't an economic necessity. He learned from his own sweat that "though joyful, missionary work is work. Though joyful, temple work is work." He urged Latter-day Saint parents to teach their children to work by working. Don't insulate them, he said, "from the very things that helped make you what you are!" He wrote in the Friend that people who learn to work will be "better disciples of Jesus Christ, who Himself learned to work as a carpenter. . . . There won't be any lazy people in heaven. They would not be happy there anyway, because there will always be so much to do."

Many of Neal's early interests grew as if grafted onto his father's interests. Clarence later acknowledged as much, looking back with nostalgia to the pig project and the trumpet he had bought for his junior high-age son: "Your 4-H achievements [and] trumpet lessons" fulfilled "my ambitions [more] than yours," even though they also provided good training. When Neal's interest in the trumpet waned after about a year, Clarence taught himself to play it eventually well enough to play his favorite song, "The Holy City." The song meant enough to Clarence that one of his grandsons, Andrew Skankey, played it on the trumpet at his graveside service.

His testimony of the gospel was the major premise for all of Clarence Maxwell's reasoning, not only about religious topics but everything else, like work, keeping records, and music. He had what Neal called a convert's zeal a childlike freshness with which he applied the gospel to life, drank in spiritual learning, and approached his Church callings.

Clarence served in the bishopric while a young man and then was the ward clerk for many years. As the clerk, he felt responsible to guard every nickel of the members' tithing. Among Neal's earliest memories was the sight of Clarence carefully opening the ward's little bank bag and placing all of the tithing and fast offering money on their round dining room table to count it each fast Sunday after Church. Few people had checking accounts then, and much of the money was in coins. To wide-eyed young Neal, surrounded by the poverty of the Depression, that seemed like a great deal of money. It was not what Clarence said but the way he felt and acted about the tithing money that told Neal these were sacred funds. Through their advanced years, Clarence and Emma always contributed funds to missionaries leaving from their ward.

Neal also watched Clarence ask good gospel questions and find good answers as intuitively as he breathed. Clarence was always raising faithful questions, born of his thirst to understand and expand the doctrines that guided his life. The idea of asking skeptical questions or trick questions or even amusing questions would never have occurred to him.

Church members in those days felt free to write to General Authorities of the Church. Not many people wrote such letters, but Clarence Maxwell did. So when he couldn't find a good answer to his gospel questions any other way, he would carefully tap out a letter to one of the Brethren.

Looking at those letters now, it is difficult to tell whether they were typed on Clarence's typewriter or on the battered manual machine Neal still uses. Neal's typewritten notes, even today, look just like the ones Clarence typed more than half a century ago: the small, old Smith-Corona characters, single-spaced, occasional strikeovers, and using every inch of the paper.

In 1946, for example, Clarence wrote to Elder Joseph Fielding Smith of the Twelve, asking about repentance, forgiveness, and exaltation. Elder Smith wrote back a two-page response in which he wondered "why this question is so constantly rising." He quoted a scripture and then highlighted the quotation with an asterisk and a long, handwritten marginal note. Neal would remember this exchange when President Smith, as the President of the Church, asked him to serve as Church commissioner of education in 1970.

Such an exchange of correspondence between a Sunday School teacher and a General Authority wouldn't occur in today's much larger Church, in which members are encouraged to go to local priesthood leaders with their questions. But in Neal Maxwell's formative years, this exchange of letters let him see the Brethren as accessible tutors men who wrote personal letters and, two at a time, visited stake conferences four times a year.

As a stake missionary, Clarence wrote to Elder Smith, wondering if he'd given the right answer to an investigator about the Godhead. And as stake mission president, he wrote to Elder Bruce R. McConkie to clarify the possibly erroneous teaching of a stake missionary about the various appearances of the Lord. Later, in doing his own family history work, Clarence wrote to Elder Howard W. Hunter, asking about the sealing relationship of children born to temple-married parents who are later divorced and the sealing is canceled. The Brethren always replied specifically and courteously.

Because Clarence typically showed Neal both his questions and the replies he received, Neal took for granted that discussing faithful, constructive questions was part of the natural culture of the Church. He also couldn't help noticing that sometimes those with broader responsibilities in the Church took a more deeply informed view in the way they answered the questions. The seeds of these early assumptions, born of Clarence's combination of devotion and desire to learn, bore fruit in Neal's later attitudes.

Conversations about gospel and other topics were daily fare around the Maxwell dinner table or as they worked together in the yard. Generally Clarence wasn't as active as Emma in their wide-open family discussions, but "if you got him talking about the gospel, that was a different matter." He was a "real believer," sharing his blend of believing attitudes with his native curiosity.

So Neal's understanding of the gospel and the Church was gradually shaped by the way he and Clarence shared their thoughts, openly and easily. For Clarence, it was second nature to look for and find the answers to life's questions in gospel teachings. His attitude created a climate of spiritual confidence for Neal, partly because both of them found that the process worked. Their specific, friend-to-friend exchange shows in their written correspondence while Neal was in the war and then on his mission in Canada, as his father faithfully "kept [up] a steady stream of letters to any of his family who were away." Colleen remembers that Neal maintained a constant conversation with his parents, phoning them almost daily during his early married years.

Neal sometimes went with his father to the Tabernacle for general conference. Given his slight personal observations of President Grant at the Nibley Park golf course and his emerging interest in political affairs, which began long before he ever heard the term political science, he was fascinated with President Grant's comments at conference. President Grant once said he was exercised about the New Deal, adding that President J. Reuben Clark, counselor in the First Presidency, "tells me I'm not supposed to talk about this, but I'm going to talk about it anyway." "To a boy up in the gallery," said Neal, "that was interesting."

Neal later said that his testimony came in three ways. Early in his home life, he experienced the witness of the Spirit, followed afterward by intellectual and experiential conversions. He found that the witness of the Spirit is more sure but that the other witnesses would increasingly corroborate his spiritual impressions.

He vividly remembers returning home one night and inadvertently hearing his kneeling parents in a nearby room praying aloud for the welfare of their children. Neal was touched with their concern and how the concern fit within their faith. He also prayed as a child during the Depression that his father would be able to find employment, and he felt his prayer was heard.

His most stirring boyhood experience with the faith of his father occurred late one night in 1943, as sixteen-year-old Neal returned from his swing shift as a grease monkey at the local Greyhound bus terminal. As he walked in the darkness, he noticed an unexpected light burning inside the house.

Quietly opening the door, Neal heard voices from the kitchen. Several people were there. He tiptoed closer, wondering what was going on. He sensed serious, even somber tones in the hushed voices. Two family friends stood under the dining room light next to Clarence and Emma. They were working, unsuccessfully, to revive Carol, Neal's six-week-old sister. None of them noticed Neal standing in the entry to the room. He saw the baby lying on her back on the round dining room table, the same table where Clarence counted the tithing. He'd heard his parents say earlier that Carol had whooping cough and they were worried about her. Now she had turned blue and, so far as Neal could tell, had stopped breathing and was about to die.

He watched as his father and the other men placed their hands on the baby's head. Speaking in quiet but direct tones, Clarence blessed Carol to live, adding other words Neal no longer remembers. When the blessing ended, Neal could see Carol begin to breathe. Emma bundled up the baby, and the adults whisked her to the hospital. After they left, Neal crept to his bedroom. Moved by what he'd felt as he saw Carol breathe again, he knelt to thank God for his parents and their convictions. He prayed for little Carol, asking that his father's blessing might be accepted. Carol survived the illness and grew up to became the mother of six children.

In 1995, Neal told PBS interviewer Hugh Hewitt in Searching for God in America, a television series of probing conversations about spiritual life with American religious leaders, that this experience gave a strong spiritual witness to his boyhood testimony: "I watched my father, after the manner of the New Testament, bless her with the power of the priesthood, and saw her begin to breathe again."

A crowning tribute that showed Neal's attitude toward his father's gentle tutoring came when Neal learned about the concept of fathers blessings. Because Clarence had not grown up in a Latter-day Saint home and because he hadn't learned the concept elsewhere, he was unfamiliar with Church policy authorizing fathers' blessings, as distinguished from patriarchal blessings and general priesthood blessings for health or comfort.

When Neal was in the bishopric of a student ward at the University of Utah in 1957-59, he heard Bishop Oscar W. McConkie, a brother to Elder Bruce R. McConkie, teach ward members about the nature, the procedure, and the importance of fathers' blessings, which may be recorded verbatim in family records, even though they are not retained in official Church records. Neal found this such a rich doctrine that he thereafter gave his own children blessings and would often teach of such blessings in his ministry among Church members.

He also went to Clarence, even though Neal was by then married and a father himself, to tell his father about the doctrine and to ask for a blessing at Clarence's hands. Clarence was reluctant. He said he just didn't see how he could do that for an adult son to whom he now looked for spiritual leadership himself.

Like young Nephi, who restored his father's confidence by asking him, "Whither shall I go to obtain food?" (1 Nephi 16:23), Neal patiently coaxed Clarence for more than ten years. Finally he "sandbagged him" into giving the blessing. Knowing of Clarence's love for family history, Neal, by then a General Authority, invited his father to visit the Church Office Building to do some genealogical work. Once Clarence was in Neal's office, he said, "Now, Dad, I want a father's blessing. And then we'll go do the family history work."

So Clarence placed his hands on his son's head on January 17, 1976, and pronounced a blessing. He prayed that the Lord would direct what he should say to "one of His faithful servants." Then Clarence blessed Neal with "strength to bear the burdens which may come upon you in physical ways . . . that you may bear [them] as [Paul] did, without complaint." Neal would remember this part of the blessing when he entered the valley of his illness twenty years later. In other parts of Clarence's blessing lie echoes of the tutorial in discipleship with which his father had guided Neal through his boyhood years. Clarence blessed him

that you may be humble . . . and seek not in any way to glorify yourself but that you may do all for the glory of our Father. . . . That your testimony may be a power to those who hear you, that even if they may not themselves know, as you know, that they may, through your words, come to know that Jesus is the Christ. . . . [That you may] devote your time and your attention to the work of the Lord, not neglecting your family in any way . . . that you may . . . feel at rest in these things . . . that He may come to you in great strength. . . . Keep the commandments, study the scriptures, . . . learn the ways and the will of the Father and of the Son . . . [and] you will have joy in heaven throughout eternity . . . with your posterity.
