Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Eight

Emma, Lois, and Life at Home

Clarence and Emma's marriage exemplified harmony amidst diversity. They had just the right blend to be model team teachers for the ward M-Men and Gleaners, a class they taught for several years. The two enjoyed a marriage of warm, spirited friendship that was big enough for two very different personalities. Clarence believed and practiced the idea that marriage is an "equal partnership," where "neither partner is a servant to the other." He believed the "husband [should] wash dishes or clothes, [and] change diapers," with "both father and mother" sharing "equally the privilege of teaching and training and enjoying the children."

Where Clarence was of slight build, shy, methodical, and restrained, Emma was quite the opposite. She had dark brown hair and stood five feet, two inches tall but was fairly rotund most of her life. Emma was also gregarious, impatient, and opinionated. At her funeral, Neal said she had never been confused about what was right, and she loved people enough to reprove them. On the whole, he would "give her an A for correctness but a B for diplomacy." After the funeral, one relative whom Emma had often tried to motivate toward greater Church activity told Neal, "Let's make that a C plus for diplomacy."

Her instructions about her own funeral illustrate her style. When her life was ebbing, she told Neal she didn't want her family to have a big dinner after the funeral she wanted them to give the food to shut-ins or sick members of the ward. She also wanted the funeral to be both "brief" and "accurate," with "no big buildup." And "if it's a good day," she wanted everybody to go home from the funeral and plant some flowers. Emma loved flowers, especially roses. Lois, Neal's sister, once said, "If plants know when they are loved, it is no wonder that her roses did so well." Because it was "a good day," Elder Maxwell passed along Emma's request to those at the funeral, noting, "We know that one day we will face her equivalent of a personal priesthood interview" with her.

At the same time, the consensus among Emma's children is that obedience was her defining quality. Her children were always impressed that, once she knew how her Church leaders felt on an issue, "she lined up." Characteristically she would say, "He's the bishop, you know. So we should do what he says." And she always would.

Emma was a stalwart, matriarchal figure who led out assertively on religious issues. To Neal, her greatest lesson was that her life reflected clear priorities the family and the Church come first. She especially liked children, having taught and led them for thirty-two years in the Primary organization. Children liked her, and they liked her directness. When Neal was little, he sometimes bit the piano bench when he got upset, leaving teeth marks. Once when he bit a young friend in some childish frustration, Emma told the small boy, "Bite him back!" The friend did, helping to cure Neal of his problem.

She was also blessed with creativity and intensity of focus that found their way into Neal's personality. She had a way with words, once earning the then-sizable sum of ninety-eight dollars from the Paris Company in Salt Lake in a public contest to find a new marketing slogan. Emma's winning idea was "Dependable Merchandise." In 1952, when she and Clarence bought their first television set, she burned the family's dinner on two occasions after getting engrossed in western movies. Emma also liked to organize things, planning activities with enough detail to anticipate Neal's penchant for organizing family trips and structuring group conversations.

Emma shared the action in her ward. As stake Primary president, she helped pilot Cub Scouting as a test stake for the Church. She enriched her Primary lessons with frequent references to good literature, which she loved and often shared at home. She made the costumes for the stake Primary program when little Neal was in the cast and members of the Church's Primary General Board attended as special guests. Emma loved a good time, hamming up her role as the fortune teller at the ward carnival. She also made the gravy for ward dinners until she was in her seventies.

Emma reflected a contagious interest in other people. Her daughters remember their teenage friends often coming over "for talks with Mom." Within and beyond the ward, Emma nurtured and volunteered, in both conventional and unconventional ways. She believed in citizenship enough to serve as a voting district election judge for many years. She also gave older neighbors the shots they needed for diabetes and other ailments, which Neal doubts "the local medical association" would have appreciated. Emma "really cared about those often overlooked in life," which included many friends and women in the neighborhood who often "came to her for counsel."

Even though Clarence was perhaps more of a mentor for his son, Neal's relationship with Emma was so secure and so fruitful that she strongly affected the way he developed. Her confidence in him, in herself, and in the Lord were powerful offsetting forces when Neal struggled with self-esteem during his adolescence, when he was discovering his own identity during the war, and at other times of stress. No other force quite equals a mother's touch of love when it is given as fully and freely as Emma gave it, conveying to her child the inner strength and resolve to cope with life's buffeting.

When he was in kindergarten, Emma helped him draw and cut out some paper pumpkins, which he took to school on a day when Emma would be away from home until late afternoon. An older boy tore up the pumpkins just before school started. Neal was stunned and hurt. He had never been bullied like that before. He still remembers "crying and coming home alone, realizing with a special kind of terror that my mother was gone and that no one would be home" when he arrived. The five-block walk from school to home felt like five miles that day. He instinctively needed Emma, the champion of the underdog, as he struggled to cope with his hurt feelings.

Neal's most pronounced childhood memory about Nibley Park is also associated with his mother's protection. The two of them had been at the park's theater and were running home in the midst of a thunderstorm. Suddenly lightning hit a tree very close to them, and Neal huddled close to the safety of Emma's strong presence as they ran for shelter.

When Neal was around twelve, his family was renting a home in rural East Millcreek that belonged to a couple serving a mission. He loved the larger house and spacious grounds, where he was introduced to serious livestock production. One season they had a pony at their place, which Neal was free to ride if he could. Emma watched one day through a window as Neal tried and tried to stay on the frisky little horse. After being thrown several times, Neal finally gave up only to see a younger boy come along later and tame the pony enough to ride him.

Neal was dejected, his self-confidence more bruised than was his rumpled body. He was sure he'd never be much of a horseman or much else. But Emma saw it otherwise: "I remember looking out of the window and seeing you bucked off. You were angry, but you gave him a hard look and took the bridle and led him back to the barn. You were always kind to the animals." She helped Neal see that, in the long run, it said more about his character to be kind to animals (especially one that had just dumped him like that!) than to ride them the very first try.

As the first Ash grandchild, Neal received unusual attention from Emma's five brothers, who took seriously their self-appointed role of indoctrinating him in the best family traditions of basketball, fishing, hunting, and devotion to Granite High School. Both the Ash backyard and his uncles seemed huge to little Neal. They would pound the dirt near their basketball hoop, wet it, and pound it some more, until it felt like clay. Then, as Emma put it, they would "play like mad." Neal loved watching their frequent scrimmages, following "the cloud of dust, which marked the progress of the ball going to and fro, up and down that court."

Lois was born in 1928, when Neal was two. From the beginning, Neal and Lois were warmly encircled in the arms of extended family. They lived within walking distance of both the Maxwell and the Ash grandparents and their families. On pleasant weekends, Clarence, Emma, Neal, and Lois would often walk the eleven-block round-trip along unpaved sidewalks to see both sets of grandparents, perhaps pushing Lois in the brown wicker buggy.

At home, the Maxwell family enjoyed serial radio programs, listening together to Little Orphan Annie, Jack Armstrong, or One Man's Family. Emma was "a stringer of some kind for one program's sponsor," having signed up to test their recipes. On a warm Sunday evening, the Maxwells would all four sit on the front porch and munch homemade sandwiches and drink milk or Emma's fresh lemonade as they chatted and watched over the neighborhood.

In 1933, when Neal was seven, Franklin D. Roosevelt began serving as president of the United States. That year both of Neal's grandfathers passed away. His parents took him and five-year-old Lois to one of the funerals, but the experience unsettled the children enough that they didn't attend the second one. That was a hard year for the family in other ways, because Clarence was sick at home with pneumonia and therefore out of work for some time.

Lois and Neal became what he calls a "duet brother and sister" during their childhood together. The two would race from their front porch to the big tree near the street. In the backyard, they dug a hole big enough for four children to stand in. One winter, Clarence helped them build an igloo large enough to turn around in. Neal also taught Lois most all she would ever know about sports. They reenacted many events from the 1936 Olympics in their yard, using orange crates for hurdles and bamboo poles for the high jump.

Lois had been born with limited eyesight, which became an important influence in opening Neal's own eyes, and his heart, to the needs of people from varying and sometimes sensitive circumstances. He developed great admiration for Lois's courage and good cheer as he watched her travel alone each week on the Bamberger train to and from Ogden, where she attended the Utah School for the Blind from the third grade onward. She later completed her college degree, taking notes in Braille and relying on friends who read to her. She went on to enjoy a productive teaching career in the public schools, specializing in helping children with learning disabilities.

Like her parents, Lois is down-to-earth. During one time of family reminiscing, Neal thanked Lois for setting a high standard, because "she has never been given to any self-pity." Lois responded with Emma-like candor, "How do you know?" And everybody laughed.

Neal's other sisters, Ann, Susan, Carol, and Kathy, were all born after he was eleven, and in a few years he was off to war and the mission field. So they have known him mostly as a grown-up big brother, who was their close and willing mentor in all things athletic, political, romantic, and religious. Neal has stayed close to his sisters, visiting often and having lunch with them every time there's a birthday.

Clarence and Emma filled their later grandparent years with "unhurried, unlimited attention" to their grandchildren, some of whom were in their home almost daily, enjoying Emma's cooking, games, and sleepovers. Emma "especially gave encouragement to those grandchildren with challenges and reminded [their] parents to be patient and trust in the Lord." Emma struggled during her final years with health problems that required her to carry an oxygen tank, but that didn't keep her from attending Church and family events.

As she was near death in 1983, Emma spoke in subdued tones. Clarence, who had developed a hearing problem, couldn't hear her. He leaned over her bed, thinking she was saying something tender. She was actually telling him he had his elbow on her hair and it was hurting her. In another near-end conversation, Clarence, always on task and always a believer, was concerned that they didn't have much time left to talk. He told her he was having trouble locating people in a certain ancestral line in their family history research and, "when you get there, Emma, I need to have you get me some help." After her passing, someone from the family asked Clarence if he wanted anyone to stay with him at home that night. "No," he said matter-of-factly, "I have a testimony of the gospel." From then on, in the room with twin beds which they had shared, he slept in Emma's bed.

Some time after Emma's death, Clarence was thinking of marrying Helen Larsen Nielsen, who had lost her husband. When he asked his daughter Kathy how she felt about that idea, she replied, "I guess it's going to take me a little time to get used to it, Daddy." Clarence patted her on the knee and said, "How long do you think it will take? I don't have much time." Clarence married Helen in 1987 and died in 1993. Helen passed away in 2000 amid warm feelings of mutual appreciation between the Maxwell and Nielsen families. Because Helen had been on Emma's board when she was stake Primary president, the Maxwells felt that in a sense Emma, once more in character, "picked her successor."
