Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Nine

A True Story? Or Were You Just Preaching?

As the range of Neal's experience broadened, he encountered some contradictions between the honest love of the gospel he felt at home and the institutional ineffectiveness he sometimes found in the church meetings he attended. The deeply settled state of his parents' faith helped their son gradually construct a bridge between the spiritual security of his family life and the comparative insecurities he felt, early on, at church.

During Neal's childhood, Clarence spent hours at the ward meetinghouse as a bishopric member; however, Neal had not yet made the connections among church, home, and his real but unarticulated trust in the Lord. One Sunday Emma and Neal made the familiar walk from home to the meetinghouse. Clarence, as usual, had gone ahead much earlier for his bishopric meetings. As they walked, Neal said to her, "Church, church. When I get big, I'm not going to church."

This was one of several hints during Neal's childhood that he was finding his experience at church less than fulfilling. His first attempt at public speaking hardly heralded the verbal fluency he would one day develop. The Maxwells were in the East Millcreek Ward, and Neal was about thirteen. He had been asked to talk about tithing and had worked hard to prepare and then memorize what he would say. When he stood at the pulpit, he began, "Tithing. The law of tithing." Then his mind went blank. Embarrassed, he groped for words and pled with himself, but the screen of his memory remained empty. Finally, he snapped his fingers in frustration and said, "Nuts!" The congregation laughed, and Neal stumbled on with a few words he no longer recalls. He regarded this first church talk as a complete failure.

Neal felt that the teachers and speakers in church often didn't connect all that well with him or with his friends. When he was eleven, he wore a Roman guard costume in a Primary festival in the Grant Stake. His picture ended up in the Children's Friend, the Primary's magazine for the entire Church. Looking at himself in that strange outfit as a snapshot of his moods, Neal said years later, "I look so bored, and I probably was."

He revealed his thoughts about one or two leaders with whom he associated at Wandamere in his memories about teachers who gave "unrequested encores" in testimony meeting. He thought that the high councilors who came to their ward were sometimes "too stern and too preachy," even though they were "good men." As for his ward teaching, he wasn't "thrilled over it, but I did it." He also remembers, with chagrin, the day the bishop's wife taught their Sunday School class. His class gave her such a hard time that she went home in tears. The bishop later asked the class to stand before the entire ward, while he scolded them for the way they had behaved. Neal knew they deserved this, even if the bishop didn't handle it with "a great deal of finesse."

He found the Church activity program no more appealing. He "did not connect with Scouting." He "never could tie a square knot. I always tied grannies." So he "rose to the dizzy heights of Tenderfoot and then quit," because he was more interested in hanging around with the much older M-Men during their basketball games and practices.

Some of his difficulty was, in retrospect, that the Church in the 1920s and 30s was "much less effective institutionally" than it would become in later years. His ward, typical for its day, was huge, but only about fifteen percent were active members, and it seemed that an even tinier fraction of the more affluent members were consistently involved. Neal recalls, for example, that it was unheard of in that era for a medical doctor to be a bishop or stake president. A ward in that same neighborhood today would probably be three times that active, with higher levels of commitment, peer support, and supporting resources. This development reflects in some ways how the Church itself has matured.

Wandamere was something of a homespun community, but that was not atypical of the times, an interior-decorating era some have affectionately called "early Depression style." The chapel had no carpet, just wooden floors and "wooden benches that squeaked every time you moved them around" or moved on them. The ward house was multifunctional. The same room served alternately as chapel, drama stage, activity center, and, on Friday nights, a movie theater for those who had paid their ward budget assessment. Rolling his eyes a little, Neal remembers the good times at the ward movies: "The films always broke, and the audience would finally stamp their feet, hoping the man in the booth would get the film spliced" so the show could go on.

With its down-home flavor, Wandamere was a nurturing place for Neal especially because of the constructive attitude his parents had about life in the ward. He had his frustrations, but he never had serious doubts about the values his parents both taught and modeled. Much later, after seeing intellectual arrogance, the vanity of wealth, and other forms of pride, Neal would say, "I give my parents a lot of credit for those homely, unfashionable virtues of family prayer and tithing, which were so pronounced for me."

His parents patiently and lovingly negotiated their son's transition from home and private religious feelings to the more public, behavioral reflections of his private values. He always knew they had "a set of givens, that you try to help people and you try to be patient." But "they didn't harp on it," and he didn't ever feel "pounded upon." He was sometimes irritated and, later on, "a little feisty and independent." But, "while my parents winced, they respected my agency. I knew somewhat how they felt, but they backed off a little bit in this almost sacred zone where our agency touches parental counsel." After they would say, "You know how we feel," he found himself "loving and respecting them all the more!"

Like other strong-willed children, Neal experienced occasional contradictions between the love and the discipline his parents gave him. By working through these tensions in an atmosphere of high mutual trust, he gradually internalized a conscience and faith of his own. He "felt a sense of belonging, that God cared about me, that my parents loved me, and that they would help me," when he wasn't so sure others would help. The Wandamere Ward, despite its limitations, was also "a warm and nutritive environment that was free of so many troubles that confront [numerous] neighborhoods today."

As time went on, the seeds of testimony in Neal's infant discipleship began to sprout, even if almost imperceptibly. He found that teachers and leaders in the East Millcreek Ward, where he lived from age ten to age thirteen, seemed to connect with him a little more. He also enjoyed singing in an Aaronic Priesthood chorus at the priesthood session of general conference when he was about fourteen. In his early teens, Neal first began to notice some distance emerging between his religious feelings and those of some of his friends. He was gravitating closer to the Church, even as some of them were moving more away from it.

One of Neal's sisters remembers when he was out with some friends who wanted to buy some beer. Neal asked them to take him home. Hearing that recollection, Neal said, "That makes me sound judgmental of my friends." Replied Colleen, "Not really. You went home and cried." And when he remembered the incident, Neal agreed, "I did."

Neal took enough seminary classes to graduate, though he recalls, wistfully, "If I could listen with one ear and get away with it, I didn't listen with two ears the way I should have." He had not read the Book of Mormon by the time he entered the military at age eighteen. But he did listen enough in class even with only one ear that forty years later he could tell the Church's seminary teachers, "I still remember the voice of my seminary teacher, James Moss, reading the scriptures."

During this season, Neal encountered an Aaronic Priesthood adviser named Steve Monson, whom he dearly loved. This affection led to a deep sting of sadness when, not long after he had been Neal's teacher, Steve was shot down in the air war over Europe in World War II. He was one of the first people Neal knew who went away to fight in the war. Losing Steve suddenly gave the war a very personal dimension for Neal, perhaps contributing to his desire to fight there himself.

The difficulties Neal encountered during his boyhood church experience arose not because he didn't value the gospel's teachings but because he valued them so much. His most serious connection to spiritual things had taken hold in what he learned with his father and mother and in his private reflections about those experiences. His religious feelings were real, embedded in an unusually sensitive young heart. He instinctively knew the difference between responses to those feelings that were superficial and responses that were genuine even though he couldn't have explained why the responses felt different to him.

Neal's dilemma calls to mind the story of a little boy who heard his grandfather speak in church. The boy asked, "Was that a true story, Grandpa, or were you just preaching?" Young Neal Maxwell had heard, seen, and felt true religious stories for years at home, from parents in whom there was no guile. Because his soul had resonated to those true stories, he sometimes felt a little dissonance when his early church experience felt more like "just preaching."

As the years went by, Neal would reflect often on both the true stories and the preaching he had known. These memories would become an intense motivating force, prompting him to help other people have a church life that encouraged authentic spiritual realities. This same hunger would later lead Neal to try so hard to improve church shortcomings that he sometimes felt guilty for "steadying the ark" too much. However it expressed itself, his desire for quality in the church environment had much of its origin in the sweet satisfactions he had tasted in the gift of a childhood home full of genuine spirituality.
