Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Ten

Hoops and Hogs

Throughout his early years, Neal felt driven by an intense commitment to excellence, which expressed itself especially in his zeal for basketball and in a 4-H project with purebred pigs. During the three years when the family rented a home in East Millcreek, he loved the rural "Tom Sawyer solitude" of this two-and-a-half acre place surrounded by orchards and fields. Here he looked after the animals and crops his family relied on for sustenance cows, pigs, chickens, ducks, and enough vegetable crops and fruit trees that, for a season each year, he and Lois would try to sell their Bing cherries.

Neal almost always had a part-time job after that, and he often gave his mother some of his earnings to help with household expenses. He worked at Interstate Brick for twenty-five cents an hour, making and hauling bricks three nights a week after school, walking to and from work an hour each way. Then it was the grease-monkey job at the Greyhound bus depot and water boy for a construction crew, as well as bottle boy for Denhalter Bottling Company. These jobs cut into both his social life and his study time, but they reflected the necessities of his life. They also exposed him to people whose values and vocabularies were different from what he knew at home, but all of that inoculated him against what he would soon find in the U.S. Army.

Not yet a terribly serious student at school, Neal still became a voracious reader of what he liked to read. He would spread out the daily newspaper on the floor and devour it with an appetite that indirectly trained his ear and instincts toward journalistic language. He also loved reading newsmagazines and whatever adventure books or fiction he could find lying around the house and on Clarence's bookshelves. His Aunt Arlene, Emma's sister, said that her most typical memory of young Neal is that of a teenage boy reading stacks of books with piles of sandwiches at his elbow. His penchant for both news commentary and good books would develop over the years into something near addiction.

But among all of his early interests, Neal found two primary outlets for his inborn passion for quality hoops and hogs. The love of basketball was virtually unavoidable, because his five Ash uncles had programmed that into his being like computer software on a hard drive. His natural gifts matched the environmental pressure: He was quick on his feet, and his left-handed shots were finely honed and hard to block.

Perhaps his best childhood Christmas came during the East Millcreek years, after his father had prepared Neal for the reality that they simply couldn't afford to buy a basketball. But on Christmas morning, there was a new ball, somehow, along with a secondhand hoop Clarence had painted to look as good as new. Neal put up the hoop on the front of their garage and played hour after hour, dreaming of the day when he fully expected to be on Cec Baker's winning team at Granite High.

The family moved back to Wandamere after three years. They left the spacious Millcreek farm and moved in with Neal's grandmother Ellen Lundwall Maxwell in her four-room, frame house on Adams Street (Twenty-Ninth South and 450 East). Now, instead of having a roomy home, they lived in a tiny, crowded place where, for a little while, the only toilet was outside.

Living conditions were cramped, but the family relationships were strong enough to handle the natural stress. Neal's greater trouble came at school, where, though blessed with many friends, his living circumstances made him feel not quite good enough for the "in crowd." He may have thought he needed to compensate for this perceived limitation by excelling at basketball. Until leaving East Millcreek, he had played the game as well as anybody in the larger neighborhood. But when he moved into the smaller house, his basketball fortunes seemed to shrink as well. He didn't even make the sophomore team at Granite High.

Part of the problem was that Neal had stopped growing, a process that didn't resume until after he graduated from high school. Whatever the causes, "It was a bitter pill for me. I had always wanted to be all-state for Granite." It was his "first real disappointment in life," "a very difficult time." Neal still winces when recalling that a friend whom he had earlier helped teach to play basketball did make the team and enjoyed great success. In junior high, he had also told his friend Lynn Cahoon that Lynn would surely be an all-stater in football some day, a goal he did reach.

Meanwhile, however, Neal found another source of unique and real achievement although eventually, and ironically, even this area of his success would become a source of social stigma. But while it lasted, he had some happy days with his purebred Duroc pigs.

The hog project began in rural East Millcreek in 1937, when Neal was eleven. LeRoy W. Hillam, who later became Neal's Granite High agriculture teacher and "one of the finest friends of my life," invited him into a 4-H project that started with a purebred gilt named Lady Era, 1st. Five years later, in a formal report called "My 4H Club Experiences and My 4H Project Achievements," Neal wrote that until meeting Mr. Hillam, he was kind of "a 'city slicker' . . . unappreciative of what farmers and other men like them do for us each year. . . . In fact I now wish to be a veterinarian." He thought he might someday attend vet school at Colorado State, although Lois later said Neal would have been "outstanding in education, politics, almost any field but veterinary medicine."

In his first pig shows, Neal showed mostly his inexperience. Lady Era didn't do well at the county fair competition, and he soon saw that "there is pigs and there is PIGS." So "back home she went and I fed her better." Then, under Mr. Hillam's seasoned tutelage, Neal gradually mastered the process of breeding, judging the quality of his own stock, and keeping the "best animals for herd improvement."

He also learned to be resourceful about finding low-cost pig feed. He would buy dozens of three-day-old loaves of bread from bakeries for a penny a loaf. And, if he came by at the right moments, a local dairy would often give him seventy gallons of waste skim milk at no cost. The general public had not yet discovered the dietary place of non-fat milk. Having that favorite pioneer dish of bread and milk put his pigs at troughs of luxury.

Within a year, Neal won first prize awards in the county fair. Then he bred his only sow to a sire that "netted thirteen dandies" in a litter. This breeding was so successful that he tried the same match again, producing "one of the greatest sows I have ever owned, Red Riding Hood," eventually a fine producer herself and a great show animal. "Mr. Evans of the Duroc Association says she is a marvel."

The rest of Neal's pig project report reads like something from the sports pages, describing the thrill of finally meeting some of "the 'big boys' of the show ring" in the Utah State Fair. By 1940, when he was thirteen, he slept near his beloved Red the night before some shows. Then, with Red in contention for state champion, the chief judge saw her "with an experienced eye," asking how many pigs she had produced and raised. Since female pigs were judged for both their appearance and their litter production, Neal knew the implications of his answer. At that early stage in Red's career, he could only breathe deeply and reply, "None, sir."

Speaking in "his true English accent," the judge said, "Well, laddie, your being honest has cost you the Grand Championship, but nevertheless she's a beautiful animal." He did win first prize for showmanship that year, gaining "prestige enough . . . to be asked by the large outsiders to show their pigs for them." From this he learned that "it pays to tell the truth even though it hurts."

Among his other 4-H adventures, Neal once hauled some pigs to the Ogden livestock show in a friend's station wagon. He also became a stock judge himself. County Agent Marden Broadbent wrote that he was "one of the competent stock judges from his study and interest." Moreover, Neal "kept the other boys encouraged and even sold them [some of his own pigs] at a losing price to keep them coming along." In recommending Neal for a scholarship, Mr. Broadbent said, "You may depend upon him for anything he commits himself to accomplish. . . . He will uphold the standards of the trust vested in him."

The next year, 1941, was "the best year in my 4-H history," despite the "major setback" of losing Lady Era by accidental poisoning. He took eight blue ribbons that year, along with five red ones and "a lonely white ribbon." His total prize money for the year was $116, and, he wrote, "that 'ain't hay.'" By 1942, pork prices rose because "more pork went into Johnny Doughboy's stomach," and Neal won a war bond "for contributing the 'most' for victory in the animal line." He also gave two radio talks "to encourage 4-H boys to do more for American victory" in the war. Finally, he was selected as Utah's most outstanding 4-H club member in livestock, which won him a trip to Chicago in 1942 by then his most distant trip away from home. 2002
