Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Eleven

Adolescent Disappointments and Directions

Neal was now sixteen, and he was beginning to encounter the social downside of being an expert on pigs. Always in the background was the wound he would long feel about not making that high school basketball team. He felt as if he'd been cut off from an anticipated inheritance of sporting success, like some kind of athletic prodigal son. And "being at home feeding the pigs was not like working out with the varsity." Then came the day of infamy for his perceived social status. Emma called Granite Junior High, trying to find him because some of his animals had escaped their pens. The principal came to his class to announce that Neal Maxwell was urgently needed to rush home and round up his straying pigs.

Not long afterward, Neal attended a party at a classmate's home. When the refreshments were served, someone asked him with a laugh, "Why don't you eat your ice cream the way your pigs do?" Neal felt a sting from that thoughtless remark. The world of middle adolescence is difficult enough for anyone trying to live through it. As humorist Richard Armour is reported to have said, "Adolescence is a disease." A young person's hunger for peer approval and social acceptance often balloons out of all proportion to reality. And Neal's self-perception created a world of hurt pig ridicule and basketball failure.

As if that weren't enough, his skin also broke out in a severe and unsightly case of acne. In the early 1940's, medical science hadn't yet discovered the wonders that would later be wrought by antibiotics and other treatments for one's complexion. Some teenagers during that era, if they could afford it, would go to a dermatologist to have their faces scraped with a scalpel and other instruments. This could sometimes relieve the infections and reduce the danger of permanent scars associated with a very visible disorder that sometimes fully covered both cheeks and much of the neck. Neal felt some emotional rejection during this time, and his pock-marked scars are still visible, permanent reminders of a condition that evoked a variety of reactions in a high school crowd, most of them unspoken and almost all of them negative.

It would have been natural for him to compensate by trying hard to establish his worth in other ways, seeking acceptance in the fickle world of adolescent popularity and peer acceptance. Whatever else it did, the acne probably reduced the inclinations he might have had toward pride and vanity. Sometimes the school of discipleship requires a high tuition, including the way teenagers measure emotional costs.

Very gradually, Neal's innate reserves of self-worth, instilled from the peaceful and spiritual security he had known as a child at home, gave him the perspective to sense that he would survive this temporary trauma. Beyond that, he would later realize that his experience gave him empathy for all those who feel excluded, rejected, put down, misunderstood, and left out whatever the reason. And he would find that nearly everyone has had some reason to know something of those feelings. For instance, Neal once urged a group of Church leaders to avoid harsh attitudes toward returning prodigals who have strayed and returned. He encouraged them not to worry about the fragrance some prodigals carry as they return from eating with the swine.

Years later, after he had come to know Neal by conducting two long TV interviews with him, Hugh Hewitt said that when he learned about these hard days in Neal's adolescence, when "he wasn't gifted with a great head start," then he understood the source of Neal's "enormous sensitivity to people," which included the PBS camera crew.

Introducing him once at BYU, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland said that in the compassion he found in Elder Maxwell's speaking and writing, "I seem to hear the echoed accents of a boy who has known the anxiety of a severe case of acne; what scarred the skin seems to have softened the heart. I hear as well empathy, born of ridicule cast at a late-developing boy living on the wrong side of town a keeper of pigs, prize-winning 4-H pigs though they were." Against this background of his youth, "The discipline of his prose recalls to me the even more remarkable discipline of his character."

Perhaps connected in some way to this season of character growth, the discipline of Neal's prose actually found some unexpected roots during these same years. Preoccupied with his disappointments, Neal was coasting through his classes, earning only average grades. He never felt confident in math and science. He enjoyed history, and English was always easy for him, because he felt at home with the written word. Then one day his English teacher, Mary Mason, gave him some shock therapy that would change the course of his life.

Neal had just handed in an essay in Miss Mason's class. He was well read for his age and natively verbal enough that he could dash off an easy writing assignment and do well enough. But Mary Mason had other ideas. She could have given him a B or C and let it go at that. Yet she saw a real talent going to waste and wanted to motivate him. So Mary gave Neal his grade a D. He was shocked and hurt, protesting that he didn't deserve a grade like that. Looking at him intently from her dark brown eyes, Miss Mason said, "Neal, you're capable of doing A work."

Once his irritation subsided, Neal decided to respond to his teacher's intervention, feeling a duty to do more with whatever capacity he might have. He took greater interest in his writing assignments, even coming alive to the exercise of diagramming sentences and understanding grammar. Soon he took a job as coeditor of the school paper, although he remarked that his fellow student "Carolyn Fagg did most of the work." Neal stayed close enough to Mary Mason to give her a blessing years later when she was dying of cancer, and then he spoke at her funeral.

Before long, Neal had begun an adventure with the world of words that would ultimately last a lifetime. He also found increased acceptance among his friends as he became the leader of his speech class in addition to leading the agriculture club. He even found a direct link between his 4-H interests and the world of politics and words, when the West Jordan Farm Bureau group invited him to give a speech. Representing other 4-H students, Neal gave "quite a speech on the political potential of the Farm Bureau" to the largely adult audience. He was afterward amazed at his temerity but realized he was becoming fascinated by his first glimpse at using the spoken word to help "connect groups with political power."

Neal eventually came to see, in retrospect, that the path of his discipleship had been taking a needed, if uncomfortable, turn. "The Lord was nudging me away from basketball maybe the acne gave me greater empathy for people. . . . He was doing things with me that I wasn't conscious of." 2002
