Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Thirteen

Okinawa

After leaving Hawaii, Neal's huge military ship steamed and tossed through endless miles of dark blue waves past the Marshall Islands and into the Mariana Islands. He was gulping at the vastness of both the Pacific Ocean and the implications of going to war. He wrote to his mother from Saipan: "Have [now] seen dead [people] and wrecked equipment. There are still [enemy troops] in the hills, but don't worry. . . . I know your prayers are with me."

From then on, military policy wouldn't let him share any details about his troop movements. But he could, and did, say: "I wish I'd done so many more things for you folks [in appreciation] for the wonderful life you and Dad have given me. . . . I've only accomplished one thing . . . well, and that was the fence. Maybe [even] that's fallen down [by now]. . . . Ten sons couldn't love you parents more than I do." He needed the reassurance of that love now as never before. The next stop was Okinawa.

It was May of 1945, and the tectonic plates that had grounded Neal Maxwell's world were beginning to shift drastically. He learned upon arriving in Okinawa that President Franklin D. Roosevelt had just died. He soon learned also of President Heber J. Grant's death. Those two men had been tall trees in the foreground that had framed his view through most of his life. But new views were appearing all around him. As the troop ship pulled into Okinawa harbor, Neal could see "the artillery blazing on the island." A "dull sickening sensation" began to fill him as reality struck. "This was real war and it was far less glamorous up close." Until now, "it had been kind of a game."

What Neal didn't know fortunately, for the sake of his peace of mind was that the Japanese had developed a grisly strategy for the Battle of Okinawa. Their backs were against the wall, and Okinawa had become their last hope. If the Yanks prevailed here, nothing would stop them from attacking the Japanese homeland something the Japanese military had vowed could not, must not, ever happen.

Consider briefly the larger military context. The Japanese had bombed Pearl Harbor to establish their command of the South Pacific. Both the United States and Britain immediately declared war against Japan, but the Japanese knew the Allies would be preoccupied and they were with the war in Europe. By early 1942, the Japanese had moved almost at will through Thailand, Burma, and the British Malay Peninsula. Soon they took the Philippines, a territory of the United States. The Allies, strung out across the entire globe, tried to respond, but, embarrassingly, they failed to hold onto even their most secure positions in Hong Kong and Singapore.

In a crucial turning point, the Allies finally stopped the Japanese eastward expansion in the Battle of the Coral Sea off the Australian coast in 1942. Then they stopped the Japanese westward expansion in Sri Lanka and began the arduous work of retaking everything the Japanese had seized. By 1944, Japan was gradually losing its control of the sea, which threatened its key geographic advantage that Japan itself was out of range from Allied air bases in the Pacific.

When General Douglas MacArthur won back control of the Philippines in October 1944, Japan was suddenly on the defensive. Germany was losing momentum in Europe, which allowed the Allies to shift more resources to the Pacific. The Allies undertook an island-hopping strategy, launching air and naval attacks on islands throughout the trackless Pacific, wherever the Japanese had established control. Island hopping was ugly in its human and other costs, but it was effective. United States warships would pound an island with artillery shells, and then troops would wade ashore under the cover of continued artillery barrages. Once ashore, these soldiers would take on the waiting Japanese with more artillery, mortar fire, machine guns, and finally the hand-to-hand combat that made the work of the infantry even worse than Emma Maxwell feared it would be.

Using this technique, the Americans kept on the move, eventually winning control of the Marianas with the fall of Saipan. This news stunned the Japanese people, who had believed the propaganda that their troops were winning the war. General Hideki Tojo and his cabinet resigned. Their successors saw clearly that unless they could hold off the advancing Yanks on Iwo Jima and Okinawa, Japan itself would be next. For the Americans, taking those two islands would provide staging areas from which they could cut off crucial Japanese fuel supply routes and put Japan within reach of B-29 bombers.

When Iwo Jima fell, some Japanese leaders argued that it was time to negotiate a peace settlement. But another view prevailed throw everything they had at the Americans in one last, lunging effort to shift the momentum. Okinawa thus became a deadly "Tennozan" "a site where a sixteenth century Japanese ruler staked his entire fate on a single battle." Defending this island was now "the key to whether Japan would survive as an independent nation."

So it was that General Ushijima planned a "monster ambush" on Okinawa, allowing "the Americans to come ashore unopposed so that they would stroll unwarily into the trap" of an island "filled with riflemen . . . artillery, batteries of mortars, and light tanks." Then Ushijima would unleash a barrage of kamikaze suicide bombers on U.S. ships and troops, smashing them "so shatteringly" that the Japanese could then "take the offensive and destroy them." Ironically, as it turned out, the fierceness of Japan's defense of Okinawa became a major factor in President Harry Truman's decision to use nuclear weapons on Japanese cities to end the war.

By the time Neal joined the Seventy-Seventh Division, the Battle of Okinawa was underway. He was one of the replacements sent to maintain United States momentum. On his first night there, a big kamikaze battle lit up the entire harbor. Amid those fireworks, Neal received the somber news that his group would be going up to the "line" the next morning. Within a few days, he would receive news that produced a very different emotion Germany had surrendered, ending the European conflict.

He found that the next day was "a poignant morning as the eight or so of us who had come all that way together were finally broken up into different units, realizing we might never see each other again." In a fateful choice, as Neal waited for instructions, a soldier named Sisk asked him and his friend Paul "Joe" Montrone, a Catholic from Salt Lake City (who has since died of leukemia), if they wanted to be in a mortar squad. They didn't understand what they were deciding but said yes. Later they learned that, in their case, firing mortar was safer than being regular riflemen. Their buddies whose last names began with "M" went into a platoon that attacked Hill 140 (Flat Top). Few survived.

Neal's overall odds were hardly reassuring. To begin with, of the eleven million uniformed Americans in 1945 (some 7 percent of the U.S. population), only about 5 percent served in the infantry, and of those, 60 percent would actually fight on the front lines. That computes to roughly a 3 percent chance that anyone who had enlisted or was drafted would actually go into battle as an infantryman those placed in "mortal contact with the enemy."

On May 13, Neal wrote his family:

I've been assigned to the famed 77th Division. . . . They're killers, out of necessity, but fine fellows. I'm proud to be one of them. . . . Seen a lot of terrible things lately, but the worst is ahead. Met some fine LDS fellows on the last boat, had planned services, but were rudely interrupted by an air raid. . . . I'm all alone as far as spiritual companions are concerned, except for One. I know he is always with me. I feel your prayers for me in my heart. . . . I'm so glad [the war is] over in Europe, we need help here . . . It's rough here, but not too much for us to bear.

As he waded into this, his first experience in combat, Neal from his vantage point couldn't have realized the "vicious sprawling struggle" that raged around him. "Never before . . . had so much American blood been shed in so short a time in so small an area. . . . Okinawa was the largest combined operation [ever] fought on, under and over the sea and land." As horrible as were the later nuclear attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, when "measured by sheer suffering . . . the battle of Okinawa was a greater tragedy."

About four hundred miles from Japan, Okinawa is a small island sixty miles long and eighteen miles across at its widest point with a normal population of 500,000. But for this battle, more than one million people were locked together there in a death struggle, and about a fourth of them would die Okinawan, Japanese, and American.

At Neal Maxwell's spot in the center of the island, his division had been assigned to take out the entrenched Japanese positions on a complex of hills Chocolate Drop, Wart Hill, and Flat Top. This forbidding area "bristled with mortars and interlocking machine-guns and 47mm antitank guns. . . . Casualties were frightful." Only about 800 of 2,400 men from the 306th Regiment one-third who had begun the battle in this location were left to be formed into a single battalion. A similar fate awaited the 307th Regiment Neal's unit as they faced these hills.

Neal felt like one of the youngest, greenest soldiers there. He wrote home that the soldiers "could barely put our feet together and do what we were supposed to be doing." He already knew the names of some casualties. He heard soon after they arrived that Ernie Pyle, World War II's most celebrated American correspondent and a hero to U.S. troops, had just been killed on a nearby island by a hidden machine gun. But the casualty stories and statistics didn't wait for the young, new soldiers to mature before becoming abruptly personal.

The first American Neal saw killed was a big man from his company named Partridge. As their group walked single file toward Flat Top, a shell exploded nearby. They hit the dirt. When they got up, someone said to Partridge, "Come on, get up, let's get going." But Partridge had caught a big piece of shrapnel, and he was dead. Neal was so shocked that "for five or six hours I was in a daze. I was only 18 and very frightened. Then as we saw more and more [of the] battle, the worse it got." Later, as they approached Flat Top, Neal saw Japanese corpses all around him. Then he looked up to see a buddy named Claude Phillips squirting a flamethrower. Suddenly Phillips took a fatal shot himself and rolled down the hill.

May 19 marked two commemorations: the worst night in combat, and the one-year anniversary of Neal's graduation from high school. By then, the savage battle had already "rendered the entire landscape bare of almost any vegetation." Then, beginning on May 21, heavy rains "turned the battlefield into a quagmire. Even tanks and amphibious tractors could not move to support the infantry. . . . Disease swept through the [U.S.] ranks. . . . The American drive literally bogged down in the center. . . . All the troops were exhausted."

The living conditions were deplorable. The mud was so bad that "sometimes you slept standing up in it." Even "tanks disappeared in lakes of ooze." The soldiers "struggled with the weight" of heavy packs and ammunition. Dysentery "plagued nearly everyone to some degree." Sleeping was a "near impossibility." Their foxholes were "filled with mud and water." They "ate wretchedly. . . . All had almost constant thirst, and worried about supplies of water only less than of ammunition. Brought up in five-gallon tanks, the water always tasted of oil." When the men "were lucky enough to be pulled off the front line for rest . . . hot coffee often waited." One soldier "craved coffee . . . despite his dead appetite," because of the unrelenting thirst and because the coffee, having been boiled, was at least edible. It was "an existence not conveyable by words or film." To be surrounded by the trauma of combat amidst such field conditions left some who survived it unable to talk about it for forty years.

This scene gives a poignant, sacrificial quality to Neal's modest comment in a letter to his parents during this time about his mood and about trying to keep the Word of Wisdom:

Had a dream the other night. You folks were holding Carol up to a window and I was saying Boo to her, and she laughed just as she does. Boy, if that didn't make me blue. . . . It's rough here. . . . It will be wonderful to bathe again. Still not smoking, drinking tea or coffee, nothing great but the coffee is tempting some times.

To a boy struggling through an exhausting battle with constant thirst and only foul water to drink, boiled coffee offered more than its usual temptation. Drinkable water was so scarce that Neal had to use rainwater and a biscuit from his can of rations for the sacrament he prepared and blessed in his foxhole each Sunday. Sometimes he obtained water by making good trades. More than thirty years after the war, he received a letter from a Latter-day Saint woman whose husband, Chris Seil, not a Latter-day Saint, had been on Okinawa with Neal. After hearing about this boy for decades, Sister Seil finally learned that his name was Maxwell, so she wrote to Neal. Her husband clearly remembered a "Mormon boy who really lived his religion." He "gave Chris all of his beer, coffee and cigarette rations in exchange for [his] water."

Neal never would drink the coffee. He sensed that a core principle was at stake, not merely the color of what he drank. On June 8, when he had been pulled back from the front lines for a brief respite, he wrote home, "Still haven't drunk any coffee, more proud now 'cause it meant considerable suffering, but always something comes along and I'd have a substitute. I have a little testimony right there. . . . I pray God will continue His wonderful help in these small but important things."

Years later, Neal would say that his wartime experience tested and transformed him in many ways. Especially important was how the war helped the seeds of testimony that had been sown in his youth begin to sprout, sending up recognizable little green shoots from the soil of his heart. He would quote C. S. Lewis to explain why:

You never know how much you really believe anything until its truth . . . becomes a matter of life and death to you. It is easy to say you believe a rope to be strong and sound as long as you are merely using it to cord a box. But suppose you had to hang by that rope over a precipice. Wouldn't you then first discover how much you really trusted it?

The battle also damaged Neal's hearing. His father, Clarence, had trouble with his hearing for years, and Neal may have inherited some of that. But being too close to U.S. Marine artillery one night on Okinawa probably caused further damage to his hearing in at least one ear, which became more noticeable as the years went by.

During the middle of the battle for Okinawa, Neal had the most transforming experience of all. He was part of a mortar squad that fired at Japanese positions hidden in the hills. His own mortar position created an obvious invitation for the enemy to locate and eliminate his firing capacity and him. They needed only to direct their own artillery and mortar fire at the place where Neal's squad sent up its shells. By identifying his position and comparing where their shells hit, they could direct their fire closer and closer until they had done their deadly job.

One night in late May, the shrieking noise of artillery fire caught Neal's attention with a frightening realization. Three shells in a row had exploded in a sequence that sent a dreadful message the enemy had completely triangulated his mortar position, and the next series of shots would hit home. Suddenly a shell exploded no more than five feet away from him. Terribly shaken, Neal jumped from his foxhole and moved down a little knoll seeking protection, and then, uncertain what to do, he crawled back to the foxhole. There he knelt, trembling, and spoke the deepest prayer he had ever uttered, pleading for protection and dedicating the rest of his life to the Lord's service.

Neal later called this "one of those selfish, honest prayers" that many people offer in times of great stress. He didn't feel entitled to anything in particular, and he knew many of his combat buddies prayed that night as fervently as he did. Yet he did have very personal reasons for looking to heaven for protection. He was carrying in his pocket a smudged carbon copy of the patriarchal blessing he had received before leaving home. He had read the blessing frequently enough to know this part especially well:

I bless you that as the agencies of destruction are manifest . . . you may be preserved in body and in mind and your intellect be quickened by the spirit of truth . . . that you may rejoice in the power, the love and the mercies of the Redeemer. I seal you up against the power of the destroyer that your life may not be shortened and that you may not be deprived of fulfilling every assignment that was given unto you in the pre-existent state.

After the prayer, Neal turned his attention again to watching the night sky, which was earlier ablaze with flashing, fiery noises. His body spontaneously tensed up as he waited, searching the darkness for sounds and clues. But no more shells came near him.

Later he wrote:

After that triangulation occurred, the shelling stopped at the very time they were [about] to finish what they had been trying to do for days. I am sure the Lord answered my prayers. . . . The following night they began to pour [more] shells in [on our position], but almost all of them were duds either the ammunition had gotten wet or they were not exploding in the very thick, oozing mud. . . . I felt preserved, and unworthily so, but have tried to be somewhat faithful to that promise that was given at the time.

He would occasionally talk about those two nights in the years that followed, never offering more details about the experience but usually adding something like, "I foolishly thought at the time that I could pay the Lord back, and now, of course, I'm in greater debt to Him than ever."

Over the next few weeks, Neal wrote several short letters home, some of them scrawled on postcard size military "V-mail" notes designed for the haste of combat conditions. He was not ready at first to share what had happened. Perhaps he didn't want to worry his family, and army policy limited what he could say. Beyond that, the experience had been almost too personal to describe in writing. Its meaning went far beyond what mere words could explain.

At the same time, Neal had discovered a sublime kind of spiritual knowledge and without self-consciousness showed in his letters how the influence of that knowledge was already distilling quietly on his soul. Without much explanation, he began sending some of each military salary check with his letters to be saved for his mission. He also offered a few restrained hints about the barely tolerable conditions that surrounded him. Both the frequency and the content of the letters illustrate how close Neal felt to his family:

May [no date]: My thoughts are constantly of home. I think today is Mother's Day. Many happy wishes, Mom. . . . I'm writing on a can of mortar ammo, it's kinda bumpy. . . . Please don't worry. I'll be OK. I'm in good Hands.

May 24: I had a ration biscuit and rainwater for my sacrament. That proves it's not the ingredients, but the Spirit. It was wonderful. Mud is terrible here, . . . my mind is home always. Many things have so strengthened my faith that I can hardly wait to go on a mission.

May 28: I have a beard 1/2 to 3/4'' long, unusual for me. . . . I get lonely for an LDS [friend]. Perhaps after the campaign I can get together. I pray constantly . . . to be worthy of my parents, [the] church, and the wonderful chances [I've had]. . . . I know I shall return.

May 30: Dearest Mom and Dad, Oh my loved ones, I'm so lonely for you, sometimes I feel like crying. . . . All I have to do is be worthy of my patriarchal blessing, your prayers, and my religion. But time and so much action hang heavy on a man's soul. Today is Sunday. I have to make it a point to know [the day] so I can bless my sacrament. Otherwise it's just another day. . . . When I get home I'll probably cry the first week, but never fear, there is no diversion strong enough to draw me from my home.

June 1: [After being on the front lines] I'm terribly tired. . . . We've seen some tough action but . . . will have to wait [to explain]. I can say only God prevented my death at times. My prayers are just as ardent as they were up at the lines. I have a testimony no one can crumble.

June 4: We're having rain, rain, and now typhoons. . . . We're supposed [to see the movie] "Gone With the Wind" tonite and [we] may be [gone with the wind], too, as we're expecting a typhoon. . . . Reading my Book of Mormon and . . . praying in secret [daily].

June 8: [Since a recent promotion, I earn] $74.80 a month now and you are to get all but $10 so I should have a little nest anyway. Use it if you need it, money is less significant to me than it ever was. . . . The testimony I have concerning my Patriarchal Blessing concerning wars pass[ing] over me is very strong.

June 10: Momentary relief [the break from the front lines] is usually the first opportunity . . . to forget God, but this is one little boy that will never forget what He did for me while in action. . . . Combat has stamped itself indelibly on my mind, but I'm not one of those psychos yet. . . . I laughed for the first time for a long time yesterday. I've smiled before then but never laughed. Relaxation does strange things after long tension.

June 12: After seeing some of the deeds my buddies performed in making the Supreme Sacrifice, I have a strong desire to destroy this thing [war] that causes such grief. I can't say I hate any race because they are God's children. I can plainly see the only way to avoid future wars is by missionary work and that's an opportunity I want more than ever. . . . I [have] placed myself completely in [God's] trust many times, and cryed I felt so good, no tears but it's so easy to cry inside, especially with joy.

After another several weeks, when he was in the Philippines, Neal could write more freely, because he was outside the sensitive combat zone:

August 5: I miss our L.D.S. They are my people. I pray to God I can someday labor in return for all [the] prayers I've had answered. Where would you like me to go on a mission? I've had two great prayers answered in my life. One at Carol's stricken time, and another one night on Okinawa. . . . I shall never forget God's aid in those cases.

September 5: We caught hell on Flat Top. [After one] week, [from a total of 157 men] there were 58 of us left. Many times I'd write a v-mail letter and hafta stop cause the artillery would pin us down. . . . What a horrible feeling, when you're under sniper fire. I could hear them crack over my head but You Know Who was always with me. I owe Him so much. All the maggot eaten [bodies] within a few yards of my hole. . . . What a mess.

Finally, almost a year after the Okinawa ordeal, he gave his family the most explicit description:

May 2, 1946: About eleven months and twenty days ago I knelt in a foxhole and asked for the seemingly impossible, that the shelling that had just [driven] me from my foxhole would cease. The last round was zeroed in. There was no reason in the world for them to stop now, but they did. No one can tell me it was a coincidence.

Decades after the war, Neal learned from his aunt Arlene what Emma had told her during May of 1945. Emma said that one evening (we don't know the exact date), she and Clarence had knelt by their bed to pray, as they did together each night, for Neal and his sisters. As they got into bed, Emma said, "Clarence, we must get up and pray again. Neal is in grave danger." They knelt and prayed once more, believing the Lord would extend special protection. When he first heard this story in 1996, Neal simply said he did not doubt his mother knew it.

In 1973, he returned to the spot where his foxhole had been located, "which, for me, is a sacred spot. Sugar cane has since covered the little plateau, but not my poignant memories." As a reminder, he still keeps in his office a framed photograph of Flat Top Hill, with a piece of sugar cane attached. Only a few ridges away stands a relatively new LDS chapel. He taught the gospel at the Okinawa stake conference on a subsequent visit.

He would always feel that he is "still trying to keep that commitment to serve Him all of my days." That night Neal had clearly "sensed that the Lord had some things for me to do." He couldn't have begun to say what that meant, for his heart was telling him things his mind did not yet know. "With this blessing and pledge, I was nudged toward discipleship without realizing what service would be required. I had been blessed, and I knew that God knew that I knew." This event thus set in motion the steps leading toward his mission, his temple marriage, and all that would yet follow.

One of the survivors of the Martin and Willie handcart tragedy once said something hard to grasp, unless one has stood in shoes like his: "We became acquainted with [God] in our extremities, . . . [and] the price we paid to [know Him] was a privilege to pay." That was Neal Maxwell's feeling about what happened on Okinawa and what has happened through his experience with leukemia. He has described both traumas as "a great spiritual adventure, one I would not want to have missed" because here, at the peril of his life, he came to know God.

If he had waited to be drafted, he might "never have seen any action" in the war. He might have escaped being stretched to his extremities but he would also have missed the heights that a disciple can discover in his depths.
