Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Fourteen

Learning and Leadership in Wartime

Learning in wartime is the subject of an essay by C. S. Lewis about British education during the war. The phrase also describes the remainder of Neal's military experience. He was on a steep learning curve not only about spiritual discoveries, patriotism, and the horrors of war but also about a new world of experience through his relationships with his fellow soldiers. He had sailed into the Pacific as a green, frightened teenager who didn't know how to buckle his leggings, and he returned two years later having discovered a major new theme that would fascinate and engage him from then on leadership.

Soon after his first days in battle, Neal's writing skills "primitive though they may have been" took him into military administration. When his commanding officers discovered his natural talent, one request multiplied into several. Soon Neal was spending much of his time with two main writing tasks letters of comfort and honor to the families of men who lost their lives in the war, and stories for hometown newspapers about their local soldiers.

In late June 1945, Neal wrote his family that "the memory of black days [on Okinawa] sorta hung over a guy, especially when you write letters of condolence to the bereaved ones of your buddies. . . . While it's an honor it's a task a man doesn't relish." Yet "drafting those letters furnished lessons in compassion for the young soldier." Mary Mason, Neal's high school English teacher, would have been pleased to see him at work partly because he could see that writing skill had real value and partly because he now realized he needed more education to develop and inform his talent.

Once Okinawa was declared secure by the Allies, his division headed for the Philippines, preparing to invade Japan. Then Neal, and the world, learned on August 6 about the fateful events in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which brought a swift end to the war on August 14. Neal's innocent reaction showed his limited perspective on the significance of the atomic bomb. Just before the bombing, he had written his family, "Hear much about this new bomb? It may do the trick."

Neal considers his first reaction to the bomb a self-centered one joy that the war might be over, that they wouldn't need to invade Japan, and he would soon be going home. There was no philosophical debate among his fellow soldiers about the merit of dropping the bomb they simply lacked perspective about the implications of its awesome power.

Neal also remembers being puzzled by the prediction of a fellow soldier from New York who warned that Russia would now become America's primary enemy, not the Japanese. He couldn't see the other soldier's point, because Russia and the United States had been allies in the war. Then he began to see the difference between particular wars and longer-term political developments.

After Japan's surrender, Neal's outfit was shipped to Japan as part of the army of occupation. He spent a year there in Sapporo, Hokkaido, and then in northern Honshu. Neal expected they would be welcomed in Japan as conquering heroes, but he soon found the realities of occupation not all that glorious. He felt intuitive empathy for the Japanese people. He still remembers a painful and all too typical moment in Hokkaido, watching Japanese children and a few adults crowd around U.S. Army garbage cans to scoop out whatever they could find. That scene, and many others like it, wrenched him with the reality of how little the Japanese had and what the war had cost them in personal ways. He knew that, heavy as the American casualties had been on Okinawa, the Japanese had lost far more. Years later, Elder Monte Brough would hear Neal speak to the Japanese Latter-day Saints there, asking the Lord to bless the descendants of those who lost their lives in that awful battle.

It was thus especially tender for Elder Maxwell in the 1980s to meet a stake president named Kensei Nagamine in Okinawa. President Nagamine had been an eight-year-old boy during the battle. His mother had rushed him to safety during the American strafing. He had not heard of the Church then, but he would later be president of the Tokyo Temple. When Neal first met President Nagamine, he hugged him good-bye at the airport but longed to stay closer to him. On a later visit, Neal called on him in a church meeting to express his feelings about the war, which fully matched Neal's own. By then many of President Nagamine's family had served LDS missions.

After arriving in Japan, Neal was moved up the ranks of enlisted men until he was appointed first sergeant in a large company. When the company commander was looking for a new leader, he wondered aloud to Neal's boss about possible people. With Neal working within earshot on clerical duties, the commander said, "How about Maxwell? He could do it." The first sergeant replied, "Maxwell? He's only nineteen." That didn't stop a later commander, who saw enough of Neal's capacity to make the promotion to the young soldier's complete surprise. His demonstrated skill with paper and administrative work had now placed Neal in a leadership role, but he felt utterly unprepared for it.

Even in the early stages of his leadership experience, he worked with a friendly, unified group whose support helped compensate for his trying sense of inadequacy: "I sure have some nice fellows working for me in the Intelligence Section," he wrote home, "all of them fathers and older men who really treat me swell. Seems funny to be Sarge to older men. . . . [But] the experience is invaluable."

He was gaining in both experience and confidence, which he would need in his next assignment more than he could yet foresee. As he wrote his family in two letters:

I get a little thrill out of setting goals in the Army and making them despite many hard obstacles, hope I can be as successful in civilian life. Course we know the reason I've had some very important gifts or at least guidance in many matters.

I suppose you know the legend on how tough we 1st Sgt. are supposed to be. Well, I have quite a theory on the treatment of G.I.'s to get results. I'll expound it one of these days. Believe me it gets results, and operates on the theory that each man can be made to do his best with the use of a little practical psychology. . . . I'm bragging too much today.

Before long, Neal became first sergeant in a big ordnance company of three hundred men, people drawn together from several different units. That diversity of background and the company's swollen size created a situation that was not easy to manage. So Neal, still a teenager, was thrust into the role of primary disciplinarian for an unwieldy group of sometimes grumpy men, most of whom were older than he was and all of whom just wanted to go home. Most of the company's officers were happy to let him worry about discipline among the troops, because they had other interests.

Neal recalls that this situation became "one of the significant tests of my life to win respect and impose discipline on the company where the officers were reluctant" to do much themselves. "I'm in an awkward position," he wrote home. "Here I am issuing orders to sergeants, buddies, etc. It's rather hard . . . for a 19 year old to tell men 32 etc. what to do, and bawl 'em out when they're wrong."

In retrospect, Neal could see that "armies of occupation are not usually happy armies," partly because "soldiers are not apt to appreciate the strategic considerations" at work in postwar circumstances. In addition, it was not his nature to be a stern disciplinarian. But it was clear that he couldn't always wait around for his men to solve their own problems. One soldier got drunk and broke a number of windows, so Neal ordered him to dig a six-by-six foot hole in the ground one day and fill it in the next day all in full view of the other troops.

As Neal stretched and groped for guidance, he found two sources of help that compensated for his total inexperience with leadership. One was that he had been in combat himself, while many in his new company had not. Something about his own experiential battle scars, young as he was, qualified him to be taken seriously by older men who hadn't been there themselves. His other source of comfort was a spiritual one. He frequently found himself seeking a private place to pray for help, both about his general concerns and about specific cases. He wrote his parents, "I still wander out alone often and pray under the star-studded sky. It gives me a feeling that praying amid other atmospheres just can't do."

At times the responsibility seemed too much. In one letter he wrote his family, "Time is heavy here now, nearly fifteen months . . . too long. . . . I can't take this too much longer. . . . I do many things here that require such mature judgment I shiver when I think of the responsibility. Way down underneath I'm just a kid, so homesick and young that he doesn't know what to do."

But with experience, he found not only that his men would accept him but also that if he listened to them carefully, his own ideas about how to solve seemingly impossible problems actually yielded solutions. As he saw this, the field of leadership opened up as an exhilarating opportunity for serving people, helping organizations, and learning about human nature. Here, perhaps, were the beginnings of Neal's future work and thoughts on leadership of all kinds.

His leadership perspective increased his interest in how the army did things even though he was seldom in a position to do much about policies or decisions he didn't like. From those days onward, Neal would worry about institutions that, in effect, shoot themselves unnecessarily in the foot. He was terribly dismayed, for example, by "friendly fire," which he had seen on Okinawa, when a communications mix-up led to an incident of American guns firing on American troops. He was similarly disturbed by U.S. military orders to dump excess jeeps into the ocean when the Japanese people had such a desperate need for vehicles.

Such thoughts provoked his emerging larger interest in military tactics, strategy, and history. Grounded in the sometimes messy realities of his own field experience, he developed a fascination for military history and leadership. In later years, he would often instinctively speak about "tactical concerns" and "strategic implications," as if everyone in his audiences shared his second-nature feel for the difference between the military concepts of strategy and tactics.

As he added his college training and his political experience in Washington, D.C., Neal would begin to devour biographies and other books on Churchill, Truman, MacArthur, Roosevelt, and many other leaders who struggled with the inherent conflicts between military and political interests. This context enriched his own views of history and leadership across the entire spectrum of applications.

Neal's feeling of responsibility for so many men also developed his appreciation for the contributions that some made to the group's well-being. Despite some of his early adjustments to people who had different lifestyle perspectives from his own, Neal couldn't hold back his feelings of gratitude for "the good guys" after serving in combat with them. When he said good-bye to some old timers from his outfit, he wrote home that "it was a privilege to have fought with such fine men. . . . There [are] men ripe for the Gospel who are just as Christian as ourselves but have a great need of the Gospel to guide them."

He later praised the courage of "a rugged sergeant under fire on Okinawa" who "had difficulty complying with formal military requirements." The man was "a steadying influence" for "those like me frightened and wide-eyed with wonder." He learned that "non- conforming individuals can contribute to common causes," if good leaders will help them do that.

The sense of appreciation ran both ways. In April 2000, more than fifty years after his military experience, Neal received a note from Kenneth Buesing in Wisconsin, to whom he'd sent occasional notes over many years. Buesing was a lieutenant in the same company in which Neal was first sergeant. He said he'd been reflecting on his life, now that he had Parkinson's disease, and felt he hadn't thanked Neal enough for his influence in Japan. "You were a good one," he wrote. "You could not only take orders, but you could translate and give orders. You had a good understanding of your subordinates' problems and needs."

And in the 1970s, a former soldier named Harry White was in an Arizona hospital for surgery. He had been in Neal's outfit in Japan. His wife and children were Latter-day Saints by then, but he wasn't. Harry's hospital roommate was a Latter-day Saint named Ivan Bates, who read his Book of Mormon regularly. Noticing the book, Harry told Ivan he had known an LDS man in the war named Neal Maxwell he remembered him as "old Mac" who "was never brash with the men. He always spoke quietly, but with great authority." Ivan Bates passed this comment on to Elder Maxwell, who called Harry White on the phone. Next time he was in Arizona, Neal contacted Harry, stayed in his home, and performed his baptism.

Not all of Neal's experiences with his fellow soldiers left him with happy memories. Watching some of them behave unwisely and sometimes recklessly verified his own moral convictions. It also prompted later teachings about irresponsible pleasure seeking. He remained disappointed, for example, with those who would spend their nights in drunken escapades of unfaithfulness to their companions at home. He could never erase from his memory "the boasting words of army buddies following their night of adultery, which I heard while trying to go back to sleep on an army cot," Neal once told a BYU group. "I saw the shame of . . . those same men in the days and weeks that followed. It seemed to me . . . that the raucousness and the shouting of sin, the Cain-like glorying in it, is also the sound of pain trying to erase itself."

Neal also reflected these feelings when he wrote a story called "The Dilemma of Madame Butterfly and Mary Jones" for a literary magazine during his university student days. He described two American soldiers in Japan, "knights of MacArthur's round table," who objected to the demeaning way Japanese men treated women and then, hypocritically, went off to their own "comfort girls," who were "convenient . . . submissive and unquestioning."

After one episode of hearing his buddies boast of such so-called conquests, Neal wrote home about the links he was seeing between this American behavior and the issue of moral leadership. Clarence had just sent Neal a copy of the Church News, which "had quite an effect on me." Neal compared that vision of "our people . . . in Zion" with the people he'd just seen "swaggering in drunken victory." He continued: "The dire need of humanity is leaders," but "I fear greatly for the United States," unless the nation has morally reliable leaders. "Despite all the planning to insure peace I see it fleeing from the world." He worried about developments in China and Russia and then repeated his concern about Americans who are "still unheeding of God. . . . How many faithful wives will accept untrue husbands after years of separation overseas? . . . I have seen all I need ever see of the world to know my place is in the Priesthood with our people."

At the same time, Neal did like how General Douglas MacArthur performed as leader of the U.S. occupation forces in Japan. The long-term strategic implications of postwar policies intrigued him, but he didn't pretend to understand them yet. He once had his photo taken when he was standing by MacArthur's five-star limousine in Tokyo. Later he would say he thought postwar Japan was probably MacArthur's finest hour.

Another group of soldiers with whom Neal felt an increasing bond of identification were the LDS servicemen. His letters reflect real growth in that bond during his two years away from home. Since arriving in Okinawa he had sorely missed the friends who had accompanied him until they went on to other assignments, and he later formed lifelong friendships with such LDS soldiers as LeRoy Nydegger and Eugene K. England. After seeing the distasteful conduct of some other men, Neal felt special appreciation for the returned missionaries, who were his own "visual aid" to demonstrate "the need to persist in discipleship" amid the widespread temptations of worldliness. His sense of belonging to "[his] people" in the Church was clearly beginning to blossom.

The most memorable sacrament meeting he had yet experienced took place on Okinawa, just after he and others from his division returned from the front lines. When Neal learned that a meeting for all Latter-day Saint servicemen had been called by a chaplain from Idaho named Lyman Berrett, he was genuinely excited about seeing his friends again then he realized that some of them might not have survived the battle. He and the others thus gathered, knowing that the ones who didn't make it to the meeting probably hadn't made it through the battle.

One who didn't make it was Dean Nielson from Delta, Utah, whom Neal had admired for the way he "strove to put on the whole armor of God." "One of the rendezvous to which I look forward," Neal would say later, "is to see my friend again and to thank him" for his example and his friendship. Another person who attended a Latter-day Saint servicemen's meeting that Neal later attended in Japan was a young bomber pilot from Brigham City named Boyd K. Packer. Boyd's group had borrowed a jeep and driven sixty miles to the meeting. Neal and Boyd didn't know each other in those days, but they would one day attend more than a few meetings together.

World War II had changed both the world and Neal Maxwell forever. At the level of political ideals and democratic society, Neal would always retain a passion for the values of freedom, personal responsibility, and civic duty, which he came to cherish by defending them with his life. He would develop his own deep convictions about, and his own ways of teaching people about, the way these values make a free society possible.

Neal was also changed spiritually. For his development as a disciple, the war had been his first rite of passage. Far from parents and Church leaders, he faced both physical and spiritual ordeals. He discovered that his internal strength could be a resource to his country and a force against its enemies. He also felt the brotherhood of his fellow soldiers, which reinforced his understanding that he was defending interests larger than his own.

Beyond this, he found God's reality for himself. Alone in a foxhole, unable to rely on familiar sources of authority and protection, he turned to the Lord. Then he found that he was not just his father's son, or a faithful son of the fathers of his Latter-day Saint community, or a servant to the leaders who represented his country. In an echo of what Nephi, Paul, and other early disciples discovered for themselves, Neal now also knew that he was a son of God, able to access directly a divine perspective on his life.
