Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Volunteering for Immediate induction

Neal Maxwell's experiences in World War II were, in two important ways, defining moments in his early life. One way was how the war shaped his attitudes about politics, power, leadership, and involvement in public causes. The other was a purely spiritual sense. In the war, he came to know divine reality in a way that permanently changed his orientation.

Until the bombing of Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, most Americans thought that Hitler's bold aggression was Europe's problem. Isolationist attitudes had persisted in the United States since the end of World War I. But the Japanese bombs that shattered American ships and lives on that sleepy Sunday morning in Hawaii roused the nation to its feet, angry and ready to fight back.

The next day, some students at Granite High hurled verbal abuse at the few Japanese-American students attending there. Further away, from his English country estate, Winston Churchill telephoned Franklin D. Roosevelt and asked, "'Mr. President, what's this about Japan?' Roosevelt replied, 'It's quite true. They have attacked us at Pearl Harbor. We're all in the same boat now.' Churchill couldn't have been happier." The United States of America was now fully committed to the worldwide war.

From then on, throughout the early 1940s, the war dominated American life. As the national draft and a surge of volunteering took hold, many of Neal's older friends went off to war, and some of them never returned. Thousands of U.S. servicemen were stationed in the Salt Lake Valley for training and military support work at Fort Douglas and the Kearns Army Air Base. Overnight, Utah became a regional center for defense-related industrial production. For instance, Colleen's father, George Hinckley, a chemist at Utah Oil Refinery, was instantly immersed in rearranging his company's facilities to produce aviation fuel.

Every school and 4-H club in the country took up the charge. As part of his club duties in 1942, Neal's personal commitment to "4-H Victory Achievement" produced 180 pounds of scrap metal, thirty-five pounds of rubber, the purchase of war bonds, summer work at a defense plant, and raising more pigs for meat and fewer for breeding in order to supply troops and meet national food priorities. "This coming war year I will increase my efforts to help until victory is achieved," Neal pledged in his "Victory Achievements" report submitted to the state 4-H office.

When Neal graduated from Granite High School in May of 1944, the week's newspaper headlines were all about the war: "Two German Strongholds Fall: Nazis Quit Cassion, Formia," "Allies Make Burma Gains," and "Bad Weather Retards European Air War." It was therefore neither surprising nor unusually heroic for the times when Neal told his parents he wanted to volunteer for service immediately. He was not yet eighteen, but he was "anxious to be involved." "I wanted to go," he said. "I felt it was my duty." Neal's feelings were like those of many others his age, who "had a fairly well developed sense of duty and no sense of entitlement."

Neal marched to the local U. S. Army selective service office and volunteered to go as soon as possible after he turned eighteen in July. He could have waited for the normal draft process to find him, or he could have enlisted for some specialized training program, but he wanted immediate induction. "I didn't want to wait around," he said, reflecting the "let's get on with it" attitude that would repeat itself often through his life. Clarence and Emma, especially Emma, struggled to understand and support him. Emma later said that when Neal told them he felt he had to volunteer, his parents' "hearts were full, but we knew you would not feel right unless you did your part."

It didn't ease Emma's anxiety to discover the service branch to which her son had been assigned the infantry. He would be on battlefields, live in foxholes, and even engage in man-to-man combat. Emma was very troubled. But the infantry suited Neal just fine. He liked direct engagement. There was a world war on, and he wanted to help win it.

Neal completed basic training at Camp Roberts, California. Having been outside Utah only three times before, he now felt homesick and insecure. He was also shocked by the attitudes of some of the men in his outfit, many of whom had little use for the Latter-day Saint lifestyle standards he had largely taken for granted. He also didn't think he cut much of a swath as a swaggering military hero. He was so young that he "didn't even need to shave in between inspections." And when he first wore his military leggings (which preceded combat boots), he put them on wrong, so that "the buckles were on the inside of the leg and therefore would catch on each other when I would walk." He thought he was "a stupid and yet laughable" sight.

No wonder he wrote his parents from Camp Roberts in September that he thought by the time he finished basic training he'd "be a real man." After all, "I've been shooting the M-1 rifle, The World's Best, all week." But he was also seeing his family's values in a new light: "Our home was heaven," he wrote, "and now I realize how swell and grand you and Dad have been. That's sincere." Then, "I owe $5.50 tithing," which he would send for them to take to the bishop.

In January of 1945, Neal was given a seven-day "delay en route," which meant home leave in Salt Lake City before shipping out for the Pacific. This phrase was typical of the army style that would come to irk Neal. The army wouldn't acknowledge to the public that it gave soldiers a real leave or furlough, because the war had made everything appear so urgent. The trip home was labeled a delay, as if somehow unavoidable. From this context, Neal took the phrase he would later use to describe his remission from leukemia as a "delay en route."

He would again feel irked a short time later, when his group stopped in Hawaii for jungle training. The army had a rigid policy against sunburns, because sunburned men couldn't carry field packs. After Neal unwittingly overstayed a visit to Waikiki Beach, he couldn't acknowledge his nasty sunburn to his superiors without facing a court martial. So he carried a full combat pack on a back covered with ugly blisters. It was the army way.

His short stay at home reinforced Emma's fears that her only son was walking into the jaws of hell. When he reached his Pacific departure point near Seattle, she called him to say she knew a colonel there who might have a way for him to fulfill his military duty without having to "go overseas." Neal repeated: "Mom, I want to go overseas." He wondered why she was so upset that he actually wanted to go. He didn't think she understood why he "needed to go." He felt that "we were in a righteous war [and] we needed to win." Perhaps Neal wouldn't understand what Emma was feeling until he had children of his own.

The infantry. A foot soldier, in the most ferocious war in world history. By some accounts, you can't get much lower on the pecking order of humanity. So why would he do that, if Emma really did know a colonel who might have found an honorable alternative? Part of the answer was in Neal Maxwell's fundamental character. His decision to volunteer for immediate induction and stay in the infantry was perhaps the boldest but it wouldn't be the last example of how simply being engaged was and is, for Neal, essential to being alive.

As time went on, he would be the same way as a missionary about engaging both opposition to the Church and inadequate missionary teaching resources. He would be that way about college students engaging secular arguments over religious questions. About universities being engaged in their local communities. About parents engaging the real needs of their children, and leaders engaging the real needs of their people. About Latter-day Saint scholars drawing on gospel principles to engage the secular dilemmas of their day. About the true Church realistically engaging the problems faced in establishing Zion in all the world. About engaging adversity in the lives of afflicted people. And about meekly engaging every duty and hazard that may be required to experience the complete process of becoming a disciple of Jesus.

Some people, with good reasons of their own, prefer isolationist, or at least arm's length, stances on some of these issues. But starting with the war, Neal demonstrated a personal makeup that wanted to be engaged, with a real intent to serve the common good, in every form of "combat." One of his favorite quotations, shared often in talks during his ministry, is from the Duke of Wellington, who, "falling exhausted after the crucial victory at Waterloo, permitted himself a brief moment of immodesty, saying, 'I . . . don't think it would have done if I had not been there.'" And for Neal, having "been there" does not mean in the luxury suite. Whether in wartime or otherwise, the infantry or its equivalent in other realms is just fine. Maybe better.

In addition to this personal inclination, some of Neal's motivation for wanting to serve on the front lines was that he was part of a time, a place, and an entire generation of people who were ready to do what the nation and the world needed in World War II. In a popular 1998 book, Tom Brokaw called this age group "The Greatest Generation" those who "came of age during the Great Depression and the Second World War. . . . This generation was united not only by a common purpose, but also by common values duty, honor, economy, courage, service, love of family and country, and above all, responsibility for oneself." They "went on to create . . . useful lives and the America we have today."

Like Neal, most of them "didn't think what they were doing was that special, [because] everyone else was doing it too." Brokaw's book captivated Neal when he read it, because it "seemed familiar [to] him . . . his generation, their sacrifice, and the great war that conditioned" them, even though he always felt like the least of them, since he was only at the tail end of those who saw action. America's World War II generation possessed extraordinary character, both during and after the war. Much of Brokaw's language about the group in general describes Neal in particular:

They answered the call to help save the world from the two most powerful and ruthless military machines ever assembled. . . . [After the war,] disciplined by their military training and sacrifices . . . they stayed true to their values of personal responsibility, duty, honor, and faith.

[Through the GI Bill] they became part of the greatest investment in higher education that any society ever made. . . . [They brought] to industry, science, art, and public policy . . . the same passions and discipline that had served them so well during the war. . . .

Although they were transformed by their experiences and quietly proud of what they had done, their stories did not come easily. . . .

World War II . . . was the common denominator and the defining experience in the lives of millions of young Americans.

One of them was John F. Kennedy, who "gave voice to his generation" about "the importance of entering the arena beyond the battlefield. In the postwar years, politics was a noble calling and a natural extension of the lives of [those] who had made so many sacrifices and learned so many lessons during the war." Neal came to share that general view of politics.

Another was George Bush (senior), who was shot down during a bombing run against the Japanese. Like so many other veterans, Bush didn't like to talk about the war, but in a candid moment he invoked the key lesson: honor. "His service in the war was 'a duty, yes, but truly an honor.' He also feels strongly it was an obligation of citizenship that requires no additional reward. . . . As he says, 'Serving in World War II, I was a tiny part of something noble."

That too was Neal's attitude. For that reason, he would struggle during the 1960s to understand the cynicism provoked by the Vietnam War, when some disillusioned young people had trouble seeing how war could ever be justified. Being cynical about patriotism would remain unthinkable to Neal, as it did to most others who fought in World War II against a more clearly defined enemy in a more obviously moral struggle than has been the case in some other wars. Neal would later quote John Stuart Mill to a group about the United States Constitution, articulating the personal belief that took root in his personal war experience: "A people may prefer free government; but if . . . they will not fight for it when it is directly attacked . . . they are . . . unfit for liberty."

Commenting on how the war shaped Neal's world view, his friend Bud Scruggs believes that people of more recent generations "have a hard time understanding the notion of good versus evil" and "the importance of actually fighting for what you believe." Totalitarian enemies, such as Hitler, helped "define our virtues." The war was "a remarkable time, when people understood that evil needed to be faced down." The terrorist attacks in New York, Washington, D.C., and Pennsylvania on September 11, 2001, were reminiscent enough of Pearl Harbor to let people gain something of that realization for themselves. In one horrifying morning, the current generation could suddenly understand, and perhaps draw strength from, the instinctive willingness of "the greatest generation" to sacrifice everything to preserve a free society.

Elizabeth Haglund, who worked closely with Neal at the University of Utah and for years afterward, also noticed how the war had affected him, including in the strictly private realm. "He had a severe experience in the war," she said, "and he came back with an intense sense of purpose." She believed "something deeply spiritual happened there, though he didn't talk enough about it for her to know what had actually occurred."
