Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Missionary Days in Canada

Fifteen

Teaching the Gospel

Long before returning from the Pacific, Neal had decided to serve a mission he just wasn't sure when. He wanted to fulfill the serious commitment he'd made on Okinawa. Yet he'd ached with homesickness during the long wait in Japan, and the idea of just being home for a while had great appeal. He was also eager to begin his college education, but even with the GI Bill, that was expensive. He had sent home enough money that a savings account of twenty-four hundred dollars was waiting for him. But that felt to him like mission money.

Soon after arriving home, he kept feeling he "had promises to keep" and that meant a mission, now. He thought his bishop might approach him with a call, but all young men weren't expected to serve missions in those days, and few had been called from the Wandamere Ward since the war ended. His mind made up, Neal grew tired of waiting for the bishop. In an early example of what he would call his "ark-steadying tendencies," he went to the bishop's home. He said he had the money, was worthy to go, and wanted to "get this show on the road." The bishop hesitated and then said he'd been meaning to ask Neal about going.

Years later, Neal would learn from that bishop's ward clerk that the bishop had felt Neal needed more time with his family after having been so far away for a tenth of his life. That's why he hadn't yet asked him about a mission. Hearing this, Neal chastised himself for having been too judgmental and impatient. But by then, his mission was long since completed.

Young Elder Maxwell was called to serve in the Canadian Mission, headquartered in Toronto. As he prepared to leave, he had two important experiences with General Authorities. First, as was customary with many full-time missionaries then, he was ordained a seventy in December 1946 by Elder S. Dilworth Young of the First Council of Seventy. Before ordaining him, Elder Young asked with his endearing, pioneerlike bluntness if Neal was willing to be a missionary all his life.

Thirty years later, when the new First Quorum of the Seventy was reconstituted, Neal was sustained as a member of both the Quorum and its Presidency. The First Council of Seventy had consisted only of seven full-time General Authorities, who had responsibility, among other duties, for the work of the part-time seventies who were scattered throughout the stakes of the Church. One of these seven in 1976 was Elder S. Dilworth Young.

In that historic conference, Neal said he hoped his "little footnote on a page of the [Seventies'] Quorum history" would "read clearly" that he had "[worn] out [his] life in helping to spread Jesus' gospel." Then he affectionately remembered 1946:

Thirty years ago President S. Dilworth Young ordained me a Seventy, but only after extracting a promise that I would preach the gospel the rest of my life. His stern demeanor was such that I felt I'd been asked to jump off a tall building. I went over the side saluting. Now I salute that same selfless, sweet seventy . . . once again.

Neal's second encounter with a General Authority before his mission occurred when Elder Matthew Cowley of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was assigned to set him apart as a full-time missionary. The two had not met before, and they did not discuss Neal's interests before the setting apart. In the blessing, Elder Cowley counseled him quite directly to "avoid political discussions," because he was "going to preach the gospel." This statement struck Neal as pure inspiration, because he had become so interested in political matters during the war that he felt sure he would not have thought of Elder Cowley's well-principled advice had he not heard it so clearly.

As it turned out, he remained fascinated with the 1948 United States presidential election between Harry Truman and Thomas E. Dewey. He occasionally kept up on campaign news during his mission, at times discussing the issues with a companion. After the Republican nominating convention, Neal wrote to Clarence, "I say Dewey on 3rd ballot or Vandenberg on 7th ballot. Either man is OK." But he otherwise tried hard to focus on missionary work not an easy assignment for one with emerging political instincts so strong that they would capture his interest for decades afterward.

Neal arrived in Toronto on February 1, 1947. His mission president was Octave W. Ursenbach from Alberta, who was replaced by Floyed G. Eyre of Ogden in September 1947. Neal joined 143 other full-time missionaries working primarily in Ontario and Quebec. The mission had 1,388 Church members in early 1947 and 1,652 two years later.

Eastern Canada, especially Ontario, had a rich missionary heritage. There Parley P. Pratt had baptized John Taylor, who became the third President of the Church. Parley found Joseph Fielding there as well, along with his two sisters, one of whom, Mary, became the wife of Hyrum Smith and the mother of Joseph F. Smith, sixth President of the Church. Ontario was also the birthplace of Ira Nathaniel Hinckley, grandfather to President Gordon B. Hinckley and great-grandfather to Neal Maxwell's future wife, Colleen Hinckley.

The Canadian Mission had a distinctive postwar flavor. On the positive side, most of young Elder Maxwell's fellow missionaries were war veterans, which created a splendid resource of spiritual maturity: "We were there because we wanted to be, not because we had been pressured into it." This was true of most missionaries the Church sent out in those years the Latter-day Saint version of "the greatest generation." One Australian Church member said they were

veterans with a maturity not simply the result of their extra years but born of their experiences in battle on sea, air and land. Unlike many of their predecessors, their testimonies [were] strong before they [ever began] their missionary service. . . . We who knew them think there has never been another generation of missionaries like them.

The war had strained leadership resources in many smaller Church units, which had unavoidably gone untended by the Church's depleted missionary force. For example, in the city of Orillia, Ontario, Neal's first field of labor, he found "things were in some disarray" among the branch membership. He and his companion could locate only two or three people who would still attend church. Several others not only declined to attend but had taken actions that required the missionaries, in their role in the branch presidency, to terminate their membership.

This less than auspicious beginning provided the basis for Neal's sobering missionary reality check. In later years, his children would occasionally remind him that on his mission he baptized two people and excommunicated four a net loss of two. This comment was included in an article about Elder Maxwell written for publication at the time of his call to the Twelve in 1981. He had thought the comment an appropriate way to reassure current missionaries who struggle, as he had, when they don't fulfill their expectations about convert baptisms. When someone in a prepublication review wondered about including this sentence, the inquiry went back to Elder Maxwell, who smiled and said gently that the reviewer must not have much of a sense of humor. The sentence remained in the text.

When it came to proselyting, Neal plunged in all the way then promptly encountered a number of well-known obstacles to missionary work. Yet his responses both showed and shaped his character, as he took on each barrier as it came bad weather, his own limited gospel knowledge, the resistance of local ministers, and the absence of meaningful teaching resources.

For missionaries working outdoors virtually all the time, Ontario in February could feel a little chilly. In one of his first letters home, Neal wrote: "It gets about 20 below and pull-lenty of snow. . . . I got a frostbitten left ear in Toronto. . . . I bought some ear muffs and fur gloves ($.50 more than the ones I had, but real gloves, nuts to ZCMI)." Years later, he would write to his son, Cory, trying to cheer him up about wintertime tracting in Germany:

My first three weeks in the mission field found us knocking on hundreds of doors without a single invitation to come in. It was in the middle of a Canadian winter and the snow was four feet high. I am not trying to impress you with my nobility, but simply empathizing with you. Frankly, I was glad that it started off rather rough, since everything after that initiation seemed to be an improvement.

Neal's frequent letters to Cory (about 150 during Cory's two-year mission) echoed, in one more way, the influence of his father, Clarence, who maintained a similar stream of correspondence to Neal during both the war and his mission.

Neal's missionary letters to his family continued to reflect his wonder about surviving the harsh winter quite a contrast to the mud and heat of Okinawa. Compared to his letters from the Pacific, he now wrote in clipped phrases and capitalized words that reflected the missionary's ever-hustling pace but kept alive the close, constant conversation with his parents. For instance, he wrote on February 19 with the return address "No'th o' th' Boda'" about other physical plagues besides the snow which he hadn't encountered in the islands:

Everyone from States is plagued with Dandruff to such an extent many Elders are losing hair. I have more than ever before (dandruff). Is there anything I can eat to Bolster My Hair or Remove this dandruff? Shampooing helps for a couple of days. You might ask around if you get a chance. What was the dosage of those calcium pills? I don't think I need them but as a rule the Peoples teeth are Bad here so I'll take them.

Neal's limited gospel knowledge was another barrier to his effective proselyting, but he had more control over this problem than he did the cold winter. Orillia was located in something of a Canadian Bible Belt, which meant that Neal, the war veteran, was about to discover a new version of artillery a frequent barrage of theological riddles and biblical arguments against the Church. From the moment he encountered such questions, instead of being dismayed by his relative ignorance of the scriptures, he was off and running for answers. Like Clarence, Neal instinctively began his searches with the premise that every question had a good answer in the doctrines of the Restoration he just needed to find it.

He began to devour the scriptures like a man just escaped from a starvation cell. His second companion, Stephen Call, remembers that Neal's "reading ability . . . was remarkable fast and with understanding," even though he also talked "so fast it was difficult for some of us to understand him." Neal wrote a steady stream of questions to Clarence, asking along the way for one church book after another. Those books had been there all the time before his mission, but he hadn't been ready for them. Now his need and his love for discovery together created an omnivorous hunger for the intellectual framework of the gospel, which he would erect on the deep footings and foundation of his already secure spiritual knowledge:

Am through with all tracts and Pearl of Great Price, starting Doctrine & Covenants. Lots and lots to learn. . . .

Finished B. H. Roberts, Falling Away. Very good. I can't read enough of this now. I love it. Too cold to tract now. Mostly study classes. . . . It is a great and marvelous work we are doing. Our only fears should be can we do it well enough. . . .

Sorry if I disturbed you about my question on New Jerusalem. I later ran across explanation, so I should be more patient. Your Outline was very good, Dad. Where will the Ten Tribes (lost portion) stay? In Zion or with Judah? I've read both. . . . I too wish you Parents could be with me as we go forth daily, the three of us [my companion], myself, and God.

I could use some [more Church] books, Priesthood and Church Government, Gospel Interpretations [both] by Widtsoe, Restoration of All Things [by] J. Fielding Smith, and Presidents of the Church, dunno who it's by.

Over the ensuing months, Neal embarked on his first attempt at "binge reading" reading several books at a time a pattern his reading still follows. He read whatever he could find from B. H. Roberts, Joseph Fielding Smith, John A. Widtsoe, James E. Talmage, and other Latter-day Saint authors. His interest was in doctrinal literature, not motivational works. He could hardly have been more motivated. As he remembered it later, he was hungry to catch up on things he felt he should have known sooner. Now his reasoned understanding of the gospel was emerging as "a response to real life," and he felt his confidence growing as he filled in doctrinal gaps. This process added to his earlier spiritual witnesses, creating a testimony that came "cumulatively, . . . experientially, . . . rather than in one blinding flash."

Clarence, Neal's librarian for much of this research, was a ready and able tutor. One of Neal's missionary associates, Web Adams, said that Neal told him during their mission that Clarence really was "a student" of the gospel, and he could sense that Neal had "great respect for his father." Web also noticed that Neal was "engaged to the nth degree" in his gospel study and in following the issues of the day not only about religion but trends in society.

Part of what ignited Neal's gospel scholarship was the resistance, and sometimes the hostility, he and his companions encountered from ministers of other churches, who warned their flocks to watch out for the Mormon missionaries. On one occasion, Neal and his companion were invited to a confrontational meeting with a number of ministers who challenged them with numerous scriptural questions. At first Neal could offer little response, but he relished the process of preparing himself to deal responsibly with such issues. The opposition provoked him to action, spurring his own learning.

These theological encounters also awakened Neal's not-always-suppressed competitive streak, which was emboldened by his high confidence in the spiritual roots of his testimony. He felt compelled to respond, to take a stand. As he wrote his family, "Local minister slammed us over radio Sunday with bitter untruths. But he's a rabble-rouser anyway. I love competition. Called on him to 'call him on the carpet' for some of his lies, but he wouldn't see [us]. . . . More about him later. That is why I like it here."

The minister was a Baptist named Guthrie, whose Sunday radio broadcasts had a large audience in and around Orillia. The citizenry took the minister at his word, and the missionaries encountered stiff resistance everywhere for weeks. Many years later, Hugh Hewitt asked Neal what kept him going during this time, which was so frosty in every sense. Neal replied it was because he was "there on the Lord's errand. If I'd been selling widgets, I'd have bagged it after the first day." But soon he caught "the sense of adventure [and] challenge" of trying to respond in a mature way. The combination of his feelings of inadequacy and the strength of the opposition was good for him, "because it helped me to balance advocacy . . . with humility, which I needed to learn. If one has an unbroken string of successes, he misses the chance to learn from . . . disappointment." The indifference of the people also taught him how unusual the message of the Restoration really is. So he worked at not judging people for responding as they did, when they didn't really understand the message.

The other proselyting obstacle Neal faced was a lack of good teaching resources. In the postwar period, the missionaries were left to their own devices, teaching investigators however they thought best for their circumstances. This approach had its merits, as Neal's case attests it developed the missionaries' gospel scholarship and their spiritual self-reliance. The downside was a lack of systematic training, teaching, and criteria to prepare investigators for baptism.

This laissez-faire environment troubled Neal when he noticed that the missionaries "were all fumbling around out there. Everybody must have felt as I did, that there's got to be a better way." One of his companions liked to visit investigators and read a chapter from the Book of Mormon each week to which Neal later responded, "I don't know how many chapters there are in the Book of Mormon, but it would take you forever to join the Church that way." His reactions weren't harsh he just believed they could find more effective missionary methods. It was the same reaction he'd had when he saw so-called friendly fire in the military or he wished for better teaching of the youth in the Wandamere Ward: we can do better than this.

For example, after one of his first attempts at a missionary street meeting, he was convinced this was "the least efficient means of proselyting ever invented." People would make fun of the missionaries as they sang "on a street corner, attracting the town drunk." Then when they would walk by a factory, people standing at upper-story windows would throw things at them. As "rites of intensification" for new missionaries, he thought all of this perhaps served a purpose, but he felt there had to be more effective tools for seriously teaching the gospel.

As time went on, his tolerance for street meetings increased. By July, he wrote the family, "I never thot I'd like Street Meetings, but it is [an] invigorating and edifying experience. We have lots of competition here." And he still remembers when Floyed Eyre, his new mission president, took his own turn preaching at a street meeting. A very unkempt man shouted at President Eyre, "You are a liar!" The president calmly replied, "And you, sir, are a gentleman. However, I think we're both wrong." The unkempt man harrumphed and turned away without catching the point, but the missionaries loved it.

Nudged by his desire to improve things and emboldened by his crash course in the scriptures of the Restoration, Neal responded with alacrity when President Eyre asked him if he'd like to prepare a written plan for teaching the gospel to investigators. He had been on his mission just under a year. In its final form, the plan was called "The Sword of Truth." It contained thirteen lessons the Godhead, the Plan of Salvation, the Church in the Meridian of Time, the Apostasy, the Restoration (five lessons), the Word of Wisdom, the Book of Mormon, the Second Coming, and a wrap-up lesson on spiritual gifts, tithing, and the sacrament.

Each lesson included a central objective, suggested visual aids, and usually two single-spaced pages of typewritten text, with scriptural references sprinkled like salt throughout the text. These mimeographed lessons resemble a cross between something Clarence Maxwell would have written on his old Smith-Corona and a Neal A. Maxwell general conference talk, with parenthetical references to scriptures after every few sentences.

The foreword to the lesson plan contains the author's message to "Fellowservants of the Messiah." He explains the need for a "systematic and effective technique to build testimony and desires for membership." After a few suggested instructions, the concluding lines, full of metaphors and stirring figures of speech, sound like a young Elder Maxwell:

Do not feel it necessary to extract all of their old stumps of doctrine in one evening. After [teaching them fully], the uprooting will be simpler. . . .

The majority reject this work as being of God. But men who sail in ships of reason, who have set their sails to catch the winds of truth, will eventually . . . land upon the shores of salvation. . . .

The 'Sword of Truth' is yours then. Wield it well, for the time is short.

President Eyre liked Neal's work enough that he adopted the plan throughout the mission. A few missionaries in other missions began to use it as well, as they randomly happened upon it through friends from Canada. A missionary in the Northwestern States Mission named Richard L. Anderson (who later taught religion at BYU) wrote the "Anderson Plan" during this same era to serve the same purpose. Neal always felt that Elder Anderson's plan was "better by far," but at least he had made an effort, and it spurred in him an increased desire to develop his writing skills.
