Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Sixteen

Establishing the Church

Missionary work involved Elder Maxwell and his fellow missionaries not only in proselyting but also in building up the organized Church. In the postwar years in Canada, as in most other far-flung places in the mission field, missionaries were the primary support for Church members as well as investigators. So a young missionary like Neal might be home teacher, branch mission leader, youth advisor, missionary zone leader, spiritual counselor, and priesthood leader all rolled into one. Among the members, his primary purpose was to teach and lift them until they could assume leadership duties for themselves.

As had happened in the military, the needs of the day pushed young Neal once more into very adult roles for which he felt unprepared. This time, the nature of Church leadership added a spiritual dimension he hadn't seen in the army. For the maturing Neal Maxwell, being asked to ride these next, higher waves of compassionate leadership came at a good time to advance his discipleship.

Barely nine months into his mission, Neal was called as district president in Toronto, responsible to oversee the missionary work and the spiritual welfare of 540 Church members 331 of them in the Toronto Branch and the remainder scattered through the expanse of Ontario. Because Elder Ezra Taft Benson of the Twelve was touring the mission that month, he was involved in Neal's call and then set him apart. Neal wrote in his journal about his brief interview with Elder Benson and added, "As they sustained new officers, I was stunned by the reading of my name. . . . Spoke words of appreciation and testimony, near weeping. Set apart under the voice and hands of President Eyre and Apostle Benson. . . . Resolved firmly to try and uphold this confidence God has given me even though I feel undeserving."

It was unusual for a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles to set apart a district president, but this brief contact began an association that would endure. Neal served later in the Washington, D.C., stake mission presidency as a counselor to Elder Benson's son Reed and then in a university ward bishopric with Elder Benson's son Mark. A few years later, Elder Benson was among those who set Neal apart as an Assistant to the Twelve and then, not many years afterward, as a member of the Twelve.

Two days after Neal was set apart as district president, he wrote home about the missionary testimony meeting that followed the district conference: "My testimony is the most precious thing I have. . . . This burning testimony has been mine for months now and I owe so much of it to you. May God strengthen me."

Tutored by President Eyre, Neal began to learn about Church leadership. On one occasion, the president set a deadline for remodeling a chapel, but the missionaries, who were in Neal's district, thought the deadline was unrealistic. Neal felt caught between the president and the missionaries. President Eyre taught him, "Elder, because we all believe in the Church and care deeply about what happens, there are times when we will disagree because we care so much. Isn't it wonderful that those elders are that committed to do their task well?" The president had taken the missionaries' feelings into account, but he left the problem's resolution in Neal's hands. Neal appreciated this approach enough that he would later cite the case to illustrate to leaders the importance of listening to people and not oversupervising them.

Neal also remembered his mission president's teachings. Nearly fifty years later, he told an Aaronic Priesthood fireside, "My mission president used to say we may not always be able to keep an evil thought from entering our minds, but we don't have to offer it a chair and invite it to sit down." And he has always remembered how moved he was in a Toronto district conference when President Eyre bore witness of the First Vision and then told the congregation they were accountable for having heard his witness. Neal would one day conclude one of his first general conference talks with his testimony, adding, "I know I will be held accountable for this testimony; but, as hearers or readers, you are [also] now accountable for my witness."

By the time of his first Christmas in Canada, Neal's growth was in full stride. Laura Merrill, a senior missionary in Neal's district, wrote in a Christmas card to Clarence and Emma:

Your son is a scholar, keen as can be, a great memory, a high sense of what is expected of him, and never an idle minute. He is an ideal leader and his help to all the missionaries is boundless.

She wrote them further:

I am old enough to be his grandmother, so you know I speak from mature judgment.

The next July, Neal's assignment was changed. He became district president in Montreal, with 225 members, 188 of them in the Montreal Branch. President Eyre felt a particular need for Neal to concentrate on lifting the district's missionaries spiritually. By then Neal was developing a sense of his own spiritual independence, "because you really do have to make decisions," especially when feeling responsible to help others. The mission leadership pattern in those days nurtured his spiritual self-reliance. As district president, he usually traveled alone when working with missionaries and members, even though he might be the companion to another missionary leader with whom he'd stay when he wasn't traveling the district.

The missionaries enjoyed Neal's playful and competitive streak. When visiting them, he would often broker "a really good round of ping pong" or they'd play a little basketball. But the elders and sisters "knew he was a leader, all business, and he got the job done." They felt that he liked them, he loved life, and loved missionary work. He tried hard to teach them, sometimes drawing on the ideas in his "Sword of Truth." After one visit, he wrote his family that he had explained "how to answer the 'I am Saved' group, for which I received an undeserved lauding, but I know the Lord guided me in my preparation."

In September 1948, Elder Marion G. Romney, then an Assistant to the Twelve, toured the mission. During this trip, Neal saw some early hints of Marion Romney's gifts as a personal mentor, a relationship that would return more than twenty years later when Elder Romney, then of the Twelve, gave Neal considerable coaching as the new Church commissioner of education. Neal wrote his family that his informal time with Elder Romney had given him a

better than average chance to draw upon his Wisdom and Personality. He's certainly humble and unpretentious. Gave a lot of good counsel to us. . . . Regarding money, my mission has cost much more than I anticipated. Being a D.P. twice is a major factor [he needed to pay some travel costs himself]. I'll be Bone Dry upon arrival Home, maybe have to borrow from you, but I'll pay you back soon as I can. . . . Elder and Sister Romney have in times past had a rough go financially, but they merely Smile about it and say, "it was good for us," so we shouldn't (speaking to myself) ever get too dollar minded.

Neal afterward felt a little sheepish about having offered his assessment of Elder Romney's own potential Church influence. He remembers "imprudently" and "foolishly but nevertheless accurately" introducing Elder Romney to the missionaries as "a man whose spiritual star had just begun to rise."

As the months progressed, Neal's Church leadership role also introduced him to many new and faithful questions to ask his father, Clarence, in their ongoing and now intensifying gospel conversation. In addition to the echoes of the sorts of questions Neal had seen Clarence ask in his own letters to General Authorities, Neal's letters also reveal the introspective self-discipline that would mark the learning style he applied to his budding discipleship:

Can one holder of the Priesthood anoint and seal in case of emergency in administering to the sick?

What do you know about the propriety of taking consecrated oil internally, [or] rubbing it on parts of the body? I have been under the impression that it wasn't called for, but . . . would like something authoritative on it. . . .

I felt the presence of the Lord in the [district] meeting telling me who to call on for testimonies even tho I had other [names] written down. . . . Now I have found the greatest thrill one can have, serving his God, a joy that if you had not at times applied counsel and brakes to me I might never have received.

I'm so simple. Sometimes (1) Still a bit impulsive, (2) self aggrandizing, (3) not completely mentally righteous thinking, (4) Talk too much. But I shan't despair, as I think I've developed some and matured a little.

He also described blessing a Church member, when he felt

God's strengthening help [enabled me] to . . . rebuke the power of the Adversary. It will always be a testimony. She was relieved of great emotional distress, bringing her sleep and calm . . . according to my blessing. I had to retire in prayer to ask for faith to support my actions in company with the Elder who assisted. Surely my God . . . must be grieved that despite such great blessings, [my] spirituality . . . is not cultivated more. I thank him for the principle of Repentance. My testimony grows daily and I rejoice at its succor to me.

Neal's association with, and growing sense of responsibility for, the members of the Church came to mean as much as his relationships with the missionaries. One of the stalwart Church members he came to appreciate and to strengthen was Mary Linklater, who lived too far from Orillia to attend Sunday meetings. Mary's husband strongly opposed her Church activity. Her only contact with the Church was when the missionaries made a monthly visit. After a few visits, Neal wrote his family about this "isolated Saint" who "treated us grand. She has a marvelous testimony. Her husband has persecuted her relentlessly, burning her books, . . . publicly humiliating her, etc. But as age is upon him, his fury is spent." Some years later, Neal and Colleen visited his mission field and went to see Mary again. In a tender reunion, she introduced Neal to her frail and ailing husband as "the one you liked."

The relationships Neal developed with converts and other members in the branches of Ontario and Montreal bore sweet and long-term fruit. During his assignments in Montreal, for instance, he and a companion met and taught a woman who was later baptized by other missionaries. Years later this woman's daughter, Olive Tooth Arbuckle, wrote:

More than 30 years ago Elder Neal A. Maxwell knocked on my mother's door. . . . She had been looking for many years for something but didn't know what. . . .

I remember that day. . . . I'd just come home from school and there was my mother with all her books around her and these two young men. I was so mad that I just went straight into the kitchen and slammed the door. . . . About fifteen minutes later my mother came into the kitchen waving her arms and dancing around saying, "I've found it, I've found it! I've found what I've been looking for and they're coming back to teach your father tonight."

Although I was rebellious at that time . . . and was determined not to join, I'm so grateful I promised my mother I would. She lived only ten months after she was baptized.

Neal's growing sense of kinship with the members in Canada also nourished his feelings of belonging with his ward back home. As he wrote with appreciation to the Wandamere Ward during his early missionary months, he perhaps unconsciously reflected the influence of his intense scripture study in his choice of words and some hints of a unique style of gospel prose that was barely beginning to develop:

May I take this opportunity to thank all of you for the splendid treatment you accorded me in divers manners before my leaving for Work in a part of God's vineyard. . . . I have grown to love this work. . . . I have but sipped the cup of joy. . . . But to compete against the Satanic opposition [has made it] necessary to "Put On the Whole Armor of God." . . .

May we realize that to appreciate the Eternal Life that is ahead of Us it was necessary that We come here and Partake of the Bread of Adversity so readily proffered one in Mortal Existence.

Another sample of Neal's early efforts to find the distinctive voice of his gospel language occurred in an earnest letter he wrote to Clarence and Emma when he learned that his mother was expecting a baby (Kathy) at a relatively late age:

It gave me a great thrill to know that you are allowing another of God's spirit children a privileged spot on this earth, an earth peopled for the most part by unrighteous and decaying people, leaving Father Elohim little opportunity for placement of his chosen spirits. . . . Many in Zion will say "all is well" and complacency shall reign over many, thus your willingness and self sacrifice, tho perhaps it leaves the confines of conventionalism, is pioneering in 1947, your labors with past spirits has been recognized by the Most High. . . . I have long prayed that you both might be permitted to tarry on this side of the veil til your task . . . was done and all the children firmly grounded in the gospel.

As Neal's associations with the Canadian members multiplied over time, he felt great empathy for their circumstances. Once he returned to Utah, the modest Maxwell home became a refuge for anyone from his mission who came to Salt Lake City. In 1949, Neal helped organize "Samaras," a lively group of returned Canadian missionaries that would endure more than fifty years. Samaras sponsored missionary reunions and other events, and it helped fund missionaries' travel to and from their mission. Its first major project was what Colleen called a "big production" to help Church members travel from Ontario and Quebec to Salt Lake City to visit the temple, because no other temple was any more accessible to them.

Neal not only arranged buses and raised funds for this trip but was so anxious to have the Eastern Canadian Saints feel close to the Church's leaders that he invited President J. Reuben Clark of the First Presidency to speak to them at a small fireside. President Clark met with Neal long enough to reprove him gently. He worried about the risk and expense of such long-distance temple trips, and he didn't want to encourage more trips by speaking to the group.

Undaunted, Neal approached Elder John A. Widtsoe, whose books he had so thoroughly devoured during his mission. Elder Widtsoe accepted. When Neal drove by to pick him up for the fireside, the Apostle was sitting in a swing on his front porch, waiting. "I was not late; he was early. As I helped him into the car, he gave me a brown sack which included a warm, fresh loaf of brown bread his wife, Leah, had just baked. He wanted me to have it, though we had never met before." And as they drove, Neal enjoyed asking him doctrinal questions.

This small act of kindness touched Neal, who recounted the experience at the inauguration of the John A. Widtsoe Chair in Chemistry at the University of Utah in 1995. He had already admired how Elder Widtsoe's writings "let his ideas have a life of their own." Then this glimpse of Elder Widtsoe's personality drew Neal to him. He was a role model in more than his gospel scholarship. "The more I see of life," Neal said, "the more I admire individuals in whom there is a combination of brightness and sweetness and of goodness and gentleness. Such were delightfully combined in John Andreas Widtsoe."

Neal Maxwell's mission accelerated his discipleship in a natural sequence. He had felt some deep but unnamed spiritual stirrings during his childhood and on Okinawa. Yet he was still so young, lacking real understanding of the gospel and the Church's place in the world. His mission opened the eyes of his understanding, explaining and confirming his earlier spiritual impressions with the added witnesses of reason and experience.

When Neal finished his mission, President Floyed Eyre wrote Neal's bishop on January 22, 1949: "He has with rare ability put forth unstinted effort to spread the great message of truth that has been vouchsafed to him." Then he added a handwritten postscript, which the bishop showed to Neal. Neal would later cite without quoting it this expression of confidence as a good example of how leaders who give specific, sincere praise can provide needed motivation and affirmation. "It took President Eyre thirty seconds to write this," Neal would say, "but it gave me encouragement for fifty years: 'Dear Bishop, Elder Maxwell is in my humble knowledge the top missionary I have yet had. Congratulations to your ward and his home.'"
