Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

University Student

Seventeen

A Postwar Student's Life

By 1949, Neal was like a spirited racehorse, pawing the earth, raring a little, feeling overdue to get on with the race. The war was over, his mission was behind him, and at age twenty-three he had finally enrolled at the University of Utah. But now, ready to run, with a full life ahead of him, much of his agenda was a blank slate. He had taken no college classes, he had no clear ideas about a major or a career, and he had left no sweetheart waiting back home. Though mature for a college freshman, in some ways he remained impressionable and unformed.

Neal's uncertainty about a career choice didn't slow his intense college pace he rushed through a four-year program of eleven straight quarters in three calendar years with no summer breaks. Having long since abandoned his boyhood notion of becoming a veterinarian, he at first leaned toward education. Then his interest in government pulled him to a political science major with a Russian minor. With the Soviet Union emerging as a threat to democracy, his instincts were drawing him toward some new kind of front lines.

Neal Maxwell's attitude and his pace weren't that unusual among the millions of veterans who flooded the nation's campuses after the war. Those of the "greatest generation" were motivated by a no-nonsense hunger for higher education. They were ready to move on, wanting better lives than the ones they remembered from their childhood years during the Depression.

Fortunately, a grateful nation matched their commitment with one of its own an unprecedented educational investment called the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944 the GI Bill of Rights. The GI Bill provided a veteran like Neal with full tuition plus seventy-five dollars a month expense money, so long as the student stayed enrolled in higher education. With this support, the number of enrollments in colleges and universities in the United States jumped from 1.7 million in 1945 to 2.4 million in 1948. Nearly 8 million veterans would use the Bill to enroll in some kind of educational program.

The GI Bill transformed American society by making higher education the key to upward mobility for average citizens rather than a prize for the elite few. Previously, it was common for a family to share one bathroom, heat their home with coal, wash their clothes on scrub boards, and use iceboxes as refrigerators. Most people rarely ate in restaurants, dances were the entertainment of choice, and ice cream was the favorite treat. In wartime even that was rationed.

After 1945, however, the nation shifted its vast war production energy to the private sector. This move was accompanied by "a spirit of confidence never experienced before. Americans felt they could literally do anything." Most people wanted their own car, their own home, and a higher standard of living. The ticket to all of this was a college education, and the GI Bill put that ticket within popular reach, making "trained minds, rather than land or minerals, America's most important resource." Thus began "the shift to the knowledge society" of today, launching the entire modern "postcapitalist society." This was such a major shift that management expert Peter Drucker believes "future historians may consider it the most important event of the 20th century" an economic and social transformation so large it is still in process.

This context shows not only how and why Neal and his fellow veterans went to college but also introduces the Church's own postwar educational and cultural transformation. Reflecting the same economic and social patterns that would sweep the country, the creation of a knowledge-based society would produce a more educated Church, as new thousands of Latter-day Saints in the United States went to college during the middle and later decades of the 1900s.

When Neal became Church commissioner of education in 1970, he illustrated, and in some ways personified, this generation of Church members. Like so many others, he came from modest origins, gaining far more education than his parents had enjoyed. His parents valued education, but college just hadn't been possible for them. As a student Neal also worked his own way through the conflicts that education can create between the sacred and the secular.

Symbolizing the postwar era, Neal took many of his classes in military barracks, which the government had simply given to the University of Utah. He "sat in old, wooden army chairs carefully stenciled with obsolete unit numbers for most of [his] political science classes. In one room, they turned on the light bulbs by hanging pieces of string." Fifty years later, he would contrast these chairs with an expensive endowed "chair" the university named in his honor.

He didn't consider himself much of a student, even though he graduated with honors. Typically, he didn't study beyond the essentials needed to prepare for tests. He enjoyed reading books but mostly when the book caught his high interest in politics and public affairs. In that field, he invested himself enough that Professor G. Homer Durham, his political science mentor, who went on to an impressive career in higher education, could tell a national scholarship committee that of the "thousands of undergraduate students" he had known, he placed Neal "No. 1 for a National Convention Fellowship."

Neal also dabbled in a variety of extracurricular interests, most of them drawing on his growing skill as a writer and a commentator on public issues. In a creative-writing class in English, Professor Clarice Short gave him a left-handed compliment by asking if he had plagiarized a short story he wrote for her. When she realized that the story was his own work, she encouraged him to write for the school's literary magazine. He made a few efforts, curious to continue his exploration with writing, but he was "in too big a hurry to do much."

His published stories drew on his wartime experience, using familiar images from his Okinawa experience like wounded soldiers falling down and not getting up. He also experimented with the rhetorical devices that would mark his later writing. One story began, "A sooty, sweaty hand clawed into the dirt. Its turgid tendons surfaced in response to the throaty cry, 'Hang On!' . . . The body lurched backwards in silent agony and then bounced down the precipitous hill. Behind rolled a clattering steel helmet like a dog looking for its master." The story probes how little the average person understands what war is really like.

Homer Durham found Neal a job moderating a weekly program on public issues aired by the university's educational radio station, KUER. Neal welcomed the income of twelve dollars and fifty cents a week, and he felt challenged by the spontaneity of live interviews with such public figures as Utah governor J. Bracken Lee, Senator Wallace F. Bennett of Utah, and Senator Paul Douglas of Illinois. He began his broadcasts with a recorded "ominous voice" that stated, "It is out of the collision of opinions that the whole truth can be found." This was the forerunner to Neal's later interview show Tell Me on KUED, the university's television station.

His relish for creative writing and current issues also drew him into writing and producing skits for Delta Phi, the fraternity for returned missionaries, which he preferred over the traditional campus fraternities. Along with Oscar McConkie, this crowd included Web Adams, a friend from the Canadian Mission; Douglas Parker, later a law professor at the University of Colorado and then at Brigham Young University; and Truman Madsen, later a teacher of religion and philosophy at BYU.

Neal and Web became known on campus for their satirical political skits, presented at student assemblies for homecoming and other events. One skit, performed in Kingsbury Hall, portrayed a tight-fisted Utah governor J. Bracken Lee sliding by the university on roller skates, tossing out a few paltry coins for the school's budget. A lighthearted performance at BYU parodying the extremes of missionary life brought down the house with laughter at a gathering of returned missionaries. Neal was very "fun loving" then, but his friends also noticed his impatience. Awaiting their turn to perform, Neal would be "agitated [and] looking at his watch. He wasn't a slow-moving, patient guy."

Corene Cowan, who later married Doug Parker, dated Neal a few times. She found him uninterested in typical dates such as movies and dancing. He preferred walks and study groups, where they could talk about ideas. Not always so serious, their "most outrageous and memorable" time was with Web Adams and his date. The four went to a dance at BYU, where the girls were surprised to see Web and Neal suddenly appear in one of their comic skits as the official floor show.

As his membership in Delta Phi suggests, Neal preferred to avoid the "higher spheres" of campus social status, as viewed by those in the fraternities and sororities. Oscar, who came from Salt Lake's urbane East High, thought Neal "unnecessarily insecure" about his Granite High and agriculture background. But Neal enjoyed his mildly iconoclastic role, which let him poke occasional holes in the pretense he sensed among some campus socialites. He managed Rick Clayton's successful campaign for student body president, after the "East High crowd" had dominated student government for years. Neal wasn't really interested in student government, being motivated more by "audacity and vanity." Mostly, he was intrigued "just to see if [we] could beat the Greek crowd."

Neal had the reputation among his campus friends of having been a good missionary in Canada. He organized a study group, in which he would often end up leading gospel discussions. "An incredible conversationalist," he "kind of took control" of discussions in an inoffensive way, just by being informed as well as having a clever way of expressing ideas.

He was only one of an interesting group of young believers in the gospel who enjoyed growing together on the campus. Doug Parker didn't see him then as one necessarily marked for some unusual future contribution. Rather, Neal's life shows "how it takes thirty years of slow, incremental spiritual and character growth to become what you are" later. "You're not that way, full blown," when you're young. Neal, like others, went from experience to experience and "took with him those qualities he possessed, and as he did, [those qualities] blossomed and flowered."
