Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Nineteen

Connecting the Secular and the Sacred

Neal's college years gave him experience with a new and significant converging of secular and sacred ideas. Until this time, the "Church track" and the "educational track" in his life had run parallel to each other. Now the two tracks began coming together. As he delved into political theory, for instance, he just couldn't see that field in a complete way without including the gospel's teachings about man's nature and about government. Before long, Neal "didn't see how one could go on in secular education and not pay attention to what the gospel teaches" about every relevant topic and issue.

He welcomed this time of engagement between the secular and the religious, even though he knew that some people feared it. For him, it was simply natural to look for ways "to connect gospel principles with my secular learning." It helped that his most basic spiritual questions had been settled by his experience from childhood through his years as a soldier and as a missionary.

As he faced the philosophical puzzles of university life, then, he felt "a special zest of trying to connect secular learning with gospel learning." Based on his prior experience, he now "assumed a connection" with the gospel "could be made." It no longer seemed to him a serious alternative that the gospel "wouldn't connect, or that if it didn't, there would [not] be a preeminence for spiritual things." As his college experience reaffirmed this basic attitude, instead of threatening his faith, Neal's education gave him "more confidence in the capacity of the gospel to respond to the human condition."

All of the people described in Neal's heritage of mentors shared a primary commitment to the religious life. Still, in practice, not all of them would have approached the issues of the day in the same way Neal eventually did. Some, like Homer Durham, spent their professional lives in state schools, where church-state separation constrained them from developing many written or publicly spoken attempts at treating secular problems in the light of gospel teachings or vice versa. In that sense, Neal would later feel much greater academic freedom as the Church's commissioner of education than he ever felt at the University of Utah, because he was more free to articulate the active integration he felt personally between the sacred and the secular.

Others, such as J. Reuben Clark, simply had a different attitude about actively integrating secular and religious issues. President Clark was personally more comfortable maintaining something of a separation between his professional and religious worlds, even though he used his ample scholarly tools in both places and his profound religious depth prevailed in all he did. Perhaps President Clark's views about isolationism between the interests of the United States and international needs also reflected his instinctive preference for maintaining an internal boundary between faith and reason while Neal's irrepressible urge to engage possible conflicts made him less concerned about boundaries.

Neal would later find affirmation for his proactive integration in the approach of his closest spiritual mentor, Harold B. Lee. Indeed, that might have been part of what drew Elder Lee to Neal when they first became acquainted. From the time of his call as an Apostle in 1941, Elder Lee had sought to achieve "the learning of all wisdom and intelligence from the scriptures, and the learning of all secular knowledge. . . . [Said Neal about Elder Lee:] 'Being secure spiritually and intellectually he could be eclectic in gathering [secular] ideas, concepts, and truths which would be helpful to the work of the kingdom.'" Elder Lee and Neal Maxwell had both established their spiritual moorings before reaching out, as they did, for secular perspectives. And both tended to evaluate secular matters in the light of the gospel, rather than vice versa.

Other University of Utah friends reinforced Neal's outlook. One of these was Henry Eyring (the father of Apostle Henry B. Eyring), whom Neal regarded as "the most distinguished Mormon scientist of this dispensation." Dr. Eyring shared Neal's basic stance: "Since he felt that all truth comes from God, and since he knew that God refused to require him to believe anything that was not true, Henry had a very large view of truth, sparing him the unnecessary conflicts and contortions which some have." Another friend was Russell Nelson, a renowned cardiac surgeon at the U of U Medical School who would later join Neal in the Twelve. Russell said, "Many years ago a medical colleague chastised me for failing to separate my professional knowledge from my religious convictions. That startled me because I did not feel that truth should be fractionalized. Truth is indivisible."

Neal never worried that the findings of science or other disciplines would challenge the gospel, because he always believed, and then his experience consistently confirmed, that "the lessons from secular history buttress gospel principles" more than they challenge them. Thus, for him, every dimension of "the gospel is relevant to every social problem."

So Neal felt sorry for those who were too suspicious of, or too trusting in, reason and intellect. He saw some people have real crises in their faith when they were unable to understand some difficult human experience. They may have found that it eroded their faith to try to reason their way through what is essentially an unreasonable experience, yet the greatest religious tests often require sacrifices that go well beyond reason. Some of them would then decide not to use reason at all in considering religious experience, in order to avoid the risk of floundering over the limits to reason's powers. Ironically, the fears that fuel this position may arise not from placing too little trust in reason but too much. Neal had a more tolerant approach:

In my own education . . . I found that the basic gospel truths . . . could be harmonized with the great secular truths. [And] those gospel truths which, for the moment, could not be harmonized could . . . be regarded expectantly, for, ultimately, all truths belong to the gospel. Not all theories . . . but all truths. To so realize was an emancipating feeling then, and is now, for the feeling has never diminished, only increased.

As he told one group of students, "The Lord sees no conflict between faith and learning in a broad curriculum. [See D&C 88:78-79, 118.] . . . The scriptures see faith and learning as mutually facilitating, not separate processes. Robert Frost's line, 'Something there is that doesn't love a wall,' is applicable regarding a wall between mind and spirit."

Neal's view on this subject, from its beginnings in his student days to its maturity later on, was never a generic attitude of simply balancing faith and reason. Nor did he think it sufficient simply to integrate the two realms indiscriminately, as if they were of equal importance. Further, he always sensed the risks of unwise integration that allowed an academic discipline to judge the gospel or the Church, knowing that, as one student said, "there is a danger that use of scholarly tools which requires the privileging of those tools will breed habits of mind that reflexively privilege secular scholarship over the gospel."

From the first time he heard them teach in some of his university classes, Neal was always dismayed by Latter-day Saint professionals who let their disciplines take priority over their understanding of the gospel. He would later express concern about teachers who "fondle their doubts" or "conceal their doubt of doubt" in the presence of Latter-day Saint students who were looking for spiritual mentoring. Neal was also disappointed in Latter-day Saints who remained "anti-intellectual about the gospel." He thought it ironic when someone couldn't see "the intellectual depth of the gospel," let alone its full spiritual dimensions, because they measured everything with the limited tools of their academic disciplines.

Neal's approach to integration, then, looked at all knowledge through the gospel's lens. He found that he could integrate a secular map of reality into the broader religious map, but the smaller secular map, with its more limited tools and framework, often wasn't large enough to include religious insights. Thus the gospel's larger perspective influenced his view of the academic disciplines more than the disciplines influenced his view of the gospel.

Elder Cecil Samuelson has noticed, for example, that "early on [Neal] developed a notion that the gospel encompasses all truth." So "he will pick up a Steven Hawking article about theoretical physics and think about ties to the book of Abraham. Or he will think about Churchill's role in preserving the freedom of the world" so the Church could continue teaching the Restoration. He believes that "faith and learning are symbiotic [and that] any apparent inconsistencies between gospel verities and scientific truth are the result of incomplete or inappropriately interpreted data. When a matter remains unresolved, he shows the same restraint employed by Alma: 'Now these mysteries are not yet fully made known unto me; therefore I shall forbear' (Alma 37:11)."

Neal also came to wish that those of other religious faiths could know more about the Book of Mormon not just to prove the book is true but to see the Restoration's witness of Christ, so that "a confused mankind can have certitude about the . . . reality of the resurrection." For him, the insights of the Restoration not only held up under scrutiny but they increasingly hold up a Christianity threatened by higher criticism of the Bible and endless other attacks.

As a college student, Neal also enjoyed discovering that George Washington and James Madison both called the drafting of the Constitution "a miracle." For Neal, only divine intervention would explain why there would have been "so many bright minds together in a small country at the same time." Arthur M. Schlesinger thought the Founding Fathers were "the most remarkable generation of public men in the history of the United States or perhaps of any other nation." Historian Barbara Tuchman wondered aloud, "It would be invaluable if we could know what produced this burst of talent from a base of only two and a half million inhabitants." When he read that, Neal wanted Tuchman to know that God had "established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom [he] raised up unto this very purpose" (D&C 101:80).

Similarly, Neal's understanding of early Christian apostasy illuminated his university courses on the Greek philosophers and vice versa. He drew on this background when he gave a conference talk on the Apostasy, explaining how obvious it is that Greek philosophy distorted early Christian teachings rather than "some misguided monk in a monastery making things up."

Neal's early interest in sacred-secular convergence also prepared him to welcome the writings of C. S. Lewis, a gifted British champion of Christianity who wrote during Neal's early years, critiquing modern secularism with unusual skill. Neal first read The Screwtape Letters in the 1950s, soon followed by other Lewis works. He admired and would later emulate the way Lewis's writing style reached the common reader with uncommon religious insight.

In 1960, he sent Lewis a letter of gratitude accompanied by a copy of the Book of Mormon: "May I express my deep appreciation for your contribution to literature and Christianity through your excellent writings." Your work has "held special pleasure for me. Perhaps you do not realize that you have acquired quite a following in this area of America" in recent years. He explained the Book of Mormon only briefly, adding that his gratitude for Lewis's work "is not conditioned upon your appreciation of this Book." Rather, "my sending it to you represents an effort to share with you some of the things that have brought me satisfaction as a token of the appreciation I feel for your writings."

Along with Neal's discoveries about secular and religious learning, his attitudes toward institutions including the Church also developed during his student years. His tendency toward what he called his "institutional chafing" had earlier made him impatient about the quality of classes and meetings in his home ward, about the United States military bureaucracy, about waiting for his bishop to approach him with a mission call, or about missionary teaching resources. Part of Neal's chafing came from his inborn impatience. "I thought, All right, Heavenly Father, if I've got to be more patient, let's get it over with right now."

One example of this attitude was that he thought it wasn't worth the time to attend the university commencement where he would have been awarded his diploma, so he just skipped it and waited for the diploma to be mailed. Colleen has since joked that it was poetic justice when he later had to attend many commencement ceremonies as a university administrator in both the state and Church educational systems. He felt the same way about such formal affairs as wedding receptions, though he was a good sport about his and Colleen's own wedding reception. He felt more justified in his attitude when he found that C. S. Lewis thought that attending receptions is like reading the first page of a hundred different books. He has told his family that someone should create a conveyor belt that keeps reception lines moving, giving each person only 3.7 seconds to speak with the bride and groom.

Young Neal also needed to work on his attitude toward sacrament meetings. He had come alive with his excitement for fresh gospel teachings, both as a missionary and from his discovery as a student that the gospel could illuminate so many other issues. With his engine running in such high gear, he sometimes found it frustrating, or perhaps a little boring, to sit through classes and meetings that fell short of what he thought the gospel really had to say. As a result, when a sacrament meeting seemed to drag a little, Neal, sitting in the congregation, would quietly pull out his scriptures and start reading about some topic that held his interest more.

Once more, Matthew Cowley rescued him. Earlier, without knowing any of Neal's tendencies, Elder Cowley had cautioned him in a blessing to avoid political discussions during his mission. When Elder Cowley later performed Neal and Colleen's marriage, still without any reason to know Neal's attitudes and habits, Elder Cowley counseled the young couple to pay attention in their sacrament and other meetings "whether you like the quality of the speakers or not." Neal felt appropriately chastised: "When you get that kind of laser-like precision, you know you're dealing with somebody with apostolic powers."

He didn't forget this mild but inspired rebuke. It was still with him when he was asked to write an article for the Ensign about President Spencer W. Kimball after President Kimball's death in 1985. Among all the things he might have chosen to quote from President Kimball's writings, Neal felt to include this: "We do not go to Sabbath meetings to be entertained or even solely to be instructed. We go to worship the Lord. If the service is a failure to you, you have failed. No one can worship for you; you must do your own waiting upon the Lord."

Another provocative student-era example of Neal's institutional chafing was the visit he and a friend requested with Elder Harold B. Lee of the Twelve. This was the first time he and Elder Lee ever met, and neither could have imagined how closely they would one day work together. The two university students just wanted Elder Lee to know how disappointed they were with the quality of instructional manuals the students were finding in their Sunday School and other classes. Neal was audacious but earnestly sincere. Later on he could hardly believe he had been so bold. Elder Lee "was very nice to listen to this young punk who was telling him what ought to be done."

This small incident was important to Neal, though in retrospect he thought the nature of his concern hardly justified taking Elder Lee's time. It was natural to him to make such an approach, partly because the Church was much smaller then and partly because he'd seen his father approach the Brethren with those early letters. Besides, his concerns were honest, faithful ones. He really felt that the gospel was much richer than what he saw many Church teachers presenting. Elder Lee's attitude signaled to Neal that Church leaders will listen, and should listen, to faithful questions. That attitude not only helped Neal develop a desire to work within the system but would also later make him want to listen closely to others who had concerns like his.

Toward the end of Neal's student time at the university, he experienced another incident that made him chafe a little. He and Colleen, just married, were struggling for every dollar. They had no car and not much else. Their bishop, in a typical request for the times, assigned them to contribute funds to help buy a stake welfare farm south of Salt Lake City. They swallowed hard and paid their share, but privately Neal was murmuring. He thought the farm was "a perfectly abysmal place, where you couldn't grow anything." He couldn't understand why busy Latter-day Saints should go "hoe rocks and sagebrush," unless as a general "test of obedience" rather than to "feed the poor." He later felt the same way when their stake in Washington, D.C., bought a dairy farm outside the city. The farm later became part of Dulles Airport, so at least, Neal thought, the Church got a good return on its investment.

He recalled these incidents later as a member of a General Welfare Committee subgroup, chaired by then-Elder Thomas S. Monson. The subgroup recommended that the Church sell many of its stake welfare farms, because it was more efficient to feed the poor in other ways. Their group asked the general committee if the members' working on those farms was really central to the welfare program or if welfare was concerned primarily with efficiently feeding the poor, urging members to avoid debt, and encouraging adequate protection against possible calamities. When the general committee agreed with them, Neal felt vindicated.

His early tendency toward institutional chafing reveals a part of his personality that he has continued to work on. Even though Elder Maxwell has learned to discipline his impatience, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland thinks it hasn't always been easy for him to work within the sometimes laborious institutional process of central Church administration. "He's so bright and able, a kind of free spirit in the sense that he knows where he wants to go and how to get things done." So to work proposals through "a big group" in "a process that has review after review has probably been a little nerve-wracking to Neal over the years. . . . But he's handled it well." Experience taught Neal the value of holding his tongue until the right time and place, rather than just complaining and running for cover.
