Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Colleen

Twenty

Early Life

Clarence, Neal's father, was probably the most formative religious influence in his early years. Later on Neal would be guided by the wise and attentive mentoring of Harold B. Lee, N. Eldon Tanner, Marion G. Romney, and Spencer W. Kimball. But in the shaping of his spiritual life's most personal and subtle dimensions, no human hand has left a more enduring touch than Colleen's.

In this day of "tell it all" investigative reporting, a person like Colleen poses a problem for a biographer who wants at least to present her as she really is, with no sugar coating. But Corene Parker, a fair-minded observer who has known Neal and Colleen since their college days, says Colleen has simply always been "the same considerate, other-regarding person that she is now wholesome and delightful." Corene knows that such assessments are "always questioned in public life," but that's just how Colleen was and is. And this understanding of her nature is necessary to understand Neal's own growth.

Though Neal didn't know Gordon B. Hinckley until many years after he had married Colleen, President Hinckley is a first cousin to Colleen's father, George Hinckley. President Hinckley describes Colleen as "a very able woman. She's done wonders for Neal, and he'd be the first to give her credit." President James E. Faust sees in Colleen "a certain resilience and strength beyond that softness and kindness which she has. She is sometimes a restraining influence" for Neal. "She's perfect for him."

Elder Dallin H. Oaks, who has been unusually close to the Maxwells for thirty years, believes that Colleen's "influence on him is profound." She is "a very gentle person on the exterior," but "he values [her influence] very highly and speaks of it with reverence and appreciation." Reflecting her own lifelong instincts to reach for those whose lives ache for encouragement, she has almost unintentionally nurtured the development of Neal's personal ministry to individuals. Elder Oaks found that this kind of compassion was more inborn with her than it was with him. "I didn't see that in him much when he was Commissioner [of Church Education in the early 1970s], but now it's pervasive."

Adds Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, Colleen is "a strong woman quiet, gentle, but strong. I think Neal has loved that. They're very much alike. I don't know who's fed whom, or whether two kindred spirits found each other already this way, but with courtesy and sensitivity," both "still have a pretty good steel rod running down their backbones." But "whatever you'd say about Neal" regarding meekness and peacemaking, "you could say it in spades about Colleen. She's a wonderful mix of velvet and steel." When introducing Colleen at Brigham Young University, then-President Holland said, "I cannot help but feel that much of what your husband now is, is due in part to what you always were."

These observations from intimate friends are important to an understanding of Neal Maxwell's life story. "I don't think you could really know him without knowing her," says Elder Marlin K. Jensen. She is "responsible for much of his refinement and growth; she's given him honest feedback; shaped the kindness, the meekness, the service ethic." Colleen Hinckley was born on April 8, 1928, Easter Sunday, in Salt Lake City, the only daughter of George Hinckley (1901-1989) and Fern Johnson (1900-1983). She has two brothers, George V. and Ed. Her lineage on both sides draws on a strong pioneer heritage.

Colleen's paternal grandfather, Lucian N. Hinckley (1862-1950), was a half-brother to Bryant Hinckley, father of President Gordon B. Hinckley. Their father was Ira N. Hinckley (1828-1904), who was born in Ontario, Canada, the province where Neal served much of his mission. Ira first heard of the Church as a child and then lost both of his parents to early deaths. At the age of fourteen, he found his way to Nauvoo, Illinois, where "he frequently heard the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum preach in the grove west of the site where the temple was under construction." Soon he was baptized and lived with the Saints until they left Nauvoo.

In 1850, Ira and his young wife, Eliza, left the Midwest with their baby girl to join the Saints in Zion. Only partway along the trail, Eliza died from cholera. Ira buried both Eliza and his half-brother Joel on the same day. When Colleen's father told this story, he would conclude, "And after the burial, the wagon rolled on." Rolling on in the face of adversity became a theme in Ira Hinckley's life.

After arriving in Salt Lake City, Ira married Adelaide Noble. Soon he took her sister, Angeline, as his plural wife. When he was thirty-eight, Ira accepted Brigham Young's call to move his families to what became known as Cove Fort in Millard County. There Ira took charge of constructing and then maintaining the fort, a midway stopping point on the key north-south route between Salt Lake City and St. George. In 1877, President Wilford Woodruff called Ira to preside over the Millard Stake, the newest of twenty-five stakes in the Church. He served a quarter century as stake president for a large portion of central Utah. Ira's vision and sacrifices as a pioneer leader set an enduring example for his posterity. His son Frank said of him, "I think I have never seen as good a man as he was. He preached the loudest by practice and the least by noise or talk of any man I ever knew."

Colleen, who has always felt both linked to and moved by her ancestors' pioneer spirit, kept a copy of two letters Ira sent from Fillmore to one of his sons in the mission field in the spring of 1883. Among other things, Ira wrote:

We have had a very cold winter here but most of the folks have got hay enough to feed their stock. . . . Every time it snowed it only made me happier, looking to the future for more water to grow more grass and grain. On the whole, I feel first rate. Getting so that I would not miss having some ups and downs in life to gain the experience to prepare us for the future. It is a good world we live in. . . .

My son, . . . be prayerful and watchful that the destroyer may not have power over you, for he will do his best to lead the servants of the Lord astray.

Although you have to fare hard, stand it like a man and never . . . look toward home until the servants of the Lord say it is enough.

Ira Hinckley, the farsighted optimist, saw future irrigation water in the same snow that made some others complain of the cold. Yet he was also bluntly realistic about the threats of opposition and the power of obedience. Colleen would innately reflect that same tough cheer.

Colleen's father remembered that his grandfather Ira had a passion for education, even though "in those pioneering days, some folks frowned on much learning as unnecessary and affectatious." Ira had learned from experience about "the need for manual labor," but "in his position of leadership" he could also "clearly see the great need for education." He hungered to learn more himself, to become "equal to the honors [of leadership] and their attendant responsibilities."

George had also been encouraged by the educational attitudes of his father, Lucian, and his mother, Ada. Though she had little formal schooling, Ada loved reading, read often to her children, and had books and magazines freely available around her home. She gave Colleen's parents a book of Bible stories and then wrote to them, "Do you have time to tell the children stories from the bible book? If you could tell them one every evening before they go to bed, they would always remember it, and it is sowing seeds in their minds and hearts."

The attitude that education is a valuable investment, not a wasteful expense, motivated George to earn a master's degree in chemistry at the University of Utah, even against the odds of the Great Depression of the 1930s. As a child of the Depression, he would later always park his car a few blocks from his city destinations to save the cost of parking meters.

George worked for Utah (later American) Oil Company in a Salt Lake refinery, playing an integral role during World War II in converting the refinery to the production of fuel for airplane engines. He was later industrial relations manager for the oil company, which gave him an office in the city rather than at the refinery.

George Hinckley applied his love of learning to the gospel. He taught his ward's Gospel Doctrine class for years and, like Clarence Maxwell, loved to discuss doctrinal topics. He memorized many scriptures and a good deal of poetry. He liked gospel discussions enough that he hated to end them. Neal would say at his funeral, "When it seemed as though he had finished, he would sometimes then say, 'Actually . . . ' and continue an elaboration of the point at hand." He was also steady, well-read, and gentle. He loved flowers, the earth, and the temple. When Cory Maxwell was serving his mission in Germany, he sent home a little German doll with bushy eyebrows which the family soon designated "Hinckley eyebrows." George and several of his male relatives were noted for "those really distinguished eyebrows."

From her earliest days, Colleen felt the embrace of the Hinckley family heritage. As a child, she accompanied her parents to Hinckley family reunions, where President Gordon B. Hinckley's father, Bryant, a well-known Latter-day Saint figure in his own right, often acted as an informal kind of patriarch for the group. Bryant would tell family stories that taught the clan what a blessing the Hinckley name was, encouraging the children to "never do anything to bring disrespect or dishonor" to the family. The sense of family belonging stirred Colleen, who felt Bryant to be a great man.

Colleen's mother, Fern Johnson Hinckley, was petite at five-foot-three, much shorter than George at five-foot-ten. She was attractive and caring. When Fern's grandchildren thought of going to see her, the picture that came first to mind was of Grandma Hinckley putting her small hands on their upturned cheeks, kissing them, and telling them how very glad she was to see them.

Fern's paternal grandfather, William H. Johnson (1839-1911) crossed the plains with other pioneers in 1856. He and his wife, Eliza, settled in Fountain Green, near Manti. After losing a son and two grandchildren to diphtheria and finding the doctors "didn't know what to do for it," William "prayed for enlightenment." In 1884, at age forty-five, he began to study medicine. Soon he was known throughout the Sevier River valley for his success in treating both diphtheria and typhoid. He "always had a cheerful word" and "served faithfully in any case of sickness" without regard to remuneration. When he and Eliza died, the local newspaper said the "venerable pair" had been "separated by death only three weeks."

Eliza Snyder (1839-1911), who became William's wife, had been born in Canada. Her family joined the Church there and then moved to Nauvoo during her early childhood. Colleen loved hearing Fern recall her grandmother Eliza's memory of the time Joseph Smith held her on his knee and talked to her. Eliza went to live near Provo in 1851 and grew up during the time of the Walker War with the local Native American tribe. During the war, she had fearful memories of riding with her father as he often had to drive their team and wagon between the pioneer settlement and their farm. The Indians later told him they could have ambushed him and his "papoose" many times, but "he had always been kind to them and given them food, so they would not harm them."

Fern cultivated the habits and traits of her pioneer grandparents. Always knitting and sewing for her family, she made many sweaters for her grandbabies long before they arrived in some cases even before a marriage had occurred. A favorite phrase from Fern, whenever family members ate at her home, was, "I am so glad to have my family around me." Later in life, she could rarely speak those words without tears coming to her eyes.

After Fern met Neal Maxwell the first time he arrived at the Hinckley home to pick up Colleen, her reaction was, "Well, he's a nice-looking young man. What's wrong with him?" She thought Colleen had been single long enough. As time went on, Fern and Neal developed an unusually close in-law relationship. Neal found her to be "one of the most appreciative people I have ever met. She responded so generously to the smallest act of kindness." And Fern never hesitated to tell Neal to sit down again when, in the early years of the marriage, he would habitually stand up and say they needed to be going within a few minutes of arriving for a family visit.

Just before Colleen was born, George and Fern moved from Provo to Salt Lake City, where he pursued his studies and then worked for the oil company. During most of Colleen's growing-up years, they lived on Logan Avenue near Fifteenth East. At age two, Colleen nearly died from pneumonia. She always felt that her father's priesthood blessing helped protect her life. When she was older, George gave her a father's blessing in which he blessed her to be an "advertisement for the Church in far lands," promising her that the spirit of her father and mother "shall ever attend thee."

Colleen's was an idyllic childhood. She thought the song "Over the River and through the Woods" had been made up just for her family, to accompany their frequent trips to the Chester Johnson home in Provo and the Lucian Hinckley farm home near Delta, Utah. Her grandmother Hinckley would often be waiting for them on the back step, wearing her little white night cap.

The family home in Salt Lake City was similarly warm and welcoming. George often built a fire in the fireplace, and the family would gather to enjoy homemade root beer and read scriptures or recite poetry. Even though family home evening wasn't as well established in the Church then as it became later, Colleen's warm feelings about the pattern ran deep enough that she and Neal consciously chose to cultivate a similar home atmosphere.

December 7, 1941 the day Pearl Harbor was bombed was a traumatic day for Colleen. She has never forgotten her feelings of dread about bombs and war, which always seemed a terrible nightmare. Her family felt the effect of the war directly, because the oil company called George to stay in Chicago or New York for weeks at a time, helping to coordinate the refinery's production with the military's need for aviation fuel. The war also imposed rationing on sugar, gasoline, and even nylon stockings. Not having free access to nylons wasn't so bad for teenage Colleen, because "many of the young men of dating age were away" anyway.

Young Colleen loved life her home, her school, the Church, and her friends. Especially her friends. Her brief personal history, written later in life, recounts that "while in Garfield [Elementary] School some of my closest friends were . . ." She then lists nine names. And a few pages later, her "good friends" at East High include a list of sixteen names, followed by "and a number of others."

Because of labor shortages brought on by the war, Colleen worked full time each summer from age fifteen onward. She spent one summer at a power sewing machine on an assembly line. Factory work opened her eyes. "It was kind of dark and dismal and you never saw the finished product just the part you were working on." This experience prompted her to desire a college education, both for "a more stimulating vocation" and for preparation to be "a more capable wife and mother."

During one period in her late teens, Colleen became so involved in school and work activities that she stopped attending that era's equivalent of the Young Women program meetings on weekday evenings. A sensitive class adviser reached for her attention, inviting her to become more involved with the seventeen-year-old Gleaner girls. She was soon president of the class, helping to plan activities in the large Edgehill Ward building, which became a focal point for youth and ward and stake projects in the eastern part of Salt Lake Valley. She maintained those interests long enough to earn a Golden Gleaner award.

Her earning that award deserves mention mostly because of the contrast between it and Neal's Master M-Man award. Neal, whose teenage heart had rarely connected with Scouting and other Church youth activities (except basketball), was called to the Young Men's MIA General Board in 1964. At one meeting, the leaders announced that they wanted all board members to understand and exemplify the Church's youth achievement program, so they gave honorary Master M-Man awards to every board member who hadn't earned one earlier. Colleen was a little nonplussed when Neal returned home and kidded her that, after all the effort she had devoted to earning her Golden Gleaner award, they just "passed out our awards with the sack lunches."

Colleen enrolled at the University of Utah in 1945, where she enjoyed four full years academically, socially, and spiritually. She loved learning so much that she couldn't get quite enough of most subjects. She had been drawn to homemaking as her core subject, but she followed her intellectual curiosity and energy to many other places. Neal later said she "racked up" more than fifty credit hours beyond the graduation requirements, with courses that included "everything from spring flowers of the Wasatch to Obert Tanner's philosophy class."

All that variety left Colleen well educated but without the credentials for a specific job, so she extended her coursework long enough to add a public school-teaching certification in home economics education, with an emphasis on foods and nutrition. This qualified her, as 1950 began, to accept a job teaching home economics at a high school in Thatcher, Arizona, replacing a teacher who had left at mid-year.

University social life had also appealed to Colleen's natural inclination toward friends and activities. She joined the Chi Omega sorority but eventually lost interest in the fraternity-sorority culture. Though she formed several close friendships there, the sorority life "seemed a bit superficial." And the selective nature of group membership also ran against her feeling that everyone "should be appreciated and acceptable." She felt more at home in Lambda Delta Sigma, the social group at the Latter-day Saint Institute, which had an open membership.

Colleen also took religion classes at the institute, feeling especially drawn to T. Edgar Lyon and Lowell Bennion, the humane and thoughtful institute director, who nurtured a grateful generation of students at the university. The institute gave her refuge from the socially "competitive spirit of the campus." It also exposed her to Lowell Bennion's deeply ingrained compassion, which inspired in Colleen a service ethic that would flourish in her own life from then on.

Colleen met Neal in Lowell's class in 1949. She was a senior, preparing to leave the campus and teach in a public school. He was just back from his four years in the military and his mission. Colleen noticed that Neal was a pal to Web Adams and that the two of them wrote and produced funny skits for Delta Phi, the fraternity sponsored by the institute for returned missionaries. She first saw him socially at a gathering attended mostly by institute students at Steve Smoot's home. As the evening unfolded, Colleen noticed how much the other students turned to Neal with their questions about the gospel, politics, or other topics. She noticed even then his skill at drawing quiet people into the discussion and thought to herself, "Who is this guy?"

Meanwhile, Colleen was torn about a personal relationship she had been developing with another young man since junior high. They had exchanged letters during his mission, but after he returned, Colleen didn't feel quite ready to take the relationship to a more serious level. She went off to Arizona to think about it while she tried her hand as a schoolteacher.

Their correspondence continued during her months in Arizona. Interestingly, her friend kept writing "nice things" about Neal Maxwell. She had heard similar comments from others by then. So when she returned home for the summer, it was not an unpleasant surprise the day Neal called her to ask for a date. The only problem was that "he talked so fast." His approach on the phone somehow "made her feel she was number fifteen on a list of girls he'd been calling." In her version, she turned him down "just for spunk." Looking back, Colleen and Neal have somewhat different perspectives on this event. She remembers she "was impressed that he seemed to have so much charisma. People were looking to him for answers and just had a great regard for him." Then Neal adds, "So much charisma [that] she turned me down when I first asked her for a date." Fortunately for both, he called again, and this time she said yes.

It didn't take them long to overcome slight differences in their backgrounds. Neal recalls that he "was this kid from Granite High who, I'm sure, didn't dress that well and was a little disdainful of the Greek [sorority and fraternity] system. She was much more prominent socially, and her friends became my friends." For those who believed in a "class system" at the university, she "was of a different order of magnitude" than he was.

Even so, Colleen found herself increasingly drawn to him. She found him "really cute and interesting," even if he did lack just a little social polish. He didn't care for dancing and didn't like small talk, both of which were more important to other people than they were to her. He "was so knowledgeable and such a good speaker, even though he did talk fast. But if you could listen fast you could learn a lot." As Neal came to know her better, he was impressed with her maturity, her sensitivity to other people, and the depth of her spiritual convictions. He began feeling a "spiritual impetus that this was a young woman out of the ordinary."

After a few dates, Neal's irrepressible "let's get on with it" attitude began to express itself, and Colleen found herself feeling a little rushed. The first time Neal proposed marriage to her, she thought he "used so many big words . . . that [she] said yes before [she] knew what [she] was getting into." His memory is that they just walked around the block near her home, had an especially good conversation, and the shared feelings that followed led to a joint decision to marry.

Somewhere during this relatively brief courtship, Colleen decided she needed to take things into her own hands. She found herself thinking "I don't know him that well. I wonder if this is really the right thing to do." She knew that each of them had earlier felt relatively close to marriage with someone else, and those experiences probably helped them both by offering a comparative experience. So she prayed earnestly, alone, on two different occasions. Both times, "the Spirit came really strongly. . . . I think that is the most powerful witness I had. It was a confirming spirit that it was the right thing to do."

They had begun dating in July, were engaged by September, and planned to marry in December. Colleen's parents went on a couple of trips after the wedding date was first set and found each time when they returned that the wedding date had been moved up. So they decided not to take any more trips. Meanwhile, at the Maxwell house, Emma remembered, "Our first introduction to Colleen was when you came home one night and said, 'I've got to see more of that girl. She has some thinking under her hood.' It was your habit to sit on the side of our bed when you came home from a date and tell us about it. There was never anyone who compared to Colleen."

Colleen and Neal were married in the Salt Lake Temple on November 22, 1950. They weren't exactly rich in this world's goods he was still in college, they had no car, Colleen got a teaching job at Jackson Junior High, and Neal found part-time work. They couldn't afford their own car until a few years and two children later, after they had lived in Washington, D.C., for a while. They borrowed the Hinckley family car for their honeymoon, and their first home was a basement apartment in a home near the university, the home where, coincidentally, Colleen had received her patriarchal blessing at age twelve.
