Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Eighteen

Intellectual Awakening and Mentoring

Aside from marrying Colleen Hinckley, the most important development in Neal's university life was the igniting and shaping of his intellectual interests and attitudes through his political science classes and his association with Homer Durham.

Neal found most of his university classes not all that exciting. His teachers ran the complete spectrum from brilliant agnostics to sedate religious believers. He was eventually drawn most to professors Francis Wormuth and Homer Durham, the founding fathers of the U's political science department, which was once in the history department. As department chairman, Durham had hired Wormuth, a gifted teacher whose views generally opposed Durham's. That opposition both fascinated and benefited Neal. Wormuth was a skeptic about both religion and politics, but he was well-read and incisive. He once reportedly said, "There are only two geniuses amongst us [Utah thinkers] myself and Hugh Nibley." Neal at times found himself dazzled by Wormuth's intelligence, especially when Wormuth's views challenged Neal's own intuitions and beliefs.

President J. Reuben Clark startled Neal in 1952 by agreeing with Wormuth on the important postwar issue of U.S. isolationism. The occasion was a campus lecture sponsored by the political science department, with Neal as a member of the student planning committee. President Clark gave a thoughtful address, later published, in which he described himself as a "thoroughgoing isolationist." He had previously enjoyed a distinguished career in the State Department, including service as ambassador to Mexico. Other than their coincidental agreement that the United States should avoid foreign entanglements, President Clark and Professor Wormuth had little in common.

Neal was unsettled. He disagreed with both of them, and that pushed him to clarify his own thinking. He had returned from the war convinced that the United States had made a major contribution in helping to win the war, preserving democracy, and establishing itself as the leader of the free world. His penchant for engagement, which his commitment to the infantry had illustrated, probably influenced him as well. If he saw a political problem looming over some distant horizon, his visceral urge was to go deal with it. As the years have gone by, Neal has sensed that on many issues he was moving more and more toward President Clark's viewpoints. But he wasn't there in 1952. It comforted him then to know that when President Clark had taken the same isolationist position against the League of Nations in 1919, Church President Heber J. Grant, speaking "as an individual," had said he favored the League.

Neal also felt discomfort in April 1951, when he confronted the opposing views involved in President Harry S Truman's decision to fire one of the nation's most admired World War II heroes, General Douglas MacArthur, who was commander of United States and United Nations forces during the Korean War. Truman was a Democrat, and Neal's leanings, like those of his parents, had been toward the Republicans on most issues. He still remembers being one of only a few children in his public school to declare themselves in a straw poll for Republican Alf Landon for president of the United States in 1936, when Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt was the overwhelming choice of almost everyone else in the nation as well as in Neal's classroom.

In addition, most Americans saw MacArthur as a soldier's soldier and a hero's hero. One historian thought this general "may have been the most brilliant commander in the country's history." Neal hadn't forgotten the thrill he felt when he learned that MacArthur had kept his promise ("I shall return") in retaking the Philippines. He also remembered the patriotic pride he felt the day a friend took his picture next to MacArthur's limousine in Japan.

President Truman had been trying to negotiate a settlement with the Chinese to end the Korean conflict, even as MacArthur was urging the strategic bombing of China. After an intense struggle over their differences, MacArthur publicly threatened to attack China, directly disobeying Truman's orders that MacArthur remain silent. That did it for Truman. Despite MacArthur's 69 percent popularity ratings, the president fired him to preserve civilian control.

Neal and a few other students huddled with Homer Durham in his tiny office in the old Fort Douglas Surplus Building, listening by radio to MacArthur's farewell speech to Congress. Thirty million other Americans listened as well. Neal felt the emotion as MacArthur closed, "his voice dropping as he began the famous last lines . . . 'Old soldiers never die. They just fade away.' And like the old soldier of the ballad, I now close my military career and just fade away an old soldier who tried to do his duty."

Fifty years later, Neal recalled that some Congressmen were so stirred by MacArthur's speech that one Democratic senator said, "If he'd spoken another twenty minutes, I'd have marched on the White House myself!" But Neal also admired how Georgia Democratic senator Richard Russell thoughtfully directed the ensuing Congressional hearings, diverting the emotion and restoring confidence in the constitutional principle of civilian control of the military.

When the emotion subsided, Neal decided that Truman was right, as a matter of constitutional doctrine. He admired Truman's courage and integrity, and he was disappointed in MacArthur, feeling that while his "place in history will be rightfully generous . . . his bravery was, on occasion, matched by his vanity."

The events with President Clark and President Truman were part of a process that helped Neal think through his own philosophy. He found that his views depended more on particular issues than on party affiliation. This approach was also shaped by the close relationship he developed with Homer Durham, whose student Douglas Alder said, "I couldn't figure out if he was a Republican or a Democrat." Alder had never heard anyone deal with Franklin D. Roosevelt in such an "objective manner" as Durham did. That stunned him, because in his world, nobody had much "good to say about FDR." Durham's approach intentionally pushed his students to form their own views in responsible ways.

Homer Durham often invited students to his home for evenings of serious conversation. Sometimes a little austere, he had the reputation of not suffering fools gladly, not seeming very tolerant of those who didn't think as fast as he did. He was also not one for small talk. Neal picked up some of these attitudes himself in his early years, perhaps because he found it stimulating to try and think as fast as Durham did, and he enjoyed Durham's substantive discussion of ideas. He also found that his mentor would "go to the wall" to help his students find good professional positions an attitude that benefited Neal on several future occasions.

Neal would later acknowledge with gratitude that he was "one of Homer's boys." In addition to admiring Durham's quest for intellectual rigor, Neal came to appreciate his attitude toward public service as an ethical dimension in political science. And he was especially blessed to discover that, along with everything else, his mentor's life reflected a sometimes understated but deeply real commitment to the gospel of Jesus Christ.

In 1987, Brigham Young University created a G. Homer Durham Lectureship, encouraged by two more of "Homer's boys," L. Ralph Mecham and Martin B. Hickman, who was then a dean in the social sciences at BYU. On that occasion, Neal would comment on Durham as a role "model for professional public servants," because he was "wise, good, and honest" (see D&C 98:10), in contrast with many modern civil servants "who are barely civil." He recalled how Durham quietly blended his religious faith with his commitment to public service, serving "family, friends, neighbors and others" in ways that would prepare them for eternity, "along with serving them here and now." "For all the diplomas Durham signed," Neal was especially glad that Homer's mentoring marked Neal with his "spiritual signature."

Neal's tutorial relationship with Homer Durham illustrates some key mentoring relationships among Latter-day Saint educational leaders in the twentieth century. In these relationships, each master modeled for his apprentice how to reconcile the competing demands between the spirit and the intellect, teaching by example how to contribute to the world without becoming worldly. That modeling was part of the genius and purpose of the Church schools, not just for the leaders but for all students and all teachers.

To begin with, Karl G. Maeser was the "founding father" of Church education, having tutored Brigham Young's children before being sent to start BYU in 1876. Karl Maeser later oversaw all Church schools, assisted by an examining board that included James E. Talmage and Joseph Tanner, whom Maeser had mentored at BYU. When Talmage was later president of the University of Utah in the early 1900s, his research assistant was J. Reuben Clark, who went on to Columbia Law School and then worked in the U.S. State Department. Then James E. Talmage was called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Meanwhile, Joseph Tanner went to Utah State University, where he found a promising young scholar named John A. Widtsoe, whom he encouraged to attend Harvard to study chemistry and then return to Utah.

Over the next generation, J. Reuben Clark became a member of the First Presidency and mentored a young stake president named Harold B. Lee in developing the Church Welfare Plan. During that same era, John A. Widtsoe became president of Utah State University and then the University of Utah, before being called to the Twelve. Elder Widtsoe knew and influenced young Homer Durham, who later became Neal Maxwell's mentor. In addition, Harold B. Lee later tutored Neal Maxwell before recommending him as commissioner of education in 1970. Neal would in turn mentor future Apostles Dallin H. Oaks, Jeffrey R. Holland, and Henry B. Eyring as key leaders in the Church Educational System.

These close teacher-student relationships illustrate the natural process by which several generations of Church leaders have passed along to leaders they helped select for the next generation a shared vision about educating both the mind and the heart. Many other teachers and leaders in Church education during these years similarly found their own mentors and role models discovering, as Neal did from Homer Durham, that for all students, example is the best teacher. Having been well mentored as a student, Neal Maxwell would thus know why and how to mentor others when his turn came.
