Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Starting Out Together

Twenty-Two

Washington, D.C.

By 1952, Neal Maxwell felt drawn to Washington, D.C., a bit like a heat-seeking missile, but the force that drew him was a general, undefined one. As Colleen put it, he just "loved that political thing." Though he had graduated from college with a political science major, he didn't really have in mind a career in politics or government service, nor did he plan to use his Washington experience as a springboard to something else. He was fascinated by national politics, and he wanted to find out for himself what it was like to be at the very center of political process, policy, and power. As with so many other steps in his life, he actually seemed to enjoy proceeding quickly but fearlessly in the mode of "Lead, Kindly Light": "I do not ask to see / The distant scene one step enough for me."

During the next four years, Neal gained a significant real-world education that informed and shaped him. He learned about the process of building consensus and cooperation among competing groups and about the limited effectiveness of dogmatic extremists on both ends of the political spectrum. About the place of a commitment to the common good among statesmen who contribute to real problem solving and about the limited contributions of ambitious, egocentric show horses. About the inner workings and the genuine value of the American political system and about the limitations of bureaucracies.

Grasping such lessons gave Neal an important level of insight into his own approach to leadership, both organizationally and in the formation of public policy. When he left Washington in 1956, he returned to Utah not because he couldn't handle the world of big-time political forces but because he could. He handled it well enough that he preferred to draw on that foundation in a sphere more suited to his real interest higher education. But no matter what else he would do later, he would think, teach, interact, and lead with a honed set of "political" skills, in the best and largest sense of the term.

George Hinckley offered to help pay Neal's way through law school, in Washington or elsewhere. He could see his son-in-law's interest in what looked like a law-related world, he knew that Neal and Colleen didn't have the money to pay for tuition or much else, and he thought more education and a specific career track might give Neal a desirable focus. But Neal was tired of school after his intense sprint through the U, and he couldn't see himself as a lawyer anyway.

For a young and wide-eyed Utah Republican who was a World War II veteran, the early fifties were a good time to be in Washington. Dwight D. Eisenhower, a celebrated World War II general, had just been elected President of the United States the first Republican elected to the White House since Herbert Hoover in 1928. The Republicans were energized, the postwar economy was beginning to move, and the Korean War was about to end. On the other hand, the Cold War was intensifying. The Soviet Union had now become a sufficient threat to the United States that much of the country "was almost in a state of paranoia about international communism." In the face of that threat, Eisenhower's view that the United States should be engaged in global political developments affirmed Neal's views against isolationism.

As an added incentive for a politically oriented Latter-day Saint, President Eisenhower had appointed Ezra Taft Benson, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, as Secretary of Agriculture. Elder Benson enjoyed an unusual degree of influence, because Eisenhower looked to his Cabinet for overall policy advice more than most presidents had done. In addition, wrote historian William Manchester, every Cabinet meeting "opened with a silent prayer or a few prayerful words from Benson. . . . If Eisenhower forgot it, [Secretary of State John Foster] Dulles would clear his throat and murmur a reminder, and Ike would blurt out, 'Oh my gosh! And I really need all the help we can get up there this morning. Ezra, please . . .'"

Among local Church members, J. Willard Marriott, his food service and hotel empire just emerging, was president of the Washington Stake, which stretched from Baltimore, Maryland, to Richmond, Virginia. Neal's and Colleen's involvement in this stake would expand their vision and attitudes about life among a community of Saints.

Neal's first job in Washington was as a staff economic analyst with a government intelligence department, but his assignments were well removed from exotic Soviet intrigue. He found the preparation of routine economic analyses a bland enough intellectual diet that he was ready to leave the organization after little more than a year. The most interesting thing about his work was that it gave him the opportunity for an insider's view of international relations. He gained much of this perspective in weekly briefing sessions, such as the time he heard former president Harry Truman give his perspective on several current international issues to a small group of staffers. Neal was impressed with Truman's candor and his grasp of detail.

During this impressionable stage of Neal's exposure to a large bureaucracy, he was alert to lessons about leadership. He was quite taken by the style of a particular branch chief, who was responsive and encouraging to Neal's staff team when they performed well even on small tasks. As an indication of her confidence, she gave the team increased responsibility. Because she was personally secure, Neal found "she was unthreatened by the progress of her followers, realizing that as they grew and improved she was succeeding as a leader." Thus she took "delight in [the] development" of her subordinates. This approach appealed to Neal enough that he sought to incorporate it into his own approach to leadership.

By contrast, he later became disillusioned with the department's overall approach to its internal management priorities. As he would later tell an audience at Brigham Young University,

in one federal department . . . the methodology of filing came out by directive and assumed a preeminence over our primary task. This trend was symbolically accompanied by the domesticating appearance of sweet potato foliage on the desk (which was accompanied by my disappearance from that department in search of better tasks).

When they learned Neal was leaving, his superiors offered to help finance his education for a Ph.D. in international relations at Harvard. This would have qualified him for further responsibility with the department, because the upper-level staff people all had doctoral degrees. But he had already decided he preferred to work in the legislative branch of government. Nonetheless, Neal always retained certain work habits he developed by following the organization's standard protocol. For instance, he would never have any trouble keeping information confidential, because confidentiality had been so valued and so pervasive in his work environment. He learned instinctively to tear up or shred unneeded documents a practice he frequently employed in later work assignments.

Neal's good friend from his college days, Ralph Mecham, was working as a staff assistant to Utah Senator Wallace F. Bennett. Senator Bennett had been elected in 1950, the first time he had run for public office. He was from a pioneer Latter-day Saint family, his father having crossed the plains in 1868. His wife, Frances, was a daughter of Church President Heber J. Grant. A prominent Utah businessman, Senator Bennett had become the first representative of small business to be elected president of the National Association of Manufacturers in 1949. This was a background Neal could, and did, appreciate. In addition, Wallace Bennett possessed some statesmanlike qualities that appealed to Neal's instincts about the political process.

When Ralph learned that Neal was looking for another position, he recommended him to the Senator and to Lyle Ward, Bennett's administrative assistant. Based largely on Ralph's influence, Neal soon joined the staff, which then totaled five people. Logistical support for Senate staffers was limited enough that Neal's addition to the crew bumped both him and Ralph into an underground basement office in the Senate Office Building, rather than in Senator Bennett's fourth floor office, where Ralph had been.

In an extracurricular project that reflected the "brashness" Neal remembers about himself during this stage, he and Ralph worked during lunch hours in their shared basement office to invent a board game they called "Uranium Millionaire." Uranium was booming in those days, particularly in southeastern Utah. They submitted their game to Parker Brothers, whose rejection letter said they'd received "many games . . . with a 'uranium background.'"

The Senate soon became Neal's kind of place. He was immediately attracted by his opportunity to work on national issues related to Senator Bennett's committee assignments with Finance, Banking, and Housing and Urban Affairs. He became a devoted reader of the Congressional Record, a habit he maintained for years after leaving the senator's staff. He was frequently assigned to listen to floor debates and committee hearings, which gave him numerous opportunities to observe famous people and time-honored processes at close range.

He immediately noticed the wide variety of styles and commitments to the legislative process among various senators. He discovered that members of the Senate could hardly be experts on the details of every bill; consequently, they had to rely on committees and staff support. Such discoveries helped Neal understand the sage observation that people who love law or sausage should avoid seeing either one being made. As he once put it, "I got to see politics in the raw in the United States Senate. It was a great education."

For instance, Neal was standing in a Senate corridor one day when the bell for a vote rang all the senators to the main floor. Senator John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts rushed past Neal in the hallway. Looking around, Senator Kennedy turned to Neal and asked, "Which way am I supposed to vote?" Neal calmly replied that he thought the Democrats were voting 'aye' on this one, so the senator went to the floor and voted 'aye' on the proposition.

Neal's real-world education was underway.
