Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Twenty-Three

The Spirit of Public Service

Neal soon noticed a difference between show horses and work horses. That insight launched the development of his entire understanding of and attitudes toward public service, a set of perspectives that permanently influenced his personal desires and philosophy.

Once he stood in a Senate anteroom next to Senator Lyndon Johnson of Texas, who was then the Senate majority leader. Both were reading the ticker-tape news reports on an important bill coming out of a Senate committee after months of intense effort. One member of the committee who had not attended the sessions to hear the tedious testimony had managed to show up on the day the bill was reported so he could "take his bows before waiting TV cameras. He was one of those senators who would show up for the opening of an envelope," Neal observed. "The man at my side, later to become President, profaned in his disgust for the show horse senator, declaring that [he was] a lazy liberal who let other liberals do the work while he took the bows." He learned from such experiences how "the many depend upon the few to lead, . . . to show the way."

One of Neal's most memorable experiences with "show horses" led to his cameo appearance in the events leading to the Senate's censure of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin. This was a strange tale that captured the nation's attention and ended with a sadly permanent legacy "McCarthyism" now holds a place in standard dictionaries, a pejorative term referring to unfair and aggressive personal attacks.

In 1951, Senator McCarthy was "the most famous figure in the [Republican] party." As the flamboyant chairman of a Senate committee, he conducted extensive hearings on the influence of Communists in the federal government and elsewhere. The public initially took McCarthy at his word. But when a McCarthy aide sought preferential treatment from the U.S. Army, the army accused McCarthy of improper conduct. McCarthy retorted that the army had trumped up this claim to make him call off his investigation of Communists in the armed forces.

After dramatic public hearings, the Senate was so embarrassed by McCarthy's conduct that it appointed a select committee chaired by Utah Sentor Arthur V. Watkins, Senator Bennett's close friend, to investigate McCarthy. Acting firmly, Senator Watkins banned television from his committee's hearings. When McCarthy complained, Watkins declared him out of order. McCarthy then "bolted into [a nearby] corridor, where television crews were waiting, and spluttered into a microphone, 'I think this is the most unheard of thing I ever heard of.'"

When McCarthy attacked the committee as "handmaidens of the Communist Party," Senator Watkins wept on the Senate floor, saying he had "taken this thankless job" at the request of his colleagues and "now they were standing by watching while McCarthy vilified him." This scene so moved Senator Bennett that he asked Lyle Ward, with Neal's assistance, to draft a resolution condemning McCarthy for attacking the committee. The Senate's adoption of the resolution on December 2, 1954, paved the way for McCarthy's formal censure by the Senate.

On the day the Senate passed the censure motion, Senator McCarthy rushed into a side room where people from the media were waiting. Standing nearby, Neal entered the room with the others. There he saw that the media representatives "knew [McCarthy] was through, he knew they'd given him a good ride, and they knew he'd been good copy." Neal would later say of this scene, "In their final exchanges in that room I saw how symbiotic sensationalism can be. . . . Crucial causes often fall into the hands of those least able to champion them effectively . . . and . . . the media use people sometimes cruelly."

Neal thought McCarthy an "inept and phony" leader who undermined the cause of anti-Communism. He believed there were indeed some Communist influences in high places, but he found that McCarthy's arrogance impaired his judgment about the complexities of dealing with those influences.

Watching this case at close range helped teach Neal to be skeptical about celebrity status as a basis for public trust since, as someone has joked, a celebrity is just a person who is well known for being well known. He would always remain cautious when he saw public figures driven to the spotlight of notoriety. Years later he would say of people with McCarthy's weakness, "craving power and the spotlight sucks out the spiritual oxygen, leaving some 'past feeling.' Strangely, though desensitized, some are still able to hear the beckoning click of a TV camera at a hundred yards."

While the McCarthy incident was the most extreme example, Neal also observed other Congressional disappointments. One was the confession of Utah Congressman Douglas R. Stringfellow just before the 1954 election that certain stories he'd told about his World War II experiences had been fabricated. Elected in 1952, Stringfellow had publicly claimed that he lost both of his legs while on a secret wartime mission behind enemy lines in Europe. In fact, his injuries did occur during the war but not in battle.

As a fellow war veteran, Neal felt real sadness over Stringfellow's embarrassing revelations and his withdrawal from Congress. Neal said he was, after all, "a legitimate veteran," so he didn't really need to make up the stories. He had also been a very promising Congressman. Neal had seen him "spellbind the House Interior Committee" regarding the need for the Upper Colorado River Project. The Republicans in Utah hastily persuaded Henry Aldous Dixon, president of Utah State University, to run for Stringfellow's seat. After Dixon was elected, Neal provided him with some staff assistance when he first arrived in Washington.

In general, Neal found that the show horse mentality among United States Congressmen was widespread. He eventually concluded that many of them were, "by and large, driven by [a desire for] power and perpetuation in office" more than by a genuine commitment to the public interest. "Power is so attractive [that] only a few people can handle it. . . . Meekness is not a common virtue." He often noted that his impression bore out Joseph Smith's words: "We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority," to "exercise unrighteous dominion" (D&C 121:39).

Neal was troubled enough by his discovery of this general tendency which some people call "Potomac fever" that "it shaped [his] views for the rest of [his] life," moving him to examine his own motives. He probably sensed within himself the same desire for recognition at times, and his honest effort to tame that urge became part of his commitment to discipleship.

Years later, he would often refer to his Washington experience or to similar examples in political and military biographies. He would talk about the "incessant strivings for glory . . . among the talented" and the "addicting nectar of recognition." At times he'd quote Abraham Lincoln about the way "towering genius . . . thirsts and burns for distinction." Frequently he would cite the Doctrine and Covenants: "Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and good men . . . ye should observe to uphold" (D&C 98:10; italics added). And then he would return to one of his signature themes the quest for meekness.

These experiences tempered Neal's idealism about the American political system with a sober dose of realism, but he never became cynical about the system itself. One reason he retained his optimistic view about public service is that he also saw a few impressive examples of authentic statesmanship. In fact, he came to realize that the leader-statesman could make an indispensable contribution to the success of democratic institutions.

For example, he came to admire Senator Richard Russell of Georgia, a Democrat who was chairman of the Armed Services Committee. Russell had an engaging personal modesty that Neal found to be an essential part of his statesmanship. Neal liked this quality, sensing that Russell's self-effacing personality did not displace his natural talents; rather, the modesty channeled his skill and strength to serve the public interest without his even seeming conscious of self-interest. As he saw Senator Russell in action, he could see and appreciate more fully the role Russell had played a few years earlier in averting a constitutional crisis by the way he managed the dispute between President Truman and General MacArthur.

He saw a similar quality in Senator Bennett, and he noticed that these two senators from opposing political parties often worked together, usually behind the scenes, to build the consensus needed for wise action. Neal saw the value of Bennett's collegial style and gentle demeanor. And, although Neal sometimes wished Bennett would be more assertive in pursuing legislative initiatives, in general the senator was a fine mentor for him.

He noticed that Bennett often took work home so he could master intricate problems. This impressed Neal, who saw that a good leader must "rise above his staff" and "know the data better than anyone else." The senator also helped Neal develop his own skills of political advocacy. In a draft of proposed remarks for the senator's use in encouraging a certain piece of legislation, Neal wrote that "the situation was underlined with unparalleled urgency." Senator Bennett just said, "Neal, that's too much alliteration, and it's too graphic."

On another occasion, the senator taught Neal to tame his task-oriented tendency to push impatiently through the agenda of pressing issues. Neal was driving Senator Bennett someplace when the senator said he needed to change his schedule to attend the funeral of a good friend. Neal blurted out something about, "Oh, Senator, you don't need to be at the funeral. We've got to have you" at the planned political appointment. Bennett calmly replied, "Neal, I should be there. He's my friend." Neal immediately saw that as the "brash young staffer," he wasn't making allowance for the personal dimension. He would remember this incident, and his own priorities would gradually assign ever greater importance to personal and human needs.

With increased experience and with Senator Bennett's tutoring, Neal developed greater appreciation for the process of building personal relationships with trusted friends, across the political aisle and across the country. He also came to see the place of these relationships in doing the business of the Senate. The senator taught him that legislation is possible only at the highest level where real consensus exists and that this level is adequate, even when it falls short of what a dogmatic partisan might have wished or demanded.

For instance, Neal watched Senator Bennett work closely with Democratic senators from the South on cane sugar issues that concerned Utah sugar beet farmers. He saw the importance of regional cooperation among senators from the West, in both parties, as the group mobilized support for the Upper Colorado River Storage Project. The passage of that legislation in 1956 would rank among Senator Bennett's most significant accomplishments. Issues relating to regional cooperation also formed the basis for some of Neal's later publications as a fledgling political scientist.

When Senator Bennett assigned him to work on an industrial dispersion bill, Neal tried his hand at managing a piece of legislation through its entire process. President Truman had first proposed this project as a passive defense method dispersing key industrial facilities to various locations, both as a defense against enemy attacks and to meet possible demands for military mobilization. With Bennett's watchful coaching, Neal looked to the Western regional base for initial help and built the necessary coalitions to gain support for the bill. As support grew, Neal worked with the White House staff in arranging for President Eisenhower to comment favorably on the bill at a press conference. The law was eventually passed; however, it was never implemented as planned because of social and political obstacles that turned out to be more powerful than the policy behind the legislation. Some of those obstacles arose within the executive branch bureaucracy that had responsibility for the law's implementation.

Neal was thus able to say of the industrial dispersion bill that he saw it all the way through, from conception to nonimplementation. He later realized that many aspects of the concept were probably not realistic, especially when the enemy could multiply missiles faster than the government could move factories.

He later described this project in his master's degree thesis, because it illustrated both the coalition-building process and the challenge of blending the wills of the legislative and executive branches of government in implementing policy. This was only one of many ways his years in the Senate prepared him to specialize in "the American Congress as my little slice of political science" in the university classroom. He would also find that his frequent proximity to national leaders and national issues had given him an informed kind of confidence when he later dealt with Utah legislators or interviewed other public figures on KUED television.

Although he stood outside the political context, J. Willard Marriott was another person whose example Neal found heartening during this time of his intensive learning about public service. Already emerging as a national business leader, Marriott was the Maxwells' stake president. Neal had heard of the Marriott business acumen but was stirred even more by Bill's soft-spoken humility. Because that commodity was generally in such short supply in Washington, Neal noticed the contrast. He saw in Bill a certain "self-confidence enclosed in meekness that was a good thing for me to see, because he was [also] such a high achiever."

In his younger days, Neal hadn't really been conscious of his own father's innate meekness. And the military leaders he knew were not much into being meek and lowly. But during his missionary service, he had begun to sense that meekness mattered. Then, his general disillusionment with most political leaders only enhanced his appreciation for the few other-centered leaders he did encounter in Washington. When he saw their modesty, he recognized it and liked it. One Sunday he saw President Marriott quietly giving a branch president a substantial financial contribution for the branch building fund something other stake members never knew. Their not knowing gave special meaning to Neal's view of the donation.

Out of all of these experiences, his understanding of the political process and public service came into balance. He retained his disappointment in political figures whose self-interest interfered with their commitments to the public interest. He also realized that political extremists at both ends of the spectrum suffered from "the same kind of myopia," as they played to their galleries and engaged more in sloganeering than in actual problem solving. Thus he saw for himself that "things get done in the center," that portion of the political spectrum where the interests of competing political parties overlap. If you're off too far to one side, you can maybe "make good copy in a newspaper," or "have a moment in the sun" with a speech but will otherwise be ineffective. At the same time, he came to appreciate "the dilemma of the centrist" who may not be appreciated by those on either end of the spectrum.

When the centrists helped the political system work and Neal saw that the system often did work, "even with all the mischief" he found that "our whole American system depended on having strong political parties and that politics would be an honorable profession." For him, then, the "highest expression of politics was in our governmental/constitutional system." The key to that system was the honest commitment of even a few able leaders who together built the relationships and shaped the consensus that nourished effective public policy.

In that "world of public service," Neal concluded, the "shaping of choices in the political process" can have "greater impact and influence" than what happens in the voting booth. While "the voting booth is very democratic," the "shaping of the [policy] alternatives is aristocratic; it is work that is done by a few." And the people blessed with the capacity and the self-discipline to do that work well would not if they were statesmen enough to deserve the duty be "first in line as eager volunteers" to serve their country, because they would often need to sacrifice their own interests for the sake of the larger public good.

These insights would influence Neal's future approach to the resolution of problems among individuals and groups in any environment. Whether he found them in biographies, history books, or real-life experience, he was often moved by the examples of people who, when called upon, laid both their gifts and their egos upon the altar of public service. He wanted to be like that. Because of these deep feelings, one of Neal's favorite moments in American history was an incident when George Washington blended power with meekness in a way that confirmed his role as a father of freedom. This was a story Neal has often recounted to illustrate the attitudes he came to prize.

Near the end of the Revolutionary War, despite the American military victories, the colonies were disorganized, squabbling, and still unwilling to finance a national government capable of paying its debts including what the country owed its soldiers for several years of valiant service. In their frustration with the untidiness of democratic self-government, some of Washington's men tried to persuade him to become king of America.

The general rejected a monarchy as contrary to all they'd fought for. Then some soldiers plotted to overthrow the government and establish a military dictatorship, with Washington or without him. Washington called his men together in a meeting some consider "probably the most important single gathering ever held in the United States." Washington was unable to dissuade them, until he tried to read them a letter. Unable to read, he pulled some spectacles from his pocket. "'Gentlemen, you must pardon me,' he said in apology. 'It appears that I have grown gray in your service and now find myself also growing blind.'" As the men realized Washington's attitude of sacrifice, "They wept, many of these warriors. And the . . . plot was dissolved."

Neal loved biographer James Flexner's lines: "This homely act and simple statement did what all Washington's arguments had failed to do." Surely "in all history few men who possessed unassailable power have used that power so gently and self-effacingly for what their best instincts told them was the welfare of their neighbors and all mankind."

Earlier Flexner had written about Washington's conscious habit of trying to learn from his experience, always assuming that he had more to learn than he had to give. In these words is a distant mirror of Neal's own growing desire for self-discipline: "As [Washington's] character and his world view expanded, more meanings became clear to him. He accurately defined his failures and worked out the reasons why he had failed. The results of this protracted self-education were to prove of the greatest importance." Drawing on his impressionable years in Washington, D.C., Neal Maxwell's own expanding world view and "protracted self-education" about the link between meekness and public service would prove important to his ministry.
