Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Twenty-Four

Family Beginnings

Leo Tolstoy began the classic Anna Karenina with, "Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way." Tolstoy knew that there are a thousand ways family life can go wrong, but, despite variety in personalities, backgrounds, and circumstances, there is only one way family life can go right a disciplined adherence to certain root principles of commitment and affection. Without that discipline, there will be unhappy families, each one unhappy in its own undisciplined way.

Neal Maxwell and Colleen Hinckley both grew up in such stable families that some people in today's culture of fractured families might say life was never like that. But in the Maxwell and the Hinckley homes, life really was like that. Despite obvious differences in the personalities and environments of those two homes, there were fundamental similarities in matters of principle. Central to their common pattern was the gospel and parents who affectionately tried to impart its teachings to their children. Having tasted the sweet fruit of this pattern so personally and so long, Neal and Colleen both wanted their children to experience what they had known.

As their children were growing up, Neal became unusually structured in his efforts to "do it right" with his family. Some people might find his approach too structured, too planned. But for him and Colleen, the structure worked partly because structured approaches and working always on his "protracted self-education" were so natural to his personality.

Beyond matters of personality, Neal came to believe passionately that family life really is at the center of society, the Church, and the gospel. Looking back on his life, he has said that as pleasant as was life in the Wandamere Ward, one can't be sealed to a ward or a high school or a group of missionaries. What happened in the homes of society took on increasing importance in his ministry. He once told the lawyers of the Utah State Bar Association, "Winning points at the office roundtable is not as vital as that which happens at your supper table." He told the teachers of the Church Educational System, "We will be no more effective in the classroom than we are effective in the laboratory of life at home." And he wrote in the Ensign that "life's most demanding tests as well as life's most significant opportunities for growth in life usually occur within marriage and the family."

Those closest to Neal knew these were not just pleasant, pro-family cliches. Said President James E. Faust, "He's a great soul in so many areas, but none greater than in his role as a family patriarch. He [and] Colleen . . . have a great family. He is a noble father and grandfather to that family."

As time went on, Neal came increasingly to think about ways to strengthen not only his own family but also other families, especially those of Church members. During his years with the Correlation Department in the mid-1970s and then during his membership in the Twelve, Neal found himself following family issues and needs with great interest and concern. As he learned from Church research that children with temple-married parents were far more likely themselves to become, and remain, active Church members, Neal would think with gratitude about his own extended family. He had seen, over three generations, the fruits of the simple, faithful way Clarence and Emma had kept their covenants and taught their children. For him, that kind of family life in successive generations is how Zion will be built.

Elder Maxwell has taken unusual interest in learning what proportion of Latter-day Saint children in various countries are growing up in the homes of temple-married parents. He often reflects on how the Latter-day Saints can best pursue the vision of building a second- and third-generation Church throughout the world. His passion about family life always reaches broadly enough to include single parents and other single adults. Sometimes he mentions his admiration for his single sister, Lois, emphasizing that Church doctrine assures her of an eternal marriage and family life.

Neal and Colleen's efforts with their family reveal glimpses of their own laboratory of life at home. It helps to know in advance the high priority they have attached to this part of their lives. Yet the Maxwells are also quick to agree with Mary Hales, wife of Elder Robert D. Hales of the Twelve, that if you think you've seen a perfect family, you just don't know them well enough yet. They found that the surprises and adventures of rearing children inevitably make family life a perpetual exercise in managing the difference between the real and the ideal.

Bearing children was itself a challenge for Colleen and Neal. Over the years, she experienced three miscarriages, in addition to giving birth to their four children. To their real disappointment, surgery required after Jane's birth finally eliminated the possibility of having more children.

Becky, their firstborn, arrived in the midst of Colleen's health trauma in 1952. Neal's parental inexperience showed up early, in what has become a favorite family tale. They brought Becky home to a basement apartment near the home of Colleen's parents, anxious to follow their doctor's instructions not to let her be around other children. With Colleen preoccupied by her illness, Neal conscientiously felt that Becky should sleep in their bed. Then the concerned young father "slept with his head about six inches off the pillow." When he awoke one morning and couldn't see Becky where he had placed her, he was frantic for a few minutes, half awake, searching for her until he found her safely asleep in a corner of the bed covers.

Becky was naturally the child on whom her parents first practiced their parental communication skills. One Sunday when the family was in church, Colleen asked Becky, then about nine, to go home and put some potatoes in the oven to bake for dinner. To prevent the potatoes from bursting, she told Becky, "Before you turn on the heat, poke a fork into each potato so the air will come out." When she arrived home and opened the oven, Colleen found a fork stuck into each baking potato just as she had asked.

Cory was born in Washington, D.C., in 1953, when Neal and Colleen still couldn't afford a car. When Colleen's labor began, she called their friend Ralph Mecham, who drove her from their suburban home to a hospital in the city. Neal rushed to the hospital from his Senate office, arriving barely in time for the birth.

Nancy was born in 1957, the only one born on time a "hard charger, like her dad," Colleen said. Then Jane came along two years later, during a busy summer in her father's job at the University of Utah. As soon as Jane had safely arrived, Neal had to hurry back to the campus. When the nurses took Colleen from the delivery room to her regular room, they wondered where her husband was. About that time, Colleen's father, George, entered a hospital elevator to be with Fern, her mother, who was there for some tests. When the nurses saw George, they asked Colleen, "Oh, is this your husband?"
