Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Twenty-Five

The Maxwell Family

Elder Maxwell perhaps unconsciously summarized many of his own approaches to parenting in remarks he shared in some Saturday evening sessions of stake conferences in the early 1980s. He talked about building a happy "storehouse of memories" from a list of desirable family practices he had compiled. They included structuring family activities to create pleasant memories, fathers giving blessings to their children, husbands giving blessings to their wives, giving prime time to prime relationships, providing pleasant little surprises for family members, parents writing letters to their children, parents bearing testimony privately to their children, reading scriptures aloud together, having frequent gospel conversations, parents willingly learning from their children, helping family members deal with opposition, holding back clever but possibly cutting comments, and ensuring that the parents are both Christians and theologians.

The memories of the Maxwell children from their own home life track this list with unerring consistency. For example, it became clear to all of them early on that, with clocklike regularity, their task-oriented father would set aside his normal preoccupations so that he could just enjoy a good time with them. Son-in-law Marc Sanders has always been "impressed that someone in his position is home at five o'clock. He gets a lot done, but he doesn't let work dominate him." That has been a constant pattern. As a deliberate choice, Nancy said, Neal put both his time and "his money into the memories" he would build with his children.

Cory's earliest memory of his father is of the two of them and Becky raking leaves in their yard and then, laughing together, diving into the pile of leaves. In the family's early years, Saturday mornings were always work time, with the schedule "pretty programmed" for everyone to pitch in to do household chores. Neal would rouse the slumbering masses with the University of Utah fight song, reminding them that they could play as soon as the work was done. Sundays were always a family day, with regular visits after church to both sets of grandparents, when other duties allowed.

One family excursion into Neal's creative imagination became so entrenched that he has carried it on, by popular demand, with his grandchildren. Somehow he got started making up "Friends of the Forest" stories, starring "Tweedle-Dee and Tweedle-Dum." He told these creative tales to Becky, Cory, Nancy, and Jane when they were very young and the adventures still continue with his grandchildren; he recently recorded some favorites for the younger ones. What Neal liked best was that this spontaneous story time let him "put my arms around them and lie down on the carpet and just tell them stories."

The children loved how the animals who were the friends of the forest had names just like theirs such as Cory Cucumber and Jane Jeppson and each chapter would always have a subtle moral. In one typical tale, the friends of the forest had to find a way to negotiate with the snakes on Snake Mountain to rid the forest of people who wanted the animals to be at war with each other rather than at peace.

Neal's own love of basketball and tennis made it natural for him to engage his children in his playful side. He understood Elder Marvin J. Ashton's comment that a twelve-year-old boy doesn't so much want you to say you love him as he wants you to play ball with him. When Cory got interested in baseball and boxing, Neal practiced baseball with him and then helped teach him to box even though, Cory later realized, "baseball is a little too slow for Dad."

As the family grew older, they added other activities to their repertoire. Some were informal activities or competitions Neal would make up as the family drove on trips. He often led the family in flying kites, hiding Easter eggs, seeing movies, and making up races some in which he would race the little ones while he was running backward and they ran forward. Their board games included Boggle, Scrabble, Monopoly, and one called Landslide, in which Neal's will to win simply couldn't be repressed. Somehow Colleen could never quite muster the competitiveness required of serious Monopoly players, because she would always make secret but forbidden side deals with losing players, giving them money under the table or giving away her choice properties, such as "Boardwalk," for a song.

In the pleasant images these events conjure up, one can hear the distant echoes of Neal and Lois racing, as children, from the porch to the trees in the front yard, or building snow forts with Clarence in the backyard, or Clarence's daughters perpetually combing his hair while he read the Sunday comics aloud, imitating each character's voice.

Once the Maxwell children began marrying, the in-laws were always included in ever more challenging competitions such as some very serious tennis. The family outings have often made room for mixed doubles and other inclusive varieties, but the most intense tennis is reserved for the family singles championship. For years, Neal issued a standing challenge to Cory, Mike, Mark, and Marc that they had to beat him in singles before he turned sixty in 1986 or any victories after that date wouldn't count. Giving no quarter, Neal has always been a tough competitor in these matches. "He'll force you to play your best," says Cory, whose last victory over his father goes back to 1972, before his mission.

On Neal's sixtieth birthday, he sent a can of white Wimbledon tennis balls to each of his four partners in the family men's singles group, with this letter:

Let the record show that so far as the singles matches between aging Neal Ash Maxwell and [these] aspirants are concerned, only two aberrations appeared: Briefly and fleetingly before any challenge had been issued in 1972 with Cory (was Calvin Coolidge President then?), and with Mike in a Henefer hiatus involving a borrowed racquet.

Neal's letter extended appreciation for "encouraging a senior citizen in his performance" and ended with "a plea for mercy" regarding future matches.

At the other end of the spectrum of family experience, the Maxwell parenting style called for quite a different set of skills and responses when a child needed discipline. Again reflecting the way they had been reared, both Colleen and Neal tended to govern their children as Joseph Smith governed his people by teaching correct principles and leaving room for self-governance. Their children were not in doubt about how they were expected to behave, which allowed most of their parents' counseling to be suggestive and nondirective.

In general, the Maxwells were realistic and flexible. Both of them preferred a "suggestion-box climate" in their home, as opposed to "parental rigidity." The children got the message early that Neal saw himself as a father or grandfather first and a university officer or General Authority second, and his willingness to share time with the family affirmed the message. The good-natured spirit of their family activities also created an open, trusting climate.

When their children needed to learn a behavioral lesson, the parents usually tried to step back and let the children learn for themselves. They felt from the earliest stages that if they "butted heads" too often, they might do a child more harm than good. They also respected their children's agency and worked at helping all of them make their own good decisions.

Sometimes, however, directness was called for. In his teens, Cory habitually teased his sisters, especially Nancy. On one occasion, while driving in the car, Neal spoke directly: "Cory, you need to back off and be kinder to Nancy, because she's suffering under the teasing." Another time, Cory was playing typically loud teenage music on the home stereo system. When Neal heard a song that contained profanity, he "did not stroll, he marched in and said he would not have that music played in their house." After that, Cory was more careful to screen his own music, in or out of the home. They later worked out an accommodation by putting a small stereo player near Cory's bedroom partly to appease him and partly to contain the sound.

When the Maxwell girls dated young men their parents weren't enthusiastic about, Neal and Colleen generally were patient. Neal did "roll his eyes a few times" about some boys the girls dated on the grounds that they didn't want to seem exclusive. It was also clear to all of the children that they were expected to be home by a reasonable hour and that their parents would either be waiting up or be expecting them to check in at the master bedroom when they returned home.

Despite her gentle exterior, Colleen had no trouble showing tough love. Once when Neal was out of town, she became upset because the children had become so quarrelsome she couldn't get their attention. So she simply announced she was leaving "Okay, I'm going out the door." And she did. The children looked at themselves and said, "Good night! Mom's leaving. What have we done?" Colleen was similarly direct on a later family vacation when a group of grandchildren were getting out of control in a swimming pool. She marched them "back to the motel room and read them the riot act" for the purpose of maintaining family peace an environmental quality she values very highly.

Some other sensitive occasions called for unusually creative remedies. Once one of the children became very frustrated by a seminary class, feeling perhaps some of the disappointment Neal had known himself at times in his youth classes. The outcome of the class was in jeopardy because of repeated absences. Knowing of Neal's visible Church role and knowing how he felt about studying the scriptures, this youngster hardly dared raise the problem, but the absences were piling up. A candid conversation followed. Because all avenues for reconciling with the teacher seemed closed, Neal had an idea: "All right, you read your assigned material with great care, and we'll discuss your reading at length one evening each week." A period of home study followed, which proved satisfying for both student and teacher.

The children sometimes sensed clear inspiration in their parents' interventions. When one of them was working in a faraway city one summer, "out of the blue" Neal called the child and "asked if anything was wrong." The child was struggling a little and felt that the call was truly inspired. Child and father had another of those candid conversations, eventually agreeing on how to have the summer end better than it had started.

Every child's adolescence can sometimes be a little turbulent. During such a season, one of the children fell into some behavior that was wrong and potentially embarrassing. When Colleen learned of one such incident, she just said with a disappointed tone that she expected better. When Neal came home a few days later, this youngster had already gone to bed. Neal went into the room, sat on the end of the bed, and said, "I love you, and you've got more potential than this." The child felt more parental concern than real chastisement. Neal and Colleen weren't happy with what had taken place, but their focus was more on the child than on how the behavior might reflect on them.

One of Colleen's unique contributions to the Maxwells' parenting was her desire to teach her family the "service perspective" that motivated her so much. She taught this orientation almost constantly by example, as she visited people in need and invited to dinner a steady stream of members of the student ward, widows and widowers, or others she felt needed a little friendship. While they didn't dare say so at the time, some of her children recall that they sometimes would have preferred to have their parents to themselves for Sunday dinner. With the passage of time, they have come to appreciate more the compassion that was so naturally their mother's way.

Sometimes Colleen would more directly teach about service. Once when Cory was in junior high school, and without consulting him, his mother made a deal with a widow in the neighborhood that Cory would take her trash to the curb on the weekly garbage day. When he protested a little at being conscripted for such service, Colleen explained that this was his chance to help someone who really needed it and besides, it would be good for him. So he did it a little grudgingly at first, but he did do it.

Colleen taught about service not just to be nice but because she had learned from experience how serving others matures the giver. She never forgot having read about a sample of young people who were acutely withdrawn, backward, and unhappy. The study reported that "in every case," the youth "were withdrawn because of over-concern with self," which revealed a lack of concern for others. She was also influenced by her mother, who was always kind to strangers. During the Depression, Fern Hinckley was ever ready to welcome people who were "down on their luck" who were willing to work in exchange for a hot meal.

A favorite family story that captures Colleen's service instincts occurred during a vacation trip to California. Neal had run into a grocery store for some provisions while the family waited in the car. Looking out the car window, Colleen spotted a large number of shopping carts strewn all over the parking lot. She instinctively jumped from the car, rounded up the stray carts and, by the time Neal returned, had them herded all together at a pickup point near the store entrance. The rest of the family just watched her in amazement which some of them have since realized was their much-too-common response to her energetic example.

Neal has often led his family into communications and activities in a relatively structured way. The modern Latter-day Saint family home evening program began in 1964. The Maxwells found that the regular pattern of meeting every Monday night was frequently interrupted by Neal's duties at a state university that couldn't realistically accommodate their desire to preserve Monday evenings for family time. But, as needed, they found other ways and times to fulfill the purpose of those evenings. They would occasionally share a church video or read scriptures together. The family was not rigid about their reading pattern, but Neal would frequently engage them during dinner or elsewhere in "gospel conversations" about a scriptural question or religious topic. He always looked for natural ways to draw his children into thought-provoking conversation.

One such moment was the day when he asked nine-year-old Cory for some feedback about his parenting. Standing in the kitchen, Neal pointed to the two ends of the oven door handle and said, "Tell me how I'm doing as a father. If this on the left-hand side is too strict and the right-hand side is too lenient, where would you say I am?" Cory wasn't prepared for such a question but felt complimented that his father "would care what I thought." He believed his dad was about in the middle, maybe slightly on the strict side. Later on, Neal and Colleen would hold a relaxed "exit interview" with their children at the time of their marriages, asking what they could have done better as parents. Becky, for instance, recalled in that visit how much it had meant to her that they trusted her in a certain situation that was more delicate for her than they had realized.

Sometimes at dinner, Neal would ask each one present to offer some specific and deserved word of praise for another family member. At other times, he would begin a family conversation with something like, "Let me tell you some good things I have observed about each of you." He had a kind of "amazing knack" for when and how to express himself at such moments. Becky remembers they were "not the least bit phony but very sincere" comments.

The expanded version of this practice came in the form of personal letters Neal would now and then write to his children, beginning when the older children entered adolescence. He wrote the first series during Thanksgiving 1970. The letters are similar in their general approach but carefully tailored to the individual child. Each begins with measured expressions of praise, followed by the gentlest of suggestions.

After describing some personal qualities he admired and liked, he told one child:

If I were to make any suggestions to you in the spirit of love, they would not be many. One is that you have unused intellect that would give you much satisfaction and excitement if you could bring it to bear more frequently. You do have a tendency to "get by," and because you are quite bright you seldom press yourself to your limits. Since I was somewhat similarly inclined during my youth, I can only say to you that I had much more fun later when I . . . was more demanding of myself.

To another child he wrote:

You are quite open and candid about your feelings. . . . While this trait is a strength, you will need to make allowance for the fact that when someone is candid, she or he needs to make an extra effort to show concern to compensate for the candor.

And to another:

I trust you and respect you and simply want you to know of my love. You are wise beyond your years. Forgive me and your mother if in our high expectations of you we anticipate things prematurely [or] expect more from someone who is already doing so very much.

Because of his illegible handwriting ("unreformed Egyptian," President Harold B. Lee called it), Neal's letters were always more useful when his secretary typed them. He once left a handwritten note for Cory as he was hurrying out of town. When Cory picked up the note, he "stood at the kitchen sink and pondered it for the longest time and then said, 'Mom, I just can't read this.'" When he handed Colleen the note, they discovered Cory had been trying to read it upside down. Either direction, it all looked the same to him. And Colleen was "not sure I was able to help him a whole lot when we turned it right side up."

The children recall having their own family testimony meeting a time or two each year. And on one occasion in the late 1960s, Neal invited each child to sit down with him alone so he could bear his testimony in private. He told Cory then that he had recently learned Harold B. Lee had made a practice of bearing his testimony privately to each of his children, and he liked the idea. He wanted Cory to know that what he felt and said in private was the same as what he might hear him say over the pulpit.

Jane remembered that his sharing of his private spiritual feelings had a "real impact" on her. It showed her how much the gospel meant to her father. She could see that he "really wanted to live the gospel completely. He was serious about progressing." She then felt more motivation for her own life. We have already seen how stirred Neal was when he learned about fathers' blessings from Oscar McConkie he immediately wanted a blessing from his own father, which he finally received after a few years of gentle coaxing. Meanwhile, he adopted the practice of giving each of his children a father's blessing, recorded word by word for family records. He usually gave these blessings the night before each child's wedding.

In more recent years, Neal has been careful to coordinate his schedule with the family's, making sure he and Colleen spend regular time with family members. They have met monthly with their married children, attending the temple one month and planning something recreational the next month. When the adults are together, Neal will frequently "engineer gospel discussions." Sometimes those discussions have been about Neal's drafts of his books or conference talks, because he has found his own family members to be among his most trusted sounding boards. He has also maintained a regular association with his sisters, as he previously did with his parents and with Colleen's.

Neal's penchant for planning to ensure the success of major family events is illustrated by excerpts from two letters he wrote to his married children and their spouses in 1988, just before the group was leaving to join him and Colleen for some vacation time together in Hawaii:

Do all you can to prepare your family for unity, stressing that this is a "once in a lifetime" trip, observing that we will need to be loving and patient with each other. . . . Each couple . . . [is] to bring a game or an inexpensive treat to be used at crucial moments. . . .

Everybody should pack LIGHTLY. We will have laundry facilities [but] don't forget swimming suits.

You probably ought to have a departure drill a couple of times before you go. . . . Remember our tickets are nonrefundable. . . . If we miss the flights, that is the ball game!

It will be wonderful to be with you.

Remember to allow enough time for both parking and checking in [at the airport]. . . . Somewhere along the way, if we could have 15 or 20 minutes with just the [grandchildren], Colleen and I would like to visit with them. . . .

Begin to think now of the things that you are apt to remember too late. . . .

We will pray for your safety and health, and for a rich stockpiling of memories.

His style as the conscientious tour guide was evidently influenced by past experience, because he had already established a reputation among the family for his dedication to keeping the flock moving along. The family has not let him forget about the time his anxiousness about staying on schedule deprived them of seeing some picturesque castles on the green hillsides of the Rhine River in Germany.

The story is that Neal cut off the sightseeing early and urged the family from the top deck of their vessel down into the hold, so they could get off quickly when the ship docked. They ended up waiting, with no room for a view, for more than half an hour in the heat of a stifling crowd before the tour concluded. Not long thereafter, Neal hustled the family off one side of a very long train as it stopped. Then they discovered, too late, that they were on the wrong side of the train, bags and all, unable to get to the correct side of the tracks. The waiting express train they were to catch pulled away without them. The family has since teased that, as Nancy said, they "missed a fair amount of Europe just sitting inside [boats and] train stations."

Such moments from the Europe trip, with Neal pacing to hurry up the family, led to the inside joke that has affectionately become known as his "Europe face" a "help-me-endure look" of "exasperation and frustration that still appears occasionally. Instead of yelling or getting frustrated, that was kind of . . . how he let off steam. Mainly it just made us all laugh." But the family understands the look, and they try to take signals from it.

Another feature of the family trips was that Neal and Colleen were determined to make each experience educational. Without that dimension, Neal might well have lost interest in family travels, because, as some of his General Authority associates have noticed, he is "probably the world's worst tourist," getting easily bored with typical tourist stops cathedrals and art museums. When the Maxwells were with Russell and Dantzel Nelson in Bangkok, for instance, between Church meetings someone offered them a boat trip along the klongs, the picturesque local canals. When Neal "politely declined, . . . Sister Nelson, Sister Maxwell, and Brother Nelson" made the trip.

At the same time, Neal has an unusually high interest in places and artifacts that reflect his interest in politics, history, and capable leaders. Colleen has usually taken charge of assigning family members to do research on each area they might visit and then report to the family when they reached that spot. As Cory and Nancy recalled, with Neal and Colleen "you never just sort of go someplace; it's an educational experience a working vacation."

They followed this same approach with their grandchildren when taking the extended family on a two-week bus tour across the country to visit Church history sites in 1994. Some family members were a little apprehensive about the trip's extensive structure and homework. Sons-in-law Marc Sanders and Mark Anderson "thought it would be a bust, but it was fabulous."

A family videotape during one moment of this trip captured Neal saying a few words to the family group at a spot near the Peter Whitmer home in New York:

We're probably within 100 yards of where the witnesses saw the golden plates. So it's very special. . . .

Thank you for being patient with me. . . . One of the things that happen when we love each other, is that we . . . see each other's little imperfections. . . . Those are things we have to work on. We're bound to notice them in each other, and I'm sure you notice them in me. To know that we're given time by Heavenly Father to work on those faults and overcome them is a remarkable and generous thing.

[Lorenzo Snow said he] saw the minor imperfections in the Prophet Joseph Smith. But instead of being offended by them, they made him grateful, feeling that if the Lord could use [Joseph], with his imperfections, maybe there was some hope for him.

As the Church history trip illustrates, Neal and Colleen have worked consistently to include their grandchildren in regular family activities that usually have some spiritual or educational purpose at their core, visible or not. Colleen also tries to take each grandchild to a special lunch on his or her birthday where just being together is purpose enough.

With experience, Neal has learned to create conversations and interactions that include those of all ages. Said Karen, "He does it even with the smallest grandchildren," always drawing them into a conversation. "He's very attentive, listens very carefully, and you know by what he says back . . . that's he's processed what you've said and gone a step beyond . . . and you have to think more."

One favorite tradition already established among the grandchildren is "Grandpa Neal's firesides," which they are invited to attend every few months at the Maxwell home as soon as they're ten. (The informal "Grandpa Neal" grew out of a time when both Neal and Colleen's parents were still alive, and their first grandchildren were confused by the sheer number of relatives who were all named Grandpa and Grandma.) Colleen has made little briefcases marked with the name of each grandchild, so they can collect handouts and other materials that launch them with their own filing system for gospel topics. She has also created a successful "peacemaker" project each grandchild whose parents judge him or her to have been a good peacemaker during a given period is invited to the Maxwells' home for a family sleepover.

The view of the grandchildren about all of this was captured when Neal dropped by Mike and Becky's home one day. Becky called upstairs to three-year-old Robbie, asking if he'd like to come down and see Grandpa Neal. "Should I bring my scriptures?" Robbie called back. Well, not really. As one observer described it, Neal "can play in the leaves, move in for the kill at tennis, read stories or make jokes [with his grandchildren] . . . He is often jovial and most emphatically does not require family members to carry around Bibles all the time. Still, he returns again and again to the scriptures . . . drawing refreshment like water on parched lips" in his frequent "gospel conversations" with any group, including his grandchildren.

The grandchildren have echoed back the same combination of loving commitment and deliberateness that they have felt from Neal and Colleen. On the Maxwells' fortieth wedding anniversary, the sixteen grandchildren old enough to write their names signed the following "family pledge" and presented it to their grandparents:

In honor of our grandparents' . . . anniversary and because we love them so much, we sign this pledge to live worthy to marry in the temple of the Lord, and to fulfill honorable missions as we are called. We will do our best to insure there will be no empty chairs when we meet in the life beyond. Signed with love and admiration.

The spouses of the Maxwell children have been able to watch the family's style with the objectivity made possible by comparisons with their own families. Cory's wife, Karen, also came from a large and close Latter-day Saint family, but she found the Maxwell family style rather different from what she'd known especially in its degree of organization. Her parents had always "just trusted that things would happen" all right, and they usually did. By comparison, the Maxwell "vacations were so civilized, compared to what I was used to." As a child, she had "hardly ever stayed in a hotel or motel," because her family just camped. But the Maxwells "always had to have a tennis court." And "agendas for a vacation? . . . That would not happen in my family."

But Karen has come to see that being so structured and getting on to the next thing on the agenda is simply "interesting" to Neal. From the time he helped arrange things in 1975 so that Cory could surprise Karen with a marriage proposal on the scenic lookout atop the Church Office Building, she has seen his unique creativity at work. The careful planning also shows how the Maxwells give. They will "feel the spiritual needs" of family members or other people, and "come up with a practical way to meet" the need, "polishing the idea until everything is packed as full of goodness and meaning as one of Neal's talks. Getting an idea and finding a way to embody it in either words or deed, or both, is their specialty."

Mark Anderson, Nancy's husband, brought the family a fresh perspective. He said, "I never would have guessed in a million years that I was going to marry a General Authority's daughter." On his first trip to the house, he spotted Neal through a window, wearing a white shirt. "Great," he thought. "What am I going to do, and how am I going to act?" As he walked in, Neal began offering him waffles, pancakes, and juice "he was firing food at me."

Then began what the family calls The Conversation. Neal asked Mark if he had a "wanderlust." Mark "wasn't quite sure what wanderlust meant." They skipped that, and Neal went on to the topic of literature. He asked, "Who is your favorite author?" Mark said he had only a "dimly lit perspective" about "books who writes them and who's good." Then he remembered "some things I was forced to read in freshman English" and offered the only book he "thought was the slightest bit literary Catcher in the Rye." Whereupon, Neal "looked like he'd swallowed a lemon."

Moving on, Neal asked if a certain course Mark mentioned was a "garden variety" class. Mark "didn't know if he was talking about snakes or flowers or soil I had no idea." To Mark's relief, they finally discovered a mutual interest in tennis, at which point Neal "seemed quite perky and offered to play me." When their match began a few weeks later, in the fall of 1975, Neal started playing with his left-handed and "completely unorthodox form." Mark, who had played some pretty demanding tennis in his day, thought "this is going to be a long afternoon." Then, "pretty soon, he was hacking me to shreds." Mark beat him only twice after that, years later, after "many, many matches. For a hacker, he's remarkable."

By the time Mark was ready for induction into the Maxwell clan, he was prepared to appreciate the formal welcome given him at the wedding breakfast by Becky's husband, Mike Ahlander. Mike warned him about family tennis and other games: "Neal doesn't like to lose. Of course, you'll soon be grateful" for Colleen's generosity, because "if you're losing she's always willing to . . . give you money in a grueling game of Monopoly."

"You'll come to know Neal's 'Europe face,'" when people aren't there an hour early for a train, or when one of his daughters is still using the electric curlers with two other daughters waiting to use them and the family is "supposed to be at the Tabernacle in three minutes." You'll "soon learn that if Colleen isn't fasting for the garbage man, she's straightening the grocery carts" at the supermarket. You'll help Neal's limited mechanical aptitude if "you can just label what few tools he does have, so he'll know what each is for." Then Mike recalled going to California with the Maxwells before he and Becky were engaged. "Neal kept calling me [Becky's former boyfriend's name]. Colleen was working on our engagement sampler, and my name was already stitched in."

Time has drawn the family closer, where all have seen in Neal a gradual "warming and mellowing" and an increase in patience. Some of that has come from stretching together in their shared experiences. For instance, the first grandchild, Mike and Becky's Rachel, was stillborn after a full-term pregnancy. As painfully sad as it was for the parents, Colleen also found it the hardest trial of her life to that time. Even after they had shared many feelings about the incident with Mike and Becky, Neal wrote a note to them that would foreshadow some ideas to which they would all return at the time of his own leukemia:

Peter tells us that when we suffer [while] keeping the commandments, this redounds to our eternal good. . . .

This experience will increase your abilities to help others who suffer, and it will give you a deeper . . . perspective of the gospel and of life. Sometimes . . . we can learn . . . only . . . with experience.

I love you . . . and appreciate the strength you have been to us all, for . . . we have wept . . . twice, once for you and once for ourselves.

Another unexpected sorrow came later, the day Karen and Cory learned from an ultrasound examination that their newly expected baby girl would be born without a left hand and might have other difficulties. When they shared the news with Neal and Colleen, Neal's response was, "We really have a special spirit coming."

Karen reflected on Neal's attitude not long afterward while she attended the dedication service for the Bountiful Temple. As the choir and congregation sang "The Spirit of God," Karen found new meaning in the song's phrase "angels are coming to visit the earth." She wrote to Neal and Colleen, "I knew that our personal family angel is coming, and that her visit will be a precious revelation if we will be righteous and ready. . . . Your efforts are never unnoticed only too seldom acknowledged."

By the time Anna Josephine was nearly five, she was already teaching her family, including her grandparents. As Neal recounted in a general conference talk, Anna Jo's cousin, Talmage, age three, had tried to reassure her:

"Anna Jo, when you grow up you will have five fingers." Anna Jo said, "No, Talmage, when I grow up I won't have five fingers, but when I get to heaven I will have a hand."

Neal added:

If Anna Jo, who has difficult days ahead, stays steady within what has been allotted to her, she will continue to be a great blessing to many people! . . .

I pray for this in the name of Him who counts all sparrows and all fingers.

So Anna Jo, Neal told Hugh Hewitt, "is already lighting up the landscape." Not only she but her family and others "are getting an experience in love" from her presence such as the time when Anna Jo was still four and her father, Cory, offered the family prayer. After he finished, Anna Jo said, "Good! You did it all by yourself." Mr. Hewitt later said that the knowing tenderness in the way Neal talked about Anna Jo during their TV interview reflected clearly to him Neal's "conviction of God's involvement with her."

After half a century of parenting and grandparenting, Elder Maxwell has never been more sure that family life is the central place where children and parents learn to live the gospel. As a Church leader, then, "you'd have a pretty hollow victory if you failed as a father, even though you might be a terrific visitor at stake conference." He counts it among his greatest gifts that he and Colleen have been "equally yoked" in their own marriage, that they grew up in homes with attentive parents, and that they have been showered with the riches of a faithful posterity. There is no group with whom Neal would rather share, and learn about, the gospel than his own family. And in his mature years, he's "never been more engaged in or excited about the gospel than right now," and "sharing with each other and with family is the centerpiece of our spiritual nourishment."

That feeling of being so much "at home" with the gospel now seems to represent the full flowering of the seeds that were planted in the warm spiritual soil of Neal's own childhood at home, with his parents. And what he feels now is simply the mature version of what he felt then, with each life stage giving meaning to the other. Perhaps, in the most essential ways, happy families really are very much alike.
