Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Twenty-One

Speaking the Truth in Love

It didn't take Neal long to realize, as he put it, that he had "married up" spiritually in ways that would lift and bless him. No wonder his patriarchal blessing had told him, regarding his marriage, "your love may be without end."

Neal had his first in-depth look at Colleen's character very early. From the accumulation of such experiences at their real-life level, he would later say, "There is romantic love, and then there's the affection that's born of admiration. I have that for her too." Within the first year after the wedding, their first pregnancy ended in a miscarriage. A few months later, Colleen was expecting Becky. By the seventh month of this pregnancy, Colleen began having terrible headaches and nausea. When she lost five pounds in the last month before Becky's birth, her doctors were mystified. They gave her phenobarbital, took out her wisdom teeth, and sent her to specialists. One neurosurgeon suspected a brain tumor. In the meantime, however, they had to bring the baby to a safe landing.

Becky was born safely in February 1952. During a noon recess at the April 1952 general conference, Elder Mark E. Petersen, who was an acquaintance of Colleen's parents, joined Neal to give Colleen a blessing. In May she returned to the hospital for tests. Before the ordeal ended, Colleen had been subjected to months of spinal taps and electroencephalograms. When the indications of a brain tumor didn't materialize, the doctors finally settled on a diagnosis of viral meningitis that would eventually run itself out, which is essentially what happened.

During this drawn-out mixture of trauma and uncertainty, there were moments when Neal honestly feared he would lose Colleen. He began to feel again the way he had felt when he first arrived at Okinawa. "Suddenly you realize that, with the guns blazing, this is for real." Her graceful handling of the pain and pressures, both physical and otherwise, made a deep impression on him. Neal couldn't help noticing that Colleen "didn't think of herself at all. There was no self-pity, no sense of martyrdom."

Watching her bravery in the midst of a fiery trial was moving to Neal. Then he saw Colleen's attitude as she recovered not only did she feel no resentment but having pulled through the illness made her feel this was an ideal time for them to "recommit themselves to be more worthy of their blessings." As they did that, they learned together about the connections between opposition and drawing closer to God.

Another almost-incident soon gave Colleen a close look at Neal's character. Near the end of the Korean War in the early 1950s, the national draft had reduced the Church's number of full-time missionaries. The Church sent out a letter to bishops, inviting them to recommend seventies who could serve missions away from home. When Neal heard of this need, he went to his bishop, noted that he was an ordained seventy, and offered to serve again, if needed.

Colleen gasped as she realized the depth of Neal's commitment to the Church. Then her thoughts reverted to her pioneer heritage. She thought again about those women "who stayed home" in the Church's early days "when their men went off for years" as missionaries. Her commitment was equal to theirs and to Neal's. But still she was relieved when their bishop explained that the request was for men who had not yet served missions.

Neal also came soon to see how right he was about that thinking going on beneath Colleen's "hood." "I knew I was not dealing with an eighteen-year-old co-ed who was so anxious to please me that I'd have my way when I shouldn't," he said. "We hadn't been married long before I knew I had a kind of Gibraltar someone who would be tough and strong in the storms of life." For example, despite his Republican leanings, Neal was quite taken by Adlai Stevenson's intelligent grasp of the issues in the 1956 presidential election. Colleen simply responded that Eisenhower is "smarter than you think he is." Neal later saw that Eisenhower's biographers had found that his down-home approach was "a deliberate ploy on his part with the press" and that he was "much more cagey and savvy than some people thought."

Neal also found that Colleen had reading interests different from his own. His preferences were strong enough that he wasn't sure why anyone would read Anne Morrow Lindbergh or Mother Teresa if one could read military history or political biography. Then, taking Colleen's subtle hints, he began to read some of what she enjoyed. Soon Neal discovered a whole new genre of valuable literature, such as Lindbergh's Gift from the Sea, which became the source of a quotation he liked so much he later had it framed and placed on the wall of his busy office: "My life cannot implement in action the demands of all the people to whom my heart responds." That insight later became a poignant and practical reminder to Neal that the extent of his actual influence would never quite reach the broader extent of his idealistic hopes.

He also found that, in his writing and speaking, Colleen could be a gentle but very constructive critic. Once in his early years as commissioner of education, he was trying hard to use a series of rhetorical devices to develop the theme of a written speech. He asked a colleague at work to read through the draft and offer suggestions. The friend thought his stylistic tools were calling too much attention to themselves. As the friend groped for a polite way to say what he was thinking, Neal sensed the concern and said, "It's too cute, isn't it? That's what Colleen thinks." The friend sighed and said, "She's right." Neal completely reworked the draft.

Over the years, Neal's respect for Colleen has just kept growing, along every front. He found in her some qualities he often described as the rare but ideal combination meekness combined with brightness. Hers is a kind of natural intelligence, which unites with her spiritual gifts and character traits to form a personality uniquely suited to a full partnership with him.

One pervasive influence on him has been Colleen's tasteful manner of doing whatever she does. Neal feels she is "a more complete Christian" than he is, with a high desire to serve and a low need for recognition. Partly through the example of her own parents and partly as an innate attribute, there is an unusual kindness and refinement about her. As one neighbor wrote, Colleen is "love personified and gives to others as naturally as she breathes." Or, as Elder Henry B. Eyring wrote, thanking her for a service she had rendered, "You've always had the gift to make me feel that when you were kind to me I had somehow done you a favor."

Seeing these qualities helped Neal develop more tenderness and patience. If he murmurs or gets overly irritated, for example, "she just has to say my first name in her own special way . . . and that's the end of the streetcar line." This was a nice antidote to help young Neal tame his early temptation at times to be a little too critical in his observations. Elizabeth Haglund, a close friend of many years, commented that Colleen doesn't like any degree of sarcasm, and she has helped raise the bar of Neal's tolerance levels. "Colleen is superb at deflating Neal when occasion warrants." Her "surgically precise prick bursts his bubble and, without wounding him, brings about needed change."

An illustration of their interaction occurred in late 1989 and early 1990 when Colleen developed a staph infection in her knee after a fall. She eventually underwent minor surgery when the knee kept filling with fluid. Later she required knee replacement surgery. During the time of the staph infection, she required injections of antibiotics every few hours, night and day. Unable to give them to herself, Colleen relied on Neal.

One very late night, he couldn't get the needle into the injection cap. After several tries, he pricked his finger with the needle. Then he had to change the needle on the syringe. By then he was murmuring. With that "Colleen way" of hers, she "just patted my hand from the bed and said, 'It will go in next time,' and it did. So she's met my impatience with her patience."

Not long afterward, Colleen wrote Neal a love letter that began

Dearest Husband,

After having seen myself as a care-giver . . . I found I was the one needing care. . . . I soon discovered that one scarcely knows anything about love until love is tested. It's a tender and humbling experience to find that your life is literally dependent upon someone else. . . . That knowledge becomes especially heart-warming when one knows that this person is not inclined to tedious, regular, exacting things. And then to see that such is done without complaint or murmuring begins to tell you just a little of love. . . . To know of your genuine love and self-sacrificing spirit has truly touched my heart. . . . How could I be so blessed? Please know of my humble and heartfelt gratitude.

All my love,

Colleen

Another dimension she helped add to Neal's experience was the place of physical affection. Colleen's mother had a spontaneous, genuine way of greeting her family members with welcoming hugs and kisses. Over time, Colleen has gently and successfully encouraged Neal to be more demonstrative with his children and grandchildren, something that was more typical of her family background than his.

Her innate serenity has also blessed the atmosphere of the Maxwell home. Neal was characteristically fast-paced and impatient, and she has been a great "calming influence" for him. He told a student research assistant in the late 1960s that he lived in a hectic world full of pressure and commitments but that when he came home, he found a "stress-free environment," because Colleen "always calmed him."

Mike Ahlander, Becky's husband, recalls a family Thanksgiving dinner when Colleen's gift of calm was in effect. Neal, who, Mike said, "is in high speed all the time," had just carved the turkey and put it on a large platter. As he carefully carried the overflowing plate into the dining room, his foot accidentally caught something and the plate fell to the floor. With the hungry family looking on, Neal was upset with himself. But Colleen immediately and calmly rescued the situation. With a voice so serene she didn't even sound surprised, let alone concerned, she stepped right in with an immediate alternative for the main dish. "We'll be okay," she said. "We'll pick it up, and do this, and be just fine."

In no other realm has Colleen's serenity been more important than in her own spiritual attitudes. Neal looks to her for spiritual companionship, as she does to him. He loves to hear her pray. She is "very prayerful," naturally expressing an "ardent kind of prayer that's wonderful." Yet "she's so calm and serene" that someone who doesn't know the range of her heart might not realize the intensity of her pleadings.

Neal has also learned to listen to Colleen's promptings as what he calls his "auxiliary conscience." She is restrained about when and how she shares, because she knows he listens to her. Since the early days of their marriage, when Neal worked in sensitive government offices or when he served as bishop, she has also found it easy to respect the need for confidentiality which means she doesn't intrude or volunteer opinions in such areas; rather, he usually has to ask for her views on some topic of appropriate discussion. He thus regards her as "an additional prompter, along with the Holy Ghost. . . . She's not always convenient. I don't want to hear what she tells me sometimes, but I've learned long since to pay attention."

That was not his natural instinct when they were first married. After Neal finished his undergraduate degree in 1952, for example, he spent the next four years working in federal government offices in Washington, D.C. When they felt it was time to relocate, they had a number of options. One choice that struck Neal as an unlikely one was a public relations job at the University of Utah. Colleen felt strongly impressed that he should take this job, because she thought being on the campus would give him an opportunity to "have an influence on young people, the way Lowell Bennion did." That's where she thought his greatest strengths lay.

Although Neal kept pointing out that the job involved little more than writing press releases, Colleen's feeling persisted, until they both prayerfully concluded that the move was a good one. It turned out to be exactly that, including the reality of influencing students. But they couldn't have foreseen that outcome at the level of pure reason.

Colleen has learned to coach her husband in ways that have let his confidence in her accept her confidence in him. She recognized his talents very early, seeing also some of the undeveloped edges as those talents emerged. She would find pleasant and honest ways to encourage him to take his Church callings seriously, telling him, "You have some talents. You'd better use them. You can do this." In such an attitude, she recognized his gift to communicate in speech and writing, gradually persuading him that he had ideas worth sharing, all the while seeing whatever he did as service rather than as self-serving.

It has helped in all dimensions of their relationship that they can communicate freely. Neal has found that Colleen is so strong that he's never had to "hold back and try to calculate, now how can I talk with her about this." So they've learned they can be "fairly direct" in their conversation, though both have learned to temper that directness with the breath of kindness. Neal once offered his experience with Colleen to illustrate the meaning of Paul's phrase "Speaking the truth in love" (Ephesians 4:15). "What she says may not always be convenient, but I don't have to decode her motive or her meaning. She does everything in a spirit of love."

Neal once wrote his daughter Nancy about the great

source of strength and comfort . . . that your mother was not only at my side but was often ahead of me spiritually. Her righteousness seems to be so reflexive when at times mine is more labored. I . . . trust her completely. . . . This level of security is an exceedingly important blessing. Such relationships might be enormous exceptions today, but they are attainable, and you deserve and need such a marriage.

Among Colleen's most significant sources of influence has been her gift of personal empathy, combined with her commitment to humanitarian service. The personal part was there for a long time, but she learned the service dimension as a college student from Lowell Bennion. With such instincts, Colleen has long been alert to the circumstances of people in her ward, her neighborhood, her extended family, and anyone else within her natural spheres of movement. She is an excellent cook a skill she learned both from her mother and from her college major in food and nutrition. She willingly offered that skill during Neal's days as a student ward bishop, when the Maxwells would invite a table full of guests for Sunday dinner virtually every week for months at a time.

But Neal and Colleen's family also came to know that the fragrance of fresh bread in her kitchen or even the scent of some delicious dinner, was often from baking that was intended for someone outside their home. On other occasions, the cooking would be for everyone in the family except Colleen, who, without comment, was fasting for someone who was on her mind. Her daughter-in-law, Karen, has found that Colleen's home management reflects her background and her sense of taste. For instance, she uses "leftovers wisely and effectively," but when something has been left over "a couple of times, then it's out of there."

Colleen's skill in the kitchen is matched by her capacity to take a sincere interest in people in all roles and stations. As she and Neal have circulated in some distinguished circles, she has not given preference to those circles over other relationships. She has respected the station of educational, political, and Church leaders but has never been "overly bowled over" by the appearance of prestige as such. In their Church ministry, Neal has found and has been helped by how naturally Colleen fits into any social situation from a state dinner in Washington, D.C., to a modest table in the primitive dwelling of Church members in Third World countries.

On any given day, she typically would have done a half dozen things for people taking food, making visits, or lending a hand in some other way. "That's just going on all the time and has for years, says Neal." Her actions have always flowed so naturally that people sense it isn't forced, just instinctive which gives it even more meaning. After her children married, Colleen had more freedom to direct her energies into what Neal calls a "crescendo in the circles of her Christian service." In recent years, her service has included tutoring first-grade children in reading at Salt Lake's Guadalupe Center and assisting nurses to care for children and families in the spina bifida clinic at Primary Children's Medical Center.

Colleen has managed to keep a kind of quiet independence about her outreach. She's always been available for church callings or activities that supported Neal's various roles, but she has also avoided what he calls "role suction," the tendency to get pulled exclusively into roles that others have expected her to play whether mother, grandmother, Relief Society president, or General Authority's wife. She accepts her various roles, but she has always been her own person, with her own quiet circles of influence quite unrelated to her husband's callings.

Colleen's intuitive Christian service has clearly rubbed off on Neal. Some of that was fairly direct, as she would tell him about someone's need and then ask if he could deliver a potted plant or a custard for her. Then she might suggest that they go together to see someone who was sick, or she'd make him aware of someone he could help with a phone call. He soon learned that if she felt someone needed them, "she was probably right." He found that her "spiritual antenna on Christian service" was always "more highly attuned than mine. So I learned to pay attention over the years when she had those impressions and feelings."

Two other influences would later augment Colleen's, helping Neal learn how becoming a follower of Jesus often involves some kind of private ministry. One was the example of President Spencer W. Kimball, whom the Maxwells first came to know well as a neighbor in the 1960s. The other, much later, was Neal's own illness in 1996. In the meantime, it is clear enough that Colleen was her husband's first and best teacher about the spirit and art of personal ministering.

No wonder Neal has often told Latter-day Saint congregations that for too long, the women of the Church have been the Christians while the men have been the theologians. Stirred by Colleen's example, he has encouraged a sharing and balancing of those functions, so that all Latter-day Saint men and women might seek to be both Christians and theologians. Her public profile may be less visible than his, but Colleen's inconspicuous influence has gradually become more pervasive in Neal's understanding and practice of his own unfolding discipleship. The story from this point forward is theirs.
