Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

A Utah Man Am I 1956-70

Twenty-Six

Singularity in Diversity

When Neal Maxwell began working at age thirty as assistant director of public relations at the University of Utah in 1956, he couldn't have imagined what awaited him over the next fourteen years. He had no academic training beyond a bachelor's degree, he had no experience in higher education administration, and he had no career path in mind.

Nonetheless, his experience during those years provided a nearly ideal preparation for two different roles to which the First Presidency would eventually assign him. He would be called in 1967 to a leadership committee that would help prepare the Church organization for its expansion across the world. And in 1970, he would become commissioner of education at a time when the Church would need to respond to a far more educated and more global membership.

Because Neal didn't know he would be given responsibilities of such breadth and complexity, he didn't know that he needed to gain experience in as many fields as he did and that he needed to hurry. But with wind-ripping speed, the experiences came not because he was always qualified for them, nor because he sought them, nor because he knew where all of this was going. On the contrary, he almost unintentionally pursued an unusual, multitrack career path that, in some ways, makes sense best when it is understood as Nephi understood his path of discipleship: "I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do" (1 Nephi 4:6).

In fourteen years at the university, Neal was given roughly fourteen different jobs, often overlapping with each other, almost any one of which required particular training and each of which could have been the basis for an entire specialized career. His assortment of tasks (some part-time and some full-time) included public relations officer, journalist, recruiter of scholarship students, executive staff assistant, TV talk show host, university administrator, political lobbyist, fund-raiser, teacher, scholar, public commentator, leadership consultant, citizen leader, student life expert, educational consultant, political consultant, and bridge builder between the Latter-day Saint and the non-Latter-day Saint communities in the Mormon heartland.

Many of those who knew Neal in a single role considered him a budding specialist in that field. But in fact, his U of U career is best understood as a composite of many specialties. His uniqueness was in his versatility. He was a generalist who had a knack for picking up on-the-job training, even when he wasn't formally qualified. Much of that training was like his tennis game or his speaking style self-taught and distinctive. Each new experience made him more valuable for the next job, as each field improved his perspective on other fields.

Because he lacked some traditional qualifications and specific aspirations, his selection for each job was often "on the merits" by leaders who were drawn more to his innate capacity than to his resume. In fact, for some of these jobs if he had applied in writing his paper credentials might not have been competitive enough even to earn a finalist's interview.

Neal began looking for a job in Utah after he and Colleen decided it was time to return home from Washington, even though they had several options for continued employment in the nation's capital. A Washington-based insurance company had offered him an attractive position. And, more of a temptation, Senator Bennett encouraged him to stay on the staff to begin the Senator's second term in 1956. But Neal felt he had learned the essentials he had gone there to learn. And though politics would always fascinate him, he'd become disenchanted with what government programs could do. Although "the governmental approach to human problems is helpful," he increasingly believed, it "doesn't really do the job. The gospel does."

By this time, Neal was feeling, if only in a vague way, that he could address the individual needs of other people more effectively by working in higher education and at the center of the Church population. In some way that wasn't connected to his employment interests, he also felt a desire to take the freshness and vitality he had felt in Washington's Latter-day Saint community back to Utah. He told Doug and Corene Parker in 1956 that he and Colleen had found refreshing spiritual strength among the D.C. Church members of the "mission field," and they wanted to take that attitude of deeper commitment back home, somehow to help make a difference. Ralph Mecham sensed that Neal was preprogrammed to return to Utah for an unclear purpose that Ralph felt had spiritual overtones.

The Church had provided an exhilarating dimension for their Washington experience. With Colleen serving as ward Primary president and Neal in the stake Young Men's presidency and then in the stake mission presidency, church life in the D.C. stake had been "totally consuming" for them. Their church commitments "took over our life. And we liked it."

The Maxwells were part of a stimulating study group among young LDS couples then living in Washington, including Russell and Dantzel Nelson, who had known Colleen during her college days. Russell Nelson said they "hadn't dealt with anybody who was interested in conversation and . . . idea development" about religion and politics quite the way Neal was and they found it "refreshing and invigorating." Brother Nelson assumed at that stage that Neal "would go into politics" as a potential senator or congressman.

Neal served in 1955-56 as a counselor to the stake mission president, Reed Benson. Through this association, Reed's father, Elder Ezra Taft Benson, then Secretary of Agriculture, came to know Neal well enough that he offered him a position in that department. Neal was grateful for this interest, but he had already decided against working in a federal agency long term. Elder Benson wrote him that his decision to return to Utah was "understandable" but "somewhat disappointing to me."

In early 1956, the Deseret News published an opinion piece Neal had written about Democratic Minnesota senator Hubert Humphrey and agricultural price supports, which reflected Neal's interest in journalism as well as politics. He even toyed with the idea of becoming a writer for a Salt Lake newspaper but found no openings. Elder Benson wrote Neal, "You will be interested to know that the President [Eisenhower] read the editorial to a group of us yesterday. We all got a good laugh. Keep writing."

Neal traveled throughout Utah during 1956 helping with Senator Bennett's reelection campaign. He met a variety of community leaders, relationships that would later aid his work for the University of Utah. He also learned that Parry Sorensen, director of public relations at the university, was looking for an assistant director. He met with Parry, who offered him the job. Uncertain whether to take it, Neal talked with his and Colleen's friend, Lowell Bennion, at the Salt Lake Institute of Religion. Lowell encouraged Neal to stay in Washington to capitalize on what he had already invested there. In the end, it was Colleen's intuition about taking this job that made the difference.

In the fall of 1956, Neal moved into a shared office in the university's administrative center, the Park Building, absorbing a hefty salary cut and occupying a "splintered oak desk and a chair that broke every once in a while." He found that "disengagement from the Potomac was not easy" and that writing press material in fact yielded little contact with students. Still, writing about university news introduced him to many faculty and administrators.

His talents were soon put to work in other ways; Homer Durham saw to that. Durham, Neal's student mentor, was now academic vice president to A. Ray Olpin, president of the university from 1946 until 1964. Durham arranged a welcoming party at his home, introducing a number of administrators and faculty leaders, including President Olpin, to his "protégé newly returned" from Washington. Neal reported about life in Washington, especially the Senate, telling stories and commenting on current affairs. Lowell Durham, Homer's brother and a faculty leader, enjoyed Neal's "beautifully-paced report," which disposed of "the layman's cloak-and-dagger concept" of international intrigue in the nation's capital.

President Olpin confided to his journal that Neal Maxwell was "very frank and used fine English, made a good presentation and caused me to think he would be a good field man or off-campus representative of the university." Within a year, Olpin asked him to become coordinator of scholarships, in addition to his public relations duties.

Neal worked with scholarships during 1957-58. Utah law allowed the university to waive tuition for a small proportion of Utah students. Rather than leaving these as randomly assigned waivers, Neal began traveling the state to recruit promising high school graduates to attend the university by offering the tuition waivers as scholarships. President Olpin thought his approach too generous, but Neal stood his ground, urging that the university needed to recruit aggressively the state's brightest students, using the scholarships as an incentive.

To Neal's surprise, Ray Olpin must have been persuaded not only about the scholarship policy but also about Neal's ability to articulate a position. Perhaps nudged by Homer Durham, in 1958 Olpin invited Neal to become full-time assistant to the president, which would become a tutorial in university administration. Now Neal found himself drafting presidential speeches, memos, and overseeing calendaring as well as acting as the executive secretary for the university's management team President Olpin, academic vice president Homer Durham, and business vice president Paul Hodson.

Meanwhile, Neal simultaneously pursued other interests. He decided to capture some of his Senate experience on paper while his impressions were still fresh, publishing an article entitled "The Conference of Western Senators" in 1957 in a U of U departmental political science journal. By 1958, he hungered to teach on the campus and saw he'd need an advanced degree to do that. Reassured by his publication that his Senate experience was a good source for political science research, he set up a graduate program with the political science faculty, who had earlier been his professors. He had to schedule his classes and research around his full-time job demands, but he was energetic enough and the department flexible enough to make it work. He completed the M.A. degree in 1961. "Regionalism in the United States Senate: The West" was his thesis, in which he showed how senators crossed party lines to cooperate on such shared regional interests as developing water resources in the arid western states.

In 1958, Neal wrote a graduate student paper on the United States Senate's role in foreign policy. To his amazement, a national magazine, The Nation, printed it, with the daring title "Congress Abdicates on Foreign Policy." His issue was whether there is any real role in foreign policy for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee or Congress, or is the constitutional power of congress to declare war a mere anachronism? He was a little uncomfortable about appearing in a fairly liberal publication, but the article enhanced his hopes for some kind of career in political science. It would remain his most nationally visible publication.

The diversity in Neal's university interests was beginning to multiply by 1958. That year the university launched KUED, its new public television station. In what would become a kind of marquee offering for KUED, station manager Keith Engar invited Neal to become the moderator of a weekly interview series called Tell Me. Neal had no specific training for such a job. His only comparable experience had been his student radio interview show several years earlier. But he had developed enough poise during his Washington years to feel comfortable interviewing public figures on a live TV show so he took on the project, continuing it for ten years, despite the increasing demands of his other assignments.

As the moderator for Tell Me, Neal became known as a "sort of Larry King Live for the university" although that comparison is too dramatic. Television was still in its infancy, the country was not yet dominated by TV celebrities, and the program's technical quality was "fairly amateurish," compared to the talk shows of today. It was transmitted in black and white, and its style was that of a pleasant conversation rather than a probing, confrontational drama. This was long before the era of investigative ambush reporting.

In a relaxed atmosphere, Neal asked questions of general interest and then listened respectfully as the guest often rambled about his views and experience. Audiences enjoyed the novelty of television enough that they weren't "as sensitive then to background noise," nor did they mind the simple camera angles, the talking heads, and the interviewer's only occasional interruptions to paragraphs of narrative. Most shows went smoothly, although one guest "froze up" ten minutes into what was to have been a thirty-minute interview. Neal rescued the show by asking many extra questions to compensate for the guest's "Gary Cooper style" one-word answers.

Happily for Neal in several of his duties, 1958 was also the year Elizabeth Haglund arrived at the university, filling the vacancy in public relations created by Neal's appointment as assistant to President Olpin. Liz became a loyal and able ally behind many of the scenes where Neal was increasingly onstage. She didn't know what to make of Neal when she first arrived, fresh from a long career of working for NBC in network broadcasting in New York City. When she moved into Neal's former office, she found no "evidence of Neal's work," because the office files were mostly empty. That was her first glimpse of his clean desk mentality.

Soon, however, Liz and Neal became trusted professional colleagues. She was a bright New Yorker with years of professional experience and a deep commitment to the Church. As she got to know him, Liz could see that "he had great physical energy, drive, and focus. If you got into a conversation with him, you talked about what he had asked you, and then he was through." Yet she "realized the breadth of his intellect and the practicality of his understanding" and saw that "he was not fooling around." Noting that Neal "caught on so fast to that interviewing stuff," Liz decided to support the Tell Me show. Her NBC experience gave Liz both good contacts and "enough chutzpah to go after good people for him to interview."

Liz soon brought her friend Arlene Francis from New York for Neal to interview. Francis was in those days a nationally known and "witty 1950s television personality" on, among other things, the classic game show What's My Line? After the Tell Me interview, Francis told Liz that Neal "is network material!" She found him skillful and incisive as an interviewer. To prove her point, she returned for another interview a few years later.

During the Tell Me years, Neal interviewed United States Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, Senator (later Vice President) Hubert Humphrey, Averell Harriman, Utah governors, senators, business leaders, and various Latter-day Saint Church leaders. The experience steadily increased his "grasp of public affairs" and his appreciation for good and influential leaders. He enjoyed what he called "the small talk of great men and women." When he interviewed Elder Joseph Fielding Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, he said, "Your father [Joseph F. Smith, sixth President of the Church] was gone a lot during your childhood. Did you resent that?" Neal expected him to say no, that his father was doing the Lord's work. Instead Elder Smith said, "Yes, it was very hard. But I would go see my aunt after school, and she would talk to me about the Prophet Joseph."

Neal remembers asking Elder Richard L. Evans, also a member of the Twelve, what it was like in his childhood to be poor and to have no father. Elder Evans said his mother made his shirts from used sugar sacks, adding how glad he was when the sugar company began putting floral patterns on their sacks rather than just the company's initials.

Local newspapers praised the TV series as "one of the most stimulating programs seen hereabouts" and "Channel Seven's big show of the evening, the season premiere of Tell Me." With this experience, Neal later became a part-time regional editor for the educational network that preceded the Public Broadcasting System, helping to produce TV specials on pressing public issues. In 1968, the network took him to Chicago to provide live commentary on the presidential election. The teleprompter jammed just as he began reporting on election returns from the Western states. He had no choice but to recall voting numbers and states from memory hoping he would be accurate.

To Elizabeth Haglund, the Neal Maxwell who came into view on the U of U campus in 1958 was barely becoming aware of his gifts, and he felt certain inadequacies in himself and in his background. His "intellect was so alive," he had "an inner light" that reflected itself in a curious combination of meekness and confidence, yet he "worried about not being humble enough."At the same time, as he was trying to make sense of all this, "there was a competent graciousness about him" that was unusual. Eventually Liz saw Neal develop and mature until he had "reached into the mind of the Lord," where he would "know what's there." He would one day become, in her eyes, an Apostle "for all times . . . particularly to the unbelieving, the non-believing, and the once-believing. That makes him enormously valuable . . . because he is so singular a spirit."
