Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Twenty-Eight

Dean of Students

Back in the president's office, Ray Olpin was about to give Neal his first opportunity to serve as a line administrator, introducing him to concepts of leadership that would claim his serious attention from then on. His first Church book, in 1967, would be subtitled Essays in Leadership for Latter-day Saints. One of that book's central themes, "participative" leadership, drew directly on Neal's experience in the field of student life a world that was being turned upside down during the turbulent 1960s.

It was summertime in 1962, and the dean of students had just left, giving President Olpin little time to find a replacement before school began in the fall. Perhaps knowing this need was on Olpin's mind, Lowell L. Bennion, who had been director of the LDS institute of religion near the campus and Neal's former teacher, went to see Olpin. According to the president's journal, Dr. Bennion explained that he "wouldn't be kept at the institute next year" and did "not want to teach at BYU," as he had been invited to do by Latter-day Saint education leaders.

So Lowell Bennion was looking for a job at the university, and President Olpin was looking for a new dean of students. Dr. Bennion said he wasn't interested in doing detailed administrative work, but he would enjoy working in the dean's office, especially if the university could hire Tom Broadbent, a Latter-day Saint who was then dean of students at the University of California at Riverside. He recommended that Olpin try to recruit Broadbent. Olpin then learned that the current associate deans had said they wouldn't stay in the dean's office "if someone untrained" in their field of student personnel were made dean. He knew they had reservations about this gap in Dr. Bennion's background, even though they also "respect[ed] him highly." So Olpin called Tom Broadbent, who visited the campus, considered the job, but concluded, after making it "a matter of prayer," that he wasn't ready to leave Riverside.

With his time and his options running out, President Olpin conferred with Daniel Dykstra, the academic vice president since Homer Durham had gone to Arizona State as president. They talked about people already on the campus. Finally Olpin suggested Neal Maxwell's name, and Dykstra said, "Tremendous. He would command the respect of the students, the faculty, and everyone who works with him." When Olpin raised Neal's name with faculty council leaders, someone there asked the same question the associate deans in student life had raised about Bennion did Neal have the requisite training? Not easily outfoxed, Olpin simply replied that "we didn't know what kind of training was best for a dean of students."

President Olpin next approached Neal about the new job, mentioning Lowell Bennion's possible role as associate dean. Neal's own account was that the president "came to work one day and said he'd had some inspiration while he was shaving." Neal was totally surprised. He did lack the typical training to be dean of students, and he was concerned about the reaction of non-Latter-day Saint personnel if both he and Lowell Bennion moved into the dean's office at the same time. Nonetheless, he admired Lowell as his mentor and friend, he knew the dean's staff would soon see Lowell's gifts, and he felt President Olpin had been so good to him that he should accept the request.

Neal thus became dean of students, and he always felt that his associate deans Lowell Bennion and Virginia Frobes were better at student life tasks than he was. Still, a Salt Lake Tribune editorial welcomed the appointment: "Dean Maxwell, well known as a speaker and writer as well as an administrator, has a special interest in and talent with young people and their problems."

Neal soon saw Lowell's skillful touch at work when a group of student athletes were accused of misbehavior. He defused the emotion and counseled constructively with each student, "as only Lowell could," drawing on his rich background from the institute years.

The new job altered and expanded Neal's role on the campus. One change came when President Olpin advised him that as one of the university's senior administrators, he should no longer serve as the bishop of a student ward, which he had been doing since 1959. Olpin wanted to avoid the appearance of any church-state conflict of interest. Student wards were a new enough phenomenon that Olpin mentioned his concern to Church President David O. McKay, who concurred with him.

Olpin also released Neal as his assistant, but the two retained an advisory relationship, with Neal becoming a member of the university deans' council and a member of Olpin's extended management team, which had always included the dean of students. Neal also found that as dean he had contact with the legislature, especially when the university sought state approval to add a small building fee to student tuition and fees, letting students help fund construction of the new Special Events Center and other buildings.

Neal's relationship with Olpin was not limited to student life issues. Since his days in the public relations office, Neal had found a serious "gap locally between higher education . . . and the business community." Borrowing from an idea he saw working at another state university in 1963, he proposed a program of conferences between faculty and community leaders. For too long, Neal felt, Salt Lake City business leaders had seen the university as a "hilltop hideaway," and local media people had found it difficult to "get any information out of the university." Neal continued raising this issue until the campus opened up more fully.

The public speeches he gave during this period reflected both his attitudes and his expanding circle of contacts. When invited to speak at a devotional for the Latter-day Saint institute of religion near the university just before the 1964 national election, he discussed what some would have considered a relatively secular topic Utah voter attitudes. But Neal, a political scientist who looked at his discipline through a gospel lens, wanted to discuss the practical implications of some doctrinal overtones. He said he thought local voters were sometimes overly influenced by a candidate's ideology or personality; sometimes unwilling to become seriously involved in the political process, despite feeling they had a "rendezvous with destiny"; sometimes tended to overly moralize such temporal political issues as water resources; and sometimes didn't seem aware of the Church's support for a two-party political system.

In June 1964, Neal was asked on short notice to fill in for an unwell Hugh B. Brown of the First Presidency as the speaker at the university's baccalaureate service. By this time, Neal's secretary, Edith Bronson, was learning to make "nine copies on onion skin" carbon paper (photocopying was still in its infancy) because increasingly people asked for copies of his speeches. Delivered with authority and awareness at a time when student unrest in the United States was just beginning, his theme was "Speaking the truth in love," from Ephesians 4:15.

His message included an appeal to both Latter-day Saint and non-Latter-day Saint members of the university community. Neal was becoming an interpreteter between both groups: "The man of religion and the humanist . . . have far more in common than they realize. . . . It is this duo to whom we look for shared concern in behalf of the individual. . . . It is they to whom we look to effect needed change, whether it is the result of empiricism or in response to the broad doctrine of repentance."

After President Brown read Neal's talk, he sent a letter of apology for his illness, adding that his "inability to be present was . . . a blessing to all concerned." President Brown's gentle praise for this talk suggests what others may have felt that people in the community were coming to appreciate Neal Maxwell's inclusive approach. A few years later, Neal would be asked to dedicate President Brown's grave.

Being dean of students taught Neal about human interaction, group process, and leadership. He received an intensive on-the-job education that continued later when he supervised the dean's office as vice president. He came quite unprepared to the field of student life, but he was dean of students through a difficult and historic era, when the protests of the 1960s raged across American campuses. Virginia Frobes and Martin Erickson, her assistant, were his best teachers about the issues and the research on students, including counseling and psychology as well as leadership methods. He also dived into the professional literature, went with student leaders to training seminars, and learned by daily experience.

One typical example of his practical education in conflict resolution occurred in January 1964, when a student and faculty art exhibit displayed a few nude statues in a prominent spot on the campus. When members of the public and the board of regents called the university to complain, Neal was caught between the clashing views of those who complained and those who claimed that freedom of expression must protect the exhibit. He hadn't helped sponsor the exhibit, but he was the administrator who, along with President Olpin, "took the heat" about it, from both sides. The next week he wrote to a friend that this "flap over an art exhibit" had made him "the man in the middle" and left him feeling "very weary."

But this was tame compared to what happened later when the tremors of national student unrest occasionally shook the Utah campus. The university remained relatively calm, compared to what happened elsewhere, but it was still a perplexing time. Once Neal was responsible to oversee the arrest of some students who made an obscene demonstration, and then he had to give a deposition in a court proceeding. And he was the vice president responsible for student life when the campus was engulfed in turmoil in the sad spring of 1970. At Ohio's Kent State University, National Guardsmen tragically shot four students during a student revolt over the Vietnam War. In reaction, Utah students burned the Intercultural Center, an unoccupied frame building that had once been used as a university bookstore.

Many of the student disturbances during this time lacked a clear focus, both at the University of Utah and across the country. Edith Bronson said of one student sit-in at the Park Building that she "didn't know exactly what they're objecting to," but with students all over the second floor of the building, she "had to step over bodies" to leave her office. Her uncertainty about the students' real purpose captured a central feature of the entire national movement its goals were, unfortunately, very unclear. It was especially unclear what the protesters had in mind to replace the system they set out to disrupt.

Although Neal's colleague Martin Erickson had been predicting some kind of student protest movement for some time, the "revolution" actually began at the University of California at Berkeley in 1964, when a few students challenged that university's right to limit student protests. The events at Berkeley quickly blended with two other forces first, the civil rights movement, which had drawn many college students to the South, and second, anger over the government's conduct of the war in Vietnam. National feelings were also tragically aggravated by the assassinations of President John F. Kennedy in 1963 and then both Robert F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968.

In its extremes, the student movement challenged universities as surrogates for a corrupt, white, and corporation-dominated society. The self-appointed national leaders in this often bewildering drama traveled from one campus to another, urging students to find any handy target for their rebellion. They sometimes said, "The issue is not the issue," urging students to protest against any campus policy, because civil disobedience was an end in itself, designed to revolutionize the entire culture. They chose universities as their target not because the schools were repressive but, ironically, because they were open institutions and centers of influence. The "counterculture" thus lashed out at "any institution attempting to assert authority over young adults."

The visible turmoil of the 1960s gradually faded during the 1970s, but in some deep and disturbing ways, the student movement in all its turbulent interaction with other forms and groups of social protest sowed seeds that changed not only universities but American culture forever. And Neal Maxwell, like others who cut the teeth of their social understanding on this battlefield, would also never be quite the same. It always amazed him that something so big could happen so fast. He had once wondered how the society described in the Book of Mormon could change as rapidly as it did ("thus had they become weak, because of their transgression, in the space of not many years"; Helaman 4:26), but now he understood: "Anybody who watched the sixties understands how our society changed quickly."

In a general sense, the "movement" had a way of shifting the burden of proof about the place of many traditional values. In the past, society had accepted long-standing cultural mores as legitimate, until someone proved conclusively otherwise. The civil rights movement did prove otherwise regarding historical American patterns of race discrimination. Some protesters felt they had similarly proven otherwise about extending trust to governmental institutions that declare war.

Certain assumptions about right and wrong began to shift in the public mind. In a confusing, erratic way, secular values increasingly seemed to transcend religious ones; civil disobedience at times seemed to transcend patriotism in the hierarchy of citizenship values; and Americans began feeling freer to walk away from such institutional bonds as marriage. Instead of assuming that sexual permissiveness was wrong, more of the younger generation began to talk and behave as if the defenders of traditional moral values had to prove their case. Movies and television began to change, allowing a sexual explicitness that no one would have imagined only a few years earlier. The nation's basic sense about the nature of acceptable public expression yielded to an increasingly standardless culture.

This was a very different world from the one Neal Maxwell had known as an idealistic young soldier defending freedom on Okinawa or as a patriotic young Senate staffer who believed deeply in the nation's political system. This strange new world left a permanent mark on him, because his daily occupation required him to think through his responses to the conflicts on his own campus. As a result, he became a sensitive and unusually articulate defender of well-established values, forging his views in settings that ranged from personal conversations with students and faculty to the larger audiences who heard his speeches and read his writings.

In this context, Neal soon saw that "power sharing" was a big issue in the student protests. Fortunately, his predecessor dean, Bill Blaesser, had anticipated this concern well enough in advance to place many students on university committees. But Neal kept learning about the need for, and the value of, participative leadership. He would have more to say about that in the future, in many settings.

He also saw that the concept of in loco parentis (the idea that a university stands in the place of parents regarding its students) was fading fast at state universities, in marked contrast to its mainstay role at such religious schools as Brigham Young University. As that concept frayed, like a thread in an unraveling social fabric, many universities relaxed their control of such customary functions as dormitory rules and behavioral and dress codes. This development saddened Neal, who always remembered a plaintive and telling line from a Berkeley student: "If the university isn't going to worry about me, who is?"

Neal's attitude toward dissenters was to listen to them, care about them, try to understand them and still try to help them see the big picture that he thought many of them missed. He wrote to students in the campus newspaper in 1963, for example, respectfully urging them to develop "the capacity to express rational dissent" and "achieve identity within a community." It is ironic, he wrote, that while many Americans "enshrine rugged individualism," history shows that "cooperation" is the nation's real genius.

Neal also became interested in the concept of self-esteem, an idea he found in the work of student personnel specialists who were helping students and authority figures to communicate with one another. When the national College and University Personnel Association met on the Utah campus in 1966, Neal talked to them about self-esteem as "a major personnel problem." He urged university leaders to help employees and students understand the need to help one another bring their personal self-concepts into line with reality, so that their self-esteem was deserved and they could help one another grow. With more honest feedback and better listening, leaders could give specific, deserved appreciation and guidance that honestly lifted those "whose self-concepts are too demeaning, too unflattering." In this way, people could assist one another with "individual redemption." He also talked about self-esteem in some of his Church speaking during this time, and he wrote about it for a national 4-H publication, recognizing how the discipline of 4-H had earlier helped him develop "self-esteem through achievement."

Such ideas as leaders asking for honest feedback and giving deserved, specific praise became staples in the insights Neal developed during these years and those ideas grew from what he was learning about helping people build genuine self-esteem. In his personal leadership style, in his parenting, and in his teaching of leadership principles, he would return often to these concepts in future years, even as they merged with his expanding view of the gospel.

While Neal was learning how to work with students under the demanding conditions of the times, he was called to serve as a member of the Young Men's MIA General Board of the Church first assigned to the board's speech committee and then to its leadership committee. At the same time, Elizabeth Haglund, his university colleague, was called to the Young Women's MIA General Board. In 1965, the two MIA general presidencies appointed Neal and Elizabeth to write the 1966 MIA leadership manual. Many of the ideas in this manual later found their way into Neal's first book, A More Excellent Way. In the book's preface, Neal thanked Martin Erickson from the office of the university dean of students for many of his ideas and illustrations.

Neal's approach to Church leadership was clearly influenced by his university experience, although he was conscious of, and grateful for, the difference between Church and university environments. He felt much more freedom in the Church setting, where he could explore his growing understanding about leadership in the light of scriptural patterns. One significant difference he found was that in the Church, authority flowed from God to divinely appointed leaders, while in a democracy the people themselves retained ultimate authority.

Joe J. Christensen, who worked closely with Neal in the Church Educational System after 1970, found that Neal often employed leadership terms or methods he had first seen in the student life context, but Joe found that Neal was "always fitting those ideas into the gospel" rather than vice versa. Perhaps for such reasons, the minutes of the meeting of the MIA General Boards for October 20, 1965, state that after Neal and Elizabeth presented some leadership material to the boards, someone noted that the material they presented "was not a University of Utah program but had been prepared" as requested by the MIA executives.

Having learned about leadership by practical experience among soldiers, missionaries, senators, and now students, Neal was learning how to teach leadership to others.
