Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Twenty-Nine

Utah Statesman and University Vice President

During the university's search for a president to replace Ray Olpin in 1964, some thought the regents should consider Neal Maxwell. He himself regarded his candidacy as "a Harold Stassen sort of thing" (Stassen was a frequent candidate for the presidency of the United States in the 1950s and 60s but was never among the frontrunners). Neal thought his candidacy improbable, mostly because he didn't have a doctorate and partly because of his visible association with the Church on the MIA General Board.

Nonetheless, a few regents, graduate school dean Henry Eyring, and others urged both Neal and the search committee to take his candidacy seriously. Neal's friend from college Douglas Parker, by then a faculty leader at the University of Colorado, wrote an unsolicited letter to the search committee. He said Neal's "credentials and capacity for true greatness as a University president are stamped within the man himself." Others might have stronger qualifications on paper, but "Neal possesses the needed empathy for people, the fairness, the youthful vision and energy to be one of the country's great university presidents. . . . I do not believe you could find a person with more potential for inspired leadership."

Most of the regents felt that James C. Fletcher, a research scientist who held a Ph.D. in physics from the California Institute of Technology and had taught at Princeton, would maintain the U's momentum toward becoming a major research university. The son of Harvey L. Fletcher, a world-renowned scientist who had earlier been a dean at Brigham Young University, Dr. Fletcher, at age forty-five, became president on September 9, 1964. The University of Utah regents had persuaded him even though he had declined their first two offers to leave his position as vice president of Aerojet General Corporation, the nation's third largest aerospace company. After serving seven years at the U, he would be appointed director of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).

Jim Fletcher was brilliant, but he was shy by nature. He once told a colleague that he'd never fit in at BYU because he was "absolutely incapable of saying hello to everybody he passed on the sidewalk." Paul Hodson, one of his vice presidents, reported that although some in the community found Fletcher exciting and dynamic, others thought him aloof and, at times, a little abrasive. When Hodson once told Fletcher that a few people might interpret a certain proposal as "intellectually arrogant," the president replied, only half jokingly, "Let's face it, Paul, we are intellectually arrogant."

Because Fletcher was used to running a large organization based on sophisticated data, he installed management information systems that were new to the campus. He had a knack for identifying talented people and "interacting with them in ways that increased their confidence and presence in the [campus] organization." Neal learned from Jim that spotting and using bright, dedicated people was an important skill. When Neal needed to entrust someone with a highly responsible task, he increasingly looked for one who was both bright and meek.

From their first meeting, Neal and Jim Fletcher hit it off. Soon after Fletcher had been appointed, he returned home from an intense visit to the campus. He told his wife, Fay, "I struck gold. . . . Neal Maxwell is there. . . . Nobody in this world can use the English language as well as [he] does, and nobody in this world has a better [sense] about how people feel and what they might be able to do. He is just a genius."

Fletcher was used to working with a larger team, so he increased the number of vice presidents from two to six. At the same time, he was impressed enough with Neal's gifts that he increased his responsibilities, partly to give him an incentive to stay around. Neal's new title was vice president for planning and public affairs which included overseeing student life, public relations, fund-raising, alumni, and long-range planning. The yearbook summarized his duties as "interpreting the university to the community." In 1967, Fletcher changed Neal's title to executive vice president, making him responsible for all of the U's nonacademic functions.

Of the 1964 appointment, the Deseret News editorialized, "Though still a young man [age thirty-eight], Mr. Maxwell has won great stature in the community and among his colleagues." He also received a letter about his new duties from Elder Harold B. Lee of the Twelve, with whom he had attended his first stake conference as an MIA General Board member earlier that year. Elder Lee wrote:

I have long admired you as one of our solid educators. . . . Many will hope that under this new administration you will be instrumental [in helping avoid a letdown] on standards of dress or conduct on the campus. . . . Your new president needs one like you.

Perhaps this letter made Neal long for some way to retrieve the waning concept of in loco parentis or at least for a way to explain to Church members why state universities were losing some of their traditional authority to supervise students' behavior.

During their six years together, Jim and Neal learned to move around the campus and the community like experienced tennis doubles partners. Neal had energy, personal contacts, and an inclusive style that opened doors with many university constituent groups, doorways that President Fletcher would enter and exit with focused emphasis on his own role and strengths.

As time passed, Jim Fletcher saw Neal's abilities grow. Looking back in 1981, President Fletcher said that Neal was "one of the most competent administrators I've ever come across. I can think of only one other, at NASA, who compares; and I've been in some large organizations." He had an "unusual sense of people and how they'll react." At the university, Neal's "Church loyalties always came first, but that didn't affect his effectiveness. Given the natural conflicts about Church attitudes" at the university, it was "amazing that he could handle it so well. His honesty and trust had a lot to do with it."

Neal became a two-way interpreter between the university and the community. In an alumni magazine article published just after Fletcher's arrival, Neal made the case he would make with state legislators, prospective donors, prospective faculty, and local business and community leaders namely, that the university gave more to the community than it took. The U, he wrote, "is not Utah's fancy, expensive trotter but the state's 'workhorse' in higher education," carrying more than 54 percent of the state's college enrollments between 1947 and 1962, awarding more than 61 percent of its four-year degrees, and building 60 percent of the U's new buildings from sources other than state funds.

Fletcher and Maxwell took their energetic appeal for support to alumni and friends all over the country, organizing the university's first National Advisory Council. Assisting from her public relations office, Elizabeth Haglund joined them in a meeting to launch the NAC in New York City. She saw a young and anxious Neal Maxwell pacing the lobby of the Waldorf Astoria "nervous and impatient" one morning when the president wasn't ready to go, ahead of schedule. "I don't think he knew he was in such a hurry during that era. It was intrinsic with him." Neal called the Fletchers' room; they said they'd be there at the planned time, and they were.

With this urbane group of Utah alumni, Elizabeth said Neal's portrayal of the university was "so gilt-edged that they would have bought anything from him. He was marvelous," displaying a social ease that belied the innate shyness and mild sense of inadequacy that Elizabeth knew still lurked a little in Neal's interior. For him, it helped that he was telling a story in which he had complete confidence: Jim Fletcher wants to move the U up a notch in national influence and quality, and he is gratefully standing on Ray Olpin's shoulders to do it.

Neal was even more at home when his duties took him to the Utah legislature, where he represented not only the University of Utah but also, in some ways, the larger face of Utah higher education. By the mid-1960s he had come to know many of the state's civic and business leaders, and they knew him from his ties with Senator Bennett, his TV show, the numerous hats he wore at the U, and his own commitment to local civic projects.

Utah's "movers and shakers" found Neal easy to like partly because he got so involved in their world. In 1963, for instance, he chaired Salt Lake's United Fund Drive with a gusto that led some to call him the campaign's "million dollar angel." He helped the fund achieve its first million-dollar goal in an annual drive, partly because he liked the fund's public service dimension. He confided to a friend that he had tripled his own monthly payroll contribution to the United Fund when he saw where the money was going. He also believed that the university was "tied to the state socially and politically. Each will rise or fall with the condition of the other."

During this season, Neal also became a director of Mountain Fuel Supply Company (later Questar), a governor of the Salt Lake Area Chamber of Commerce, and president of the Milton Bennion Foundation a project that fulfilled his earlier plea to Ray Olpin for dialogue between educational and business leaders. James E. Faust, a state legislator and president of the Utah State Bar during some of these years, came to know Neal the way others did. To him, Neal was a bridge-builder: "He'll cross the river in a relationship and build a bridge. He's the first one to put the girders out."

Neal was both direct and practical in reassuring legislators and other leaders that the university wasn't growing too large and that it was an economic asset to the state. One of his favorite projects was to invite influential people to the campus and let them observe the U's top-flight researchers at work. He would ask the professors to open up their offices and labs and then bring visitors to hear them explain how their work helped the state. He might take them to the greenhouse where Professor John Spikes was doing creative work with biology and atomic energy. Or, a favorite moment for Neal, they'd go see Henry Eyring demonstrate his "drunken molecule" routine, in which Henry showed how molecular actions worked while he stood in front of an office chalkboard full of complex equations.

Neal wanted Utah's legislators to see for themselves the interactive relationships between vocational education and the university's research role. "One man with an idea from a university background will found a business in which students from trade techs will be employed." Therefore, "it was so clear . . . that the people of the state were getting a bargain" in their support for the university. Neal felt this was a more practical, and therefore more persuasive, argument for supporting the U as a major university, than trying to promote the value of pure research as a desirable but academic abstraction.

One of the university's most difficult, but finally most successful, legislative challenges was how to fund the construction of some urgently needed, expensive new buildings including a major medical center. Enrollments had expanded until the place was bulging at its seams, and army barracks were hardly adequate for either the size or the quality of university the U was becoming. But most Utah legislators came from the old school about debt they didn't believe in it. So it took herculean efforts between 1963 and 1965 for Neal and many others to persuade the legislature (and the public) that it was a wise investment, not merely an expense, to adopt "the biggest bonding effort for education that this state has ever had." The bonds were financed by a one-half percent state sales tax increase.

An obstacle to the bonding-for-buildings problem was that each of the state's nine colleges and universities had its own direct line to the legislature, which created both confusion and competition. Neal next became involved, then, in finding a way to coordinate all nine institutions while still honoring a needed degree of autonomy at each school. Neal's own university was the biggest player on this field with, therefore, the most to lose in any compromise of its direct relationship with the legislature. But the bruises the players had collected during the building fund crisis showed a clear need for a stronger state system of higher education.

President Olpin had initially opposed the creation of a state higher education coordinating council in the late 1950s because he couldn't yield one whit of the University of Utah's preeminence. He was finally persuaded by the promise that the new council would prevent the creation of additional state colleges and would assure increased funding for the university. But he still resisted the council's having any more than "coordinating" authority. A coordinating council thus created in 1959 at least put yellow "caution" signs at the intersection where the college presidents all came to meet the legislators. But some collisions were inevitable, because the council needed but lacked the authority of a traffic cop. The council had no authority to create or manage a state master plan for funding or anything else.

By the time Calvin Rampton became governor in 1965, Utah's higher education was in trouble. Student enrollments had increased 31 percent in one year (1964-65), BYU was limiting its enrollment, and the Salt Lake Tribune editorialized that a "'tidal wave' of post-war babies" threatened to overwhelm the state's higher education capacity. Determined to solve the problem, Rampton appointed a committee chaired by Peter Billings and including Neal Maxwell, charging them to recommend a permanent state system of higher education. After a complicated struggle, the legislature in 1969 fashioned the plan that led to today's Utah system of higher education, which is governed by a single board of regents and assisted by institutional advisory councils at each school. The first commissioner for the new system was Neal's mentor G. Homer Durham, fresh from his term as president at Arizona State University.

A recent study of the origins of this new system identified the University of Utah as a key historical obstacle to a unified system and Neal Maxwell's attitudes as a key source of resolution. President Fletcher fatalistically saw more centralization as inevitable. He was also persuaded by Neal's being "philosophically more comfortable with . . . centralization . . . as a means of improving Utah higher education." In the end, Fletcher and Maxwell "jointly brought [their] somewhat unwilling institution along during the master planning process." Along the way, "Maxwell was an eloquent advocate for centralization who could both 'deliver' the University of Utah and also flesh out in persuasive prose the principles" he believed in.

Working with state senator Dixie Leavitt on the system's final recommendations, Neal drew on his United States Senate experience to shape public policy in the area of overlap between competing interests and principles. His approach tried to balance the need for institutional freedom with the need for statewide planning, limiting the authority of the system's commissioner to that of "executive secretary to the board" of regents, leaving line authority running directly between the board and each campus president. These experiences developed Neal's later attitudes about the role of the Commissioner in the Church Educational System, teaching him why system leaders need to help their boards find strong presidents and then avoid micromanaging them.

By the later 1960s, the state asked Neal to help solve another problem reorganizing the state's own governmental branches. Governer Rampton was committed to strengthening both the executive and the legislative branches of state government, reflecting a national movement to upgrade the power of state-level governments. "At no time in the nation's history [had] the states' basic law been under such widespread scrutiny." After hearing a Rampton-appointed Little Hoover Commission on the executive branch, the legislature concluded that it first needed to revise the state constitution's legislative article. The power the typical nineteenth-century state constitution gave to state legislatures was, as one expert said, "the most serious failure in American political development."

This weakness in state legislative power had two causes. First, corruption in nineteenth-century state legislatures had prompted severe constitutional limits on their power, a model on which Utah's 1896 constitution was based. Second, the federal government's power had gradually increased until it now dwarfed state power, endangering the very concept of federalism (shared power between state and federal governments) that was at the heart of America's complete constitutional system. With U.S. cities bypassing their state governments and turning to the federal government to solve urban problems, it was time to revitalize state constitutions.

The legislative study committee (LSC) launched in early 1966 was overseen by House Speaker Kay Allen and Senate President Oscar W. McConkie. To Oscar, Neal's longtime friend, Neal Maxwell was "the ideal guy" to chair such a project. He had a political science background, knew the legislators, had a good rapport with the Church, and brought the perspective of his staff years in the federal Congress. The LSC initially included N. Eldon Tanner of the First Presidency, who had served in the Alberta legislature in Canada, and James E. Faust, a Salt Lake City attorney who had served in the Utah legislature and as president of the Utah State Bar Association.

Cautious about change, Utah voters rejected the committee's first recommendations in 1966, including a proposal for a constitutional convention to deal with all needed revisions. Neal thought the proposals failed because the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce opposed them. The public was also spooked by the open-ended implications of a constitutional convention. Learning from this defeat, the legislature reconstituted the committee as a longer-term constitutional revision commission (CRC), leaving Neal as chairman. The new group proposed a "Gateway Amendment," which allowed the public to consider clusters of constitutional amendments without reviewing the entire document. The CRC adopted a media campaign and obtained public endorsements from groups that included the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce. In 1970, the electorate adopted the Gateway Amendment.

Roger Porter, who later served as an economic policy adviser in the White House and on the faculty at Harvard University, was a BYU student during the CRC years, working as Neal's student assistant during two summers. Watching Neal manage this process, Roger said he'd "rarely . . . seen anyone move so surely or adeptly in bridging the differences between Republicans and Democrats, LDS and non-LDS, power brokers in one sector of the economy and leaders in other sectors."

For example, Neal had turned to his friend John W. (Jack) Gallivan, publisher of the Salt Lake Tribune, for advice. Jack, who wasn't a member of the LDS Church, was one of Utah's leading community statesmen. He and Neal had together attended a national conference on strengthening state legislatures. Jack helped persuade the influential Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce to back the CRC proposals. To address local leaders, Neal also imported Michigan governor George Romney, who had previously helped revise his state's constitution. Roger found that Neal had an "astonishing lack of interest in who received credit" for the work and that he'd help create "an environment in which people could reach agreement without feeling like some won and others lost."

Authorized by the Gateway Amendment, the CRC developed several proposals for the 1972 ballot annual legislative sessions (rather than every two years), increased legislators' compensation, and new positions of legislative auditor and legislative legal counsel. The Salt Lake Tribune published Neal's article that urged passage of the amendments as a way to revitalize federalism, increasing the state's power compared to that of the federal government. When the amendments passed, Neal wrote to Cory, "All the amendments passed . . . by wide margins, so I feel good. Later today our Constitutional Revision Commission will meet" to begin consideration of similar changes for the executive branch.

The CRC eventually recommended creating the office of lieutenant governor as "second in command" to the governor; abolishing the office of secretary of state, and changing the membership of the state board of examiners all of which the public approved in 1974. When Neal was released as CRC chairman, a Salt Lake Tribune editorial noted his commitment to public service, his balance between detail and vision, his "knack of identifying the most likely approach to a successful public presentation," the "versatile nature of his leadership," and his "genuine selfless way [which avoided] the turmoil and disharmony" that could have occurred. These attitudes reflected not only the political scientist rendering public service but Neal's peacemaker skills. One friend said Neal has an unusually "irenic" quality peaceful in purpose and able to promote unity. This gift had drawn him from university life into civic service, where he helped people of differing views resolve complex public policy issues to serve the common good.

Elder Alexander Morrison thought Neal's years at the U of U enhanced his education about people, history, and institutions a process that motivated him to learn from experience as well as books. The university years added a diverse and valuable set of tools to his understanding of the American political system, leadership, managing people with varying views, public policy, and his sense of history. All of this laid foundations on which he would soon need to build.
