Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Thirty

The Maxwell Style

By the mid-1960s, Neal's distinctive personality had settled into a number of telling habits and attitudes. Some of them were well known around the campus, including a playful streak that would become a little more (but not completely) sedate once he began his full-time association with the Church. The playful streak included a mixture of Neal's quick sense of humor and his innate competitiveness. One time the secretaries to Neal and to Parry Sorensen discovered that both men typed hunt-and-peck style, with one finger of each hand. They proposed a race with two manual typewriters side by side, testing which of the two could type the same pages first. Neal won, but he never would have raced someone who typed with all ten fingers.

Another time, while Henry Eyring was dean of the graduate school, Edith Bronson proposed that they do something for their faithful campus postman to honor his retirement. Henry and Neal put together a "nice certificate," recognizing the mailman with an honorary "doctor of letters" degree.

Nothing was more competitively playful than the Coronary Club, the twice weekly (Mondays and Fridays at 4:00 p.M.) pickup basketball games with friends from the faculty and administration. Here Neal's intense "drive to win," which he usually kept under tight control, would cut loose with an unsuppressed energy that must have taken vengeance on the demons that had haunted him since he failed to make his high school basketball team. If it didn't do that, at least it gave him a place to let off the steam generated by the increasing pressure of his daily duties.

One faculty partner said Neal rarely missed a game in fourteen years. Edith would just write "seminar" on his schedule, and he'd be there. Jim Jardine remembers being in Neal's office as he dashed out the door for a 4:00 p.M. game. Edith signaled to him that the governor was phoning, but Neal waved and shook his head, so Edith told the governor's secretary that Neal had a pressing appointment and would need to return the call later. Some of Neal's teammates played basketball "as if it were a contact sport" but Neal played with a more "finesse," relishing his "very accurate left hand set shots from the sidelines." Neal's typical shot was "novel," like his slightly quirky but well-polished tennis shots. He sparked fast-paced team action with his hustle and tough defense. His quick hands would "swipe the ball away" without mercy, but he wouldn't ever lose his temper.

By 1970, the campus newspaper did a story on the club. When Neal left the U that year, the other players gave him a certificate recalling his "solicitous concern for injured teammates, whether or not the injury was inflicted by him." They noted too his "consistent confounding of the laws of physics," making his shots "despite all manner of impossible trajectories."

Neal's passion for action also surfaced when he played tennis, which eventually replaced basketball as his physical and emotional outlet. His regular tennis matches began in the 1960s and stopped only for his chemotherapy in 1997 and then began again, and still continue. Neal's tennis partners found what his "hoop" friends did that he was very competitive and played with a unique style. In general, said Jim Jardine, "he'll dive for every ball but give you every line call." And "he's developed all these crazy strokes" drop shots, spin shots, unorthodox serves, and disguised volleys- "and this isn't just for fun. These are tools" to win.

His tennis style reflects his offstage personality, as well as his desire to stay fit: "A one-minute warmup is plenty for him. Let the games begin." If the game drags a little, "out come Neal's spin shots 'junk tennis' they call it. His doubles partners never know where the shots are going to or coming from." And if there's "even a brief lull," Neal wants to hear the latest political news: "How are things going for the president? What have you heard about the governor?" And when he gets unhappy with his own shots, he will "scold himself: 'Oh, Neal! Oh, Neal!'" a lament "somewhere between an exclamation and a grunt." Faculty colleague J. D. Williams found a similarity between Neal's tennis game and his office style. Neal was "a clean desk man, and I've never been able to abide them." In "tennis you never knew where the ball was coming from. And in his office you never knew where he hid the papers."

Friends who have been in touch with Neal through the years have noticed that when he's in town, he just might call to arrange a quick game. When he visited Oscar McConkie while Oscar was presiding over a mission in Arizona, Neal set up a basketball game in the mission office parking lot. And Beverly Campbell, who worked with Neal on Church international affairs in Washington, D.C., said that on his visits he loved it when the Campbells could find him some tennis clothes and tennis partners. Then he'd rise early, play a hard game, and arrive at his meetings with ambassadors from other countries, refreshed and on time.

Elizabeth Haglund believes that his passion for sport is not an isolated aberration but a window to a soul full of strong, deeply rooted emotions. She knew all about the playful streak, from stories that filtered back from the gym and the tennis court; but she thought Neal consciously "bridled his passions" with a self-discipline that arose from his "sense of mission."

One day Liz also happened to glimpse the deeper springs of Neal's passions. She dropped by his home to deliver something and, before he knew she was there, she saw him in a rocking chair "on the front porch of his house [holding] one of his new grandbabies. It was the most emotionally moving vignette. He was totally fulfilled in the presence of this child." It was as if the baby were "telling him about the next world by osmosis."

The idea of bridled passions introduces Neal's demanding self-discipline. Since his mission, Neal had worked consciously to develop desirable character traits. His interest in such themes as meekness and discipleship in the later books and talks of his ministry reflects his discovery in earlier years that he needed, and therefore wanted, to work on developing those qualities within himself.

For example, Neal surprised one of his faculty basketball friends at the U in the 1960s by confiding that he had to make himself work hard to do a better job in teaching, speaking, and leadership. He was the same way about his parenting. Other close friends saw that he "has tried very, very hard over the years to make himself a better person. For most people, New Year's resolutions don't last. But his do." His later call as a General Authority enhanced this tendency, but he's long had "a determination, the perseverance, to do it and do it and do it again." All of that has produced gradual changes as he has matured. Said one friend, "No one I know requires such extreme effort of himself." Another said Neal is a Type A personality "with a capital A, yet he has learned such exquisite skills that he does not really appear hurried when he's hurrying, and he doesn't appear to be dismissive when he's dismissing."

There was almost a Ben Franklin quality about Neal's quest for self-mastery. In his 1771 Autobiography, Franklin recorded his disillusionment with the churches of his day for paying insufficient attention to morality and citizenship. So he decided to write his own "lesson plan" as Neal has done when not satisfied with existing missionary approaches and Church leadership texts. Neal never went to the Franklin-like extreme of keeping a scorecard on his own performance with each of thirteen ideal virtues, but some of Franklin's language sounds very Maxwellian: "Avoid trifling conversation. . . . Resolve to perform what you ought. . . . Lose no time. . . . Avoid extremes. . . . Imitate Jesus and Socrates."

For Neal, self-mastery was simply part of the gospel. To him, mortality is designed to help us learn and grow. We can't take material things with us, but character and understanding are portable. "We talk glibly about eternal progression," he told some students at Brigham Young University, "yet that idea really must be broken down into day by day improvement." In addition, much of his on-the-job training to fulfill unexpected occupational assignments was self-taught just like his basketball and tennis shots and his typing, speaking, writing, and leadership styles.

He has worked on himself in small ways and large ones. Edith noticed that when Neal ran across a new word in his reading, he would deliberately use that word several times the next day in speaking or writing and then he'd have it in his vocabulary. He once wrote to Cory and Karen, "Deliberately cultivate what your mother has done better than I a certain resilient and glad spirit, so that even when you are in the midst of a pressure situation you can smile and have an upbeat manner." The key words here are "deliberately cultivate."

Another example of the self-mastery quest was Neal's preoccupation with patience. Cory has said his father is not a "naturally patient" person, but he has worked on that quality over the years, including giving a devotional talk on the subject at BYU after he had just returned from a difficult trip that tried his patience. Even now, his family and friends can tell when he's "biting his tongue" or may "start to say something" and then check himself.

Neal also decided he wanted to understand and practice empathy. Drawing on the way he learned to listen to students who were trying to understand their own rebellion, he wanted to become more fully aware of other people's feelings. He told one interviewer during those years, "I don't know that empathy is natural to us. . . . I have to work at it. I have to make sure that, in my task orientation to get things done, I do not forget the feelings of people."

When he first began working at the university, he was so focused on his own tasks that he sometimes didn't listen fully to the answers other people gave to his own questions. Oscar McConkie found that as time went on, Neal was much "more likely to listen to your response and not be thinking about what he's going to say next." Part of this skill came as Neal learned to believe, "more than he used to, that the other guy may have something worth listening to."

In earlier days, Oscar had noticed that Neal "didn't suffer fools gladly." In fact, before he began consciously to develop empathy, he had "the capacity for a very acerbic wit." Neal acknowledged as much, once telling a BYU audience that in the early years of his marriage, he once privately spoke "less than worthy words" of criticism about someone just before being called to work with that person in a church assignment. "In such circumstances one winces for his words, and pride goes first" as one learns "experientially." As time went on, however, Neal "just buried it," simply choosing to avoid clever sarcasm or criticism by suppressing it.

So Neal's "talents in ministering with sympathy and empathy to people is a learned [skill]. The more he did it, the better he got at it." He learned empathy from Wallace Bennett, who wanted to attend a funeral when Neal thought they should stay on the regular schedule. He learned of it from noticing that Ray Olpin was sometimes too task oriented and in Olpin he saw much of himself. Neal once wanted to tell Olpin, "Look, somebody is going to come and give you a million dollars. Make them feel good on their way out, rather than arguing with them over something," as was his tendency.

Neal also began learning about empathy from being asked to talk at funerals. In the early 1960s, a woman called him to say her husband had passed away and she wanted him to speak at the funeral. Neal was so saddened by the news that he sat alone, crying, after hanging up the phone. When Cory saw his father, he thought he must have done something to make Neal feel bad the empathetic son was watching his father learn empathy from experience. Gradually, Neal's empathy increased, as did the requests for his presence at funerals.

After Neal had gained some experience at Church headquarters, he began to see the traditional rivalry between BYU and the University of Utah more empathetically. In the past, he'd seen BYU through Utah's eyes; now he could also see Utah through BYU's eyes. Then he realized the folly of being so competitive as to "stereotype each other in a way that is not only inaccurate but unfortunate." As this insight came, it reminded him of the unfortunate polarization he'd seen between political extremists in the U.S. Senate, who likewise suffered from the myopia of stereotyping.

Neal's growing empathy responded when the president of a student stake at the University of Utah invited him to speak. The stake was made up mostly of married students but included a number of LDS single parents. The stake president told Neal, among other things, that the single parents needed encouragement. As Neal spoke, he said he'd been watching the diving competition in a televised Olympic event. In that sport, he said, the score given to a diver is the multiplied sum of the degree of difficulty of the dive times the quality of executing the dive. People may watch others do their dives, but one can never know the difficulty of another person's dive. Only God knows our degree of difficulty. That's especially true for single parents. From his having seen and said this, the meaning of Neal's expression of admiration and encouragement to the single parents was itself multiplied.

Neal's empathy began to express itself in his approach to leadership. Through their years of interaction in leadership settings, President James E. Faust would find that "even when he's presiding he's very, very sensitive in reaching out to get the opinions of everybody and not imposing his own thoughts and ideas on other people. . . . He can almost read your thoughts."

For example, he enjoyed drawing other people into interaction, whether in leadership training, a classroom, a social setting, or private conversation. He might ask people to write down their goals for their life, their goals for the next year, and their goals if they had only six months to live then to list their main activities for the past week, to see if they were spending time on their most important values. He might also ask people to identify a skill or quality they need to develop and then write down one thing they would stop doing and one thing they would start doing in order to improve. Once he asked members of a study group to say what they would do if they had unlimited financial resources.

Some of this was "a tool for inclusion," to be sure people weren't being left out of group conversations. Colleen had noticed this tendency in Neal when she first met him. In teaching and training, he also found that "there is generally more learning when members of an audience have some involvement."

In one of his first Church Educational System staff meetings, Neal asked each participant to take three minutes and write what they'd like to be remembered for after leaving their current position. Then-BYU President Dallin Oaks preserved and often referred to what he wrote down that day, having found it a "very significant question." Neal would do the same thing in informal conversations, asking such questions as "How do you study the scriptures?" Then he'd listen to the merits of various study habits. He took a similar approach in asking his children questions designed to produce thoughtful discussions around the dinner table.

Not all of the Maxwells' friends were unqualified fans of his penchant for so much structure, even when it did produce involvement. When one group was having dinner together, he asked each person to take turns responding to a certain question. Elizabeth Haglund became exasperated. She had participated in such exercises so often with Neal that she wondered why they couldn't just enjoy "wonderful, warm, meaningful" and spontaneous conversation.

Related to his interest in empathy was Neal's conscious choice to take a positive view of human nature in dealing with other people. He had learned, both with students and with those he supervised, that people do better when they're valued than when they're scolded. "I have found," he told a BYU audience, "that it is better to trust and sometimes be disappointed than to be forever mistrusting and be right occasionally. This is to endorse empathy, not naivete."

Those who worked for him found that if he wasn't happy with their performance, he would just not increase their responsibility. "If you didn't do the job, you never got asked a second time." Those with ears to hear would sense his gentle style of correction, and he preferred working with people whose ears were finely tuned enough to hear his understated direction.

Elizabeth Haglund found that he worked best with self-starters who could keep up with him without much direction. His best allies were "whole-souled" people who had their "own sense of direction that dovetailed with his." Not everybody who thought they'd like to work with Neal "wanted to work as hard as Neal works you. He just squeezes the last drop . . . out of you without always realizing he's doing it." Further, "if you had to have someone explain the whole thing to you, if you couldn't see the vision from the words he used," the collaboration probably wouldn't work.

Typically, then, Neal's corrections would come in a "feedback sandwich," with the correction surrounded by positive comments. For instance, one scholar missed two deadlines on a project that Neal's office had helped to fund. When the person requested another extension, Neal wrote that he could "understand in part . . . the many burdens that have fallen upon you." And "I surely want it to be done well . . . which is, of course, your style." But "we will probably have to hold" to any new date "to bring this matter to closure. I am looking forward [to seeing] what you will have done." Probable interpretation: Don't ask again to extend the deadline.

Others found that Neal's sensitivity about people's feelings made him reluctant to give direct criticism he'd find another way to send a needed message. When Russell Nelson, then a regional representative, assisted Neal in a stake reorganization, Elder Nelson forgot to include the normal reference to the stake high priests quorum presidency when setting apart a new stake president's counselor. Rather than whispering in Brother Nelson's ear or asking him to repeat the blessing, Neal just explained to the group afterward that the counselor's office in the stake presidency included his presiding role in the high priests quorum.

Another part of the Maxwell style was his innate commitment to efficiency. While in his office, Neal focused on the task or person before him, and people typically left his office feeling he had nothing else on his mind but whatever they had discussed together. If he had papers or projects on his desk, he would do whatever was needed to work through them and move on. By about 5 p.M., he would be ready to go home, and that was usually without "anything left over." Edith also said he cleaned out his correspondence files once a year and "just threw everything away." That habit has continued through the years, making his biographer's task at once easier and harder.

In conversations with work colleagues, his quickness and his focus always shortened conversations. Often when he saw where someone's point was going, he would ask questions about bottom-line implications, perhaps before the other person was prepared to be there. Some colleagues found, as Dallin Oaks once said, "That confounded Neal Maxwell sometimes finishes my sentences!" One friend noticed that "in their young married lives it was not uncommon for Neal to finish Colleen's sentences." Some of this was because Neal anticipated so intuitively that he would detect where a thought was going as soon as it began to unfold.

Neal's interest in efficiency was intentional. He practiced habits he learned from others, such as President N. Eldon Tanner. Neal knew that when business pressures began to affect President Tanner's health as a young man, he "had a talk with himself" and decided "he would give the problem before him, whatever it was, his full and best attention. Once he had disposed of it, having done his best, he would forget it and move on to the next one" rather than recycling his problems.

The passion for efficient focus sometimes made it hard for Neal to relax and slow down. His family knew if they went on a family vacation, he'd often take work along; or if they went out to dinner, he'd want to structure a "gospel conversation." At times this part of his personality made him seem always in a hurry early for appointments, airplanes, and trains and impatient with having to wait in lines, get through traffic, or attend receptions.

His haste even showed up in his typing, where his friend with a printer's eye, President Thomas S. Monson, could always tell when Neal had typed something himself, "because he's too [impatient] to wait for the capital key to go down. So . . . the capital letters are all . . . a sixteenth of an inch higher on the line than all the rest of the letters." He still often types little notes on his manual machine in half-space lines, rather than regular spaced lines, perhaps because he doesn't want to take time to click the carriage return twice.

Edith saw his hastiness when she typed his dictated speeches. Often Neal would be so anxious to keep moving that he would take a sheet half-full of typing from her machine so he could begin revising it. She was a fast typist but couldn't keep up when he was "so anxious to get into it, make the corrections, get it done, and get started on something else."

At times during the early university years, his fast pace put work needs ahead of human ones. But he gradually became more "humanized," adjusting his gait to that of other people. "There's something to be said about not getting too far ahead of other people," said one friend. Even later, President Boyd K. Packer said Neal "likes to get something done right now. . . . You have to slow him down once in a while." Adds President Monson, "When it's time for the meeting to end, he doesn't look at his watch. He's not rude. But you can just tell, because there's a little shoulder movement that says, 'I ought to be moving on to something else.'"

Neal's inborn mental quickness was related to what would become his distinctive verbal style laced with one-liners, alliteration, and word pictures in speaking, writing, and informal conversation. During his university years, he increasingly looked for ways to turn a phrase or create a fresh metaphor that would compress and capture meaning and insight a stylistic urge that has heavily marked his work ever since. The exercise of crafting memorable phrases and images required real exertion, especially because his natural creativity was always bubbling up an array of word choices. In that sense, the Maxwell style of expression hardly saved his time because it added to his preparation effort. But the process yielded fruit that packed entire sentences of meaning into brief phrases, thus economizing his listener's time.

Edith noticed he was always moving paragraphs, cutting, compressing, and looking for vivid images and symbols. She also thought that some of "his talks are so hard for an ordinary person to keep up with, because he doesn't have any extra stuff in them. It's all meat, and the little things that give you time to catch up with what he's saying have disappeared." As one later associate put it, "You take that raw ore, sprinkled with gold, compress it, and extract the gold and you have his books." Edith thought this style more fitting for the university audience where it was first forged than it was for the younger kids. "He was a little above them."

During the late 1960s and early 1970s, when Neal was still developing his speaking style, he sometimes experimented with language that became saturated with rhetorical devices. One 1973 talk at BYU, for instance, included these phrases:

A distinctive, differential valuation of truth could be a more profound protrusion. . . .

We live in an age that is flooded with facts . . . a process which [reflects] futility as much as humility. Much of the factual flood flowing from research is very valuable, but from some undiscriminating research comes a deluge of data and a blizzard of conceptual confetti. . . .

Without the divine disclosures God has given to us, we face all the usual dangers of incomplete information, but these are compounded by cosmic consequences. . . .

Without divine guidance, cerebral calisthenics . . . can provide us with . . . but empty exercise. . . . Freedom is the catalyst in the chemistry of choice. . . .

Distinctive education must therefore pay more than a curricular curtsy to those kingly truths about family and freedom. . . . After all, rhetoric is an easy religion, and conversational Christianity makes few demands of us. . . .

Distinctive education . . . is a temporizing tutor. . . .

In moral education, a chameleon curriculum is not usually conducive to . . . selflessness.

The Maxwell language style did not go unnoticed on the BYU campus, which led to some good-humored and constructive feedback to which Neal, over time, would respond. Indeed, many years later, when asked about his diminished fascination with alliteration, Neal would smile and say, "I'm now down to two packs a day." In 1976 Donald T. Nelson, the director of fund-raising for CES, introduced Neal to his staff with language that caused then-BYU President Dallin Oaks to "laugh himself almost under the table":

Neal A. Maxwell is a connoisseur of communicative cadences and one for whom we have ample affection and affinity. As such we believe he will recognize in the introduction that is to follow the compliment of imitation which has been to exaggerate not castigate. . . .

Brother Maxwell, an accumulator of accolades, is an admirable administrator who has been our boon and booster for the last five years. He can bolster and bless, becalm and bedazzle, befriend and beseech, but he balks at balderdash and begrudges ballyhoo.

He is a baron of brevity, the best of the breed, who has helped us as a broadminded brother to banish barnacles of brainless and bankrupt behavior.

He has counted the cadence for us, calm and candid. His cardinal care was to act as a captivating catalyst . . . in the awful arithmetic of the year-end fund results. . . .

Now, Brother Maxwell, if you are not too taxed to testify, nor too anguished to appreciate, we will await your tender tutoring.

One further dimension of Neal's style was that he learned to create bridges between the Latter-day Saint and the non-Latter-day Saint communities, both on the campus and in Salt Lake City. His deepest loyalties were to the Church, but he respected the U as a state institution, and his peaceful nature helped him foster good relationships between Latter-day Saints and members of other faiths especially those for whom the Church presence in Utah was a difficult issue.

Neal's religious attitudes were no secret. People knew he had a "complete spiritual commitment," but he "always enfolded [it] in respect, generosity, and openness toward those who didn't accept or understand him fully." As dean of students, he knew of the discomfort some in that office felt about his and Lowell Bennion's closeness to the Church. Nevertheless, "instead of allowing them to be enemies, [Neal] made them his colleagues, and that wholly changed the complexion of things." In his approach to the religious issue, "he never confronted it, never made speeches about it," and "was very successful in conveying to other people that it really didn't matter." He "earned his spurs" by simply creating authentic professional ties.

Bill Loos was a student body officer who worked closely with Neal when he was dean of students. After Bill later joined the Church, he recalled:

[Neal's] warmth did much to "thaw" the cold feelings of some students toward the Church. . . .

We never discussed the Church, yet years later when I took the missionary discussions, it was Neal's example . . . that propelled me into continuing with my investigation into the Church. . . . [His] unspoken influence seemed to always give me confidence in the Church. . . .

I felt his love and respect just as much before joining the Church as after. It was not conditional on my believing, or living or acting like he did.

Neal took a proactive approach that reflected his empathy for faculty members who were not Latter-day Saints. He helped prepare a paper the university gave to non-LDS faculty prospects and their families, conveying an attitude of welcome and acceptance and offering well-informed suggestions about their natural questions. He often reassured his non-LDS friends about what "the local culture" contributed to the university. Sometimes he would say, for instance, that the Church should send the university a bill for a million dollars for attracting such people as Henry Eyring, who never would have come to Utah but for the attraction he felt toward the Church.

Russell Nelson, who was a faculty member at the medical school when Neal first returned to the university, saw two reasons why Neal had earned so much respect from his non-LDS friends. One was that he "was so unarguably good," professionally, doing his work so well that he "was immune from attack" on other grounds. Besides, people simply liked him as a person, and "you can't quarrel with a man you love."

On the other side of this judicious balance, Neal constantly looked for ways to reassure Latter-day Saints in the legislature, the Church leadership, or elsewhere about the university's environment and direction. He was well aware, as Oscar McConkie put it when he was Utah senate president, that it was "hugely important that the state university have some sympathetic understanding of 70 percent of the Utah population" who were members of the Church.

This wasn't always easy, or completely possible, given the constraints inherent in a state institution. Neal once heard from a friend that two General Authorities were concerned about some issues on the campus and wondered why Neal hadn't done more about those concerns. He immediately asked to see the two leaders, telling them he'd heard of their questions and wanted to discuss them openly, in the spirit of Matthew 18:15 a favorite Maxwell scripture, and by then a hallmark Maxwell process: "If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother."

As an interpreter between the two communities, at least in Utah higher education, Neal tried to interact honestly with both groups. Looking back, he felt it was good for his own growth to "learn to defend my principles in a setting where you didn't get a free pass. I had to be sure of what those principles were, and the strength of that position became more apparent to me." His approach was "a great source of strength and courage for [other] faithful" Latter-day Saints at the university who looked to Neal as a role model.

During his university years, he developed many close friendships with people from all across the spectrum of belief and attitude toward the Church. He kept many of those relationships alive for years after leaving the campus. As just one example, in 1996 he baptized Willam Christensen, the university's distinguished ballet director, when Christensen was past ninety years of age. During his years of observing the U community, Jim Jardine believed that "non-Mormons and less-active or disaffected Mormons" in "the university community related to him, respected him, [and] connected with him" to "a degree that was probably true of no other Latter-day Saint" of that era. This was because Neal was "always so centered on the gospel" and was also so genuine and thoughtful that "people who might feel a distance from . . . the Church . . . felt like they had a relationship with him."

In 1969, the board of regents surprised Neal with a gesture that showed how leaders from diverse perspectives felt about him. They awarded him an honorary doctor of law degree at the June commencement. Major universities seldom give honorary doctorates to their own faculty, let alone to one of their own administrative personnel. The regents, chaired then by Edward Clyde, appreciated Neal not only because of his long university service but also because of the statesmanship in his approach to shaping a Utah system of higher education and revising the legislative and executive articles of the Utah state constitution.
