Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Thirty-Two

Neal was released as bishop when he was made dean of students at the University of Utah in 1962. Then in 1964, he was called to the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association (MIA) General Board.

Marvin J. Ashton, a loyal U of U alumnus who would later serve in the Twelve, was Assistant Superintendent of the YMMIA. He introduced Neal to the board on November 18, 1964. Elder Thomas S. Monson, a new member of the Twelve and adviser to the MIA, set Neal apart. Elder Monson was also on the university's alumni board. There he had found that "Neal Maxwell's reputation was legendary already," partly because he had "those jobs no one else wanted," like "having to fire the coaches." But he could do even that with a personal touch that left a fired coach feeling "it was the right thing."

The MIA general boards were large in those days, with more than fifty people on each one, many of them specialists from BYU and the U of U, who served on such committees as drama, sports, music, Scouting, and leadership. This was before the correlation era, so each auxiliary general board wrote, implemented, evaluated, and oversaw its own entire program. As a member of the MIA speech committee then, Neal trained stake and ward speech directors, helping them to coach youth when they gave talks in their Church meetings. He also helped organize the annual Churchwide June conference for all MIA leaders, and he attended stake conferences with members of other auxiliary boards and a presiding General Authority.

Shortly after his first board meeting, Neal was assigned to a conference in Ogden's Ben Lomond South Stake, accompanied by two other general auxiliary leaders and Elder Harold B. Lee. The auxiliary leaders met with their stake and ward counterparts for afternoon training, and then all the leaders met together on Saturday evening. Elder Lee asked Neal to talk for ten minutes. When he took only seven, Elder Lee said he should have spoken longer. Neal later commented that he thought it audacious for board members to hold "forth as if we really had something to say."

The stake clerk recorded that Neal spoke in the Saturday night meeting about the need for youth to have good role models. In an early use of what would become the central concept of his future Church teaching, Neal told the leaders that "a disciple should follow the good life so he may feel and see the works of the Spirit. To some it is given to know the truth, but some must rely on others for their faith." In the Sunday afternoon general session (stake conference had both morning and afternoon sessions then), he said that each young person needs to love and be loved, have a sense of belonging, feel recognition, and submit to authority. Those themes echoed some of what he'd been learning as dean of students.

Neal had six or seven stake conference assignments each year in his MIA calling. He attended the Boston Stake in early 1966, at which, coincidentally, three other future Apostles were also involved. Boyd K. Packer, then an Assistant to the Twelve, was serving there as president of the New England Mission; L. Tom Perry had just moved into the stake and would soon be called into the stake presidency; and Robert D. Hales was released from the stake presidency at this conference to take a new job in England. The clerk recorded an attendance of 677, which was 25 percent of the membership a good turnout, considering the snowy weather. Elder Packer later recalled having heard Neal speak at this conference. He never forgot his early "impression of the man and it's never changed. I was impressed with his ability . . . with words. He's the master of the one-liner," with meanings "crystalized into one phrase or one sentence."

After Neal had served on the MIA board less than a year, he and Elizabeth Haglund, by then on the YWMIA board, were assigned to the leadership improvement committee. One of their tasks was to show board members how to teach the entire MIA program in their stake conference visits, rather than speaking only about their specialities. In this capacity, Neal trained the trainers in ways that in hindsight he would consider rather brash, partly because he still felt a little guilty about not having been a very "gung ho" MIA participant in his own youth.

At one board meeting, for example, Neal assigned impromptu speech topics and then evaluated each member's talk. Another time, he talked to board members about "not being our own worst enemies," which included not "overdoing their protestations of humility." He often talked about participative leadership, urging board members to be less formal, involving their audiences when training them which was quite a departure from their traditional style of simply giving talks.

Elizabeth and Neal were also assigned to prepare the 1966 MIA leadership training manual and introduce it at June conference. That annual event had become a huge project by the mid-sixties, with thousands of MIA leaders traveling to Salt Lake City for training in every activity department. The general boards also staged a giant youth festival of music, dance, or drama that demonstrated a pattern the stakes would follow in their own local activities. As a separate assignment that year, Neal and Chieko Okazaki also co-chaired the theme presentation committee a major production in itself. The MIA had a new scriptural theme each year, which the youth recited as they began each ward's midweek MIA evening program.

As the MIA approach suggested, each Church auxiliary organization in those years had its own organizational and training line to the stakes and wards. The Church also had a more developed auxiliary activity program than would be possible when it had spread further across the globe. Looking back, Neal would feel that "the change to a less-structured local program is lamentable, but in other ways it was inevitable." When the Churchwide MIA June conference was discontinued in 1974, President Spencer W. Kimball announced that the Church would fulfill the conference purpose in a more decentralized way a still unfolding pattern, as suggested by the revised youth program the Church introduced in January 2002.

The 1966 leadership manual formed the basis for Neal's first book, published in 1967, A More Excellent Way: Essays on Leadership for Latter-day Saints. Neal's experience as dean of students had introduced him to several concepts he included in this material, adapting it to the Latter-day Saint environment. The book illustrated the tendency he had developed in his college days to integrate secular and scriptural learning; however, it also illustrated how his approach to integration consciously placed secular ideas within the gospel's primary context.

A More Excellent Way was more about leadership approaches than about Church doctrine, and it relied less on scriptural sources than would his later books, yet it was based on such gospel principles as love and personal spiritual growth. Neal wrote with a serenity that reflected his authentic commitment to the Church, deeply rooted in the religious experience of his home, the war, and his mission. Those experiences had reassured him that his instincts about helping to improve Church leadership would be welcome, just as his writing an original lesson plan for missionaries had been welcomed. This implicit tone of unqualified gospel acceptance let Neal write about Church leadership with a freshness and candor that a less spiritually secure person might not have attempted.

The book's introduction, for instance, addressed the challenge of being an authoritarian church in a day (the 1960s) of increasing secularism, international Church growth, and the unpopularity of authoritarian organizations all topics that reflected Neal's experience as bishop and dean of students. He acknowledged the clear significance of authority in the Church but wrote candidly that leaders should help members develop trust in that authority. The book was concerned not just with leadership mechanics but with "developing a climate of trust" to help leaders accept members as individuals, inviting their participation, not simply directing them. Leaders, he wrote, need to blend directive and participative styles:

Many of us . . . in an authoritarian Church [have excused] ourselves from the need to act participatively in our leadership and followership roles. We have relied on the weight and prestige of the Church to support us in styles of leadership . . . which were heedless of the feelings of others. . . . It is the worth of souls that is great not statistics.

And because the gospel net "gathereth of every kind" in this age of skepticism about institutions and authority, he continued, leaders must allow for individual differences and let people know that their ideas matter. Moreover, the "only moral authority to which people respond is example." So leaders must develop Christlike attributes if they would lead well in His Church. In that sense, "our ability to individualize is . . . a test of our capacity to love." And leaders who "over-react to dissent or to doubt" are not helpful to members who have honest questions. Authority is still essential to carry out the Lord's purposes, so leaders must not defer to people so much that they "minimize the gravity of sin or give gushy, casual reassurances too quickly." But, on balance, "there is in the admittedly authoritarian structure of the Church much more opportunity to use participative approaches than is realized."

With this blend of participation and direction as a framework, the book offered ideas and practical tips to leaders about getting adequate information, being open and candid, how to give "specific" and "deserved" commendation and reproof, and working in small groups including the family. Several short training exercises were sprinkled through the book. Those who worked closely with Neal recognized here many of the leadership habits he has cultivated for years.

This book revealed much about Neal's development by the late 1960s. Fundamentally, he thought, students and other followers want their leaders to empathize with them and level with them trademark Maxwell terms. To do this in the Church, leaders must love, be candid, include others, and be sensitive. Moreover, these are "acquired and cultivated traits," not "natural gifts." In that sense, A More Excellent Way was Neal's first effort at leaving written notes tacked onto the trees along the pathway of his discipleship, left for those who'd be coming behind. This process would continue with each book he wrote. He was sharing what he'd been learning, and he learned from deliberately practicing what he discovered from his life experience.

In early 1967, the YMMIA leaders assigned Neal to make an extensive trip through Latin America with two other board members seven countries in three weeks. They'd see only two stakes; all the other units were mission districts. He'd never been in that part of the world but really didn't want to go. He was pressed for time at the university, he didn't feel competent to teach all facets of the MIA's complex program, and the whole idea of transporting an American activity program to the international Church unsettled him. "I am supposed to go to Brazil and teach them to dance the rumba?" he said to Colleen with a perplexed "Europe face" look.

By then the Maxwells had moved to a home on Herbert Avenue, closer to the university. They discovered after the move that three members of the Quorum of the Twelve lived in their ward Elders Spencer W. Kimball, Delbert L. Stapley, and Marion G. Romney. Once when Neal was asked to teach a ward Gospel Doctrine class on the duties of the Apostles, he found Elders Kimball, Stapley, and Romney all sitting in the classroom. On another occasion, the three elderly Apostles sang a trio at a ward party, "I'll Serve the Lord While I Am Young."

Soon after he'd been asked to travel to Latin America, Neal passed Elder Kimball in a hallway one Sunday. Knowing nothing of his private reservations about the trip, Elder Kimball said, "Neal, I wish you would take that trip to South America." That comment settled anything he was unsettled about. He made the trip.

Neal returned home with a stirring sense of the Church's coming growth there and that discovery convinced him that the Church needed a simpler organization internationally, one that could adapt to every part of the world while emphasizing the gospel's fundamental elements. He could also see how impractical it would become to follow the traditional pattern of sending people from Utah-based general boards and priesthood committees, along with General Authorities, to teach a detailed Church program all across the globe. Little did he know that within a few months, he would need to draw directly on those impressions in helping to devise, teach, and implement a new approach to Church leadership the correlation program and regional representatives of the Twelve.

Thirty-Three

Correlation and the Church Leadership Committee

By 1967, the correlation program of the Church was developing well under the piercingly watchful eye of Elder Harold B. Lee, who was then second in seniority in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles after President Joseph Fielding Smith. During the next few years, Elder Lee would become Neal's most significant mentor.

Few superlatives could overstate the historical importance of correlation, both as a doctrinal concept and as an organizational movement. Those writing the history of the Church later identified correlation as "one of the principal themes of the Church's history" from 1960 until well into the 1970s. And Harold B. Lee's biographer wrote that "some historians may well argue" that correlation, developed pursuant to an assignment from President David O. McKay, was Elder Lee's "most significant lifetime work for the Church," including his service as President of the Church for about eighteen months in the early 1970s.

Elder Lee's vision of correlation had its roots in his conversations as a young Apostle in the early 1940s with President J. Reuben Clark and Elder Marion G. Romney. One issue they discussed was the relationship between the priesthood and the auxiliary organizations, which was intertwined with questions about the respective roles of the First Presidency, the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric. Another was the question of multiple organizational lines between headquarters and local Church units as demonstrated by the MIA's line from general to stake and ward leaders, which Neal saw in his general board experience. By 1960, these issues were still there but were both augmented and eclipsed by two other massive developments that Elder Lee's prophetic instincts foresaw: the deterioration of the family in Western society and the internationalization of the Church.

In 1961, the First Presidency launched correlation by announcing the creation of general committees for children, youth, and adults. Each committee was chaired by a member of the Twelve and was charged to review Church curriculum planning by age group rather than by organization. In 1963 came the first general priesthood committees on welfare, genealogy, missionary work, and home teaching. Members of these committees traveled with general board members and General Authorities to stake conferences from 1963 to 1967, a season that prepared both the Brethren and the Church for the calling of regional representatives in 1967.

Other elements of correlation announced in the early 1960s included the change from ward teaching to home teaching, the creation of stake and ward priesthood executive committees and councils, family home evening, and the new positions of ward and stake executive secretary. In 1971, the Church correlated its magazines to reflect the primacy of age-group perspectives over those of auxiliary (such as Relief Society and Sunday School) or quorum organizations.

Organizationally, correlation was a simplified and "integrated Church program led by the priesthood." This meant that the main organizational line should be the natural ecclesiastical channel from the First Presidency through the Twelve to stake presidents, bishops, and families. All quorum and auxiliary programs would then be "correlated" by the presiding priesthood officers within that line at each geographic level, including Church headquarters. The distinction between the "ecclesiastical" line (the Twelve) and the "temporal" line (the Presiding Bishopric) had its seeds in this era but was not fully clarified until the mid-1970s.

Conceptually, correlation emphasized the family as the heart of the Church. Each priesthood officer's highest mandate was to apply the entire set of new concepts the correlated curriculum, ward councils, and everything else to the strengthening of every home, making the family the center of gospel instruction and living. The First Presidency's direction on that subject was conveyed in a letter to Elder Lee and his associates in terms that have been quoted frequently and reverently by subsequent First Presidencies: "The home [is] the basis of a righteous life and . . . no other instrumentality can take its place or fulfill its essential functions, and . . . the utmost the auxiliaries can do is to aid the home in its problems."

By the spring of 1967, Elder Lee was brooding prayerfully over a major unresolved question in the full implementation of correlation how to fill the space in the priesthood line between the General Authorities and the stake presidents, which would only grow greater as the Church grew larger. This situation was both an organizational issue and a serious training problem. Elder Lee and his associates could see clearly what Neal had just seen in South America: It was unrealistic to keep enlarging general boards and general committees and expect them to train the entire Church leadership from Salt Lake City in all of the Church's programs.

In June, Elder Lee took the concept of regional representatives to the First Presidency and the Twelve, where it was approved and set for implementation at the 1967 October general conference. He was mindful throughout this time of the "inherent hazard of introducing an entirely new level of leaders" between stake presidents and General Authorities.

Against this weighty historical background, with which Neal had had virtually no contact, he was released from the YMMIA Board in June of 1967 and called to a new Church Leadership Committee. This new committee, chaired by Elder Thomas S. Monson and reporting to Elder Lee, was initially a subset of the Adult Correlation Committee, but it soon became independent of the age-group committees.

When Elder Lee assigned Elder Monson to chair the new Leadership Committee, he said, "You may have any two men you choose in the Church . . . stake presidents, mission presidents, anybody." Their first task was to flesh out and implement the concept of regional representatives. In addition, they were to design training programs for these new officers and other leaders, including a bishops' training manual and, later on, plan the annual seminar for regional representatives and the training portions of stake conferences.

Elder Monson searched prayerfully and came back with the names of Wendell Ashton and Neal Maxwell. A year later, with their tasks growing rapidly, they were joined by two other men selected the same way James E. Faust and Hugh W. Pinnock. The executive secretaries to the committee were Henry D. Taylor, an Assistant to the Twelve, and later David B. Haight, another Assistant to the Twelve.

From the moment he first saw Thomas Monson in action at such close range, Neal would always think of him "like Larry Csonka, the fullback. President Lee would give him the ball and open a hole in the line, and Tom would be good for seven yards. It was just a great team."

The feeling was mutual. Elder Monson saw that Neal was "young, vigorous, and was not steeped in anybody else's traditional philosophy." Moreover, "the leadership of the Church at that time wanted a new look at things." In the years that followed, Elder Monson and Neal often served on the same committees. During one of their early assignments together, Neal passed Elder Monson a note of gratitude and affection. Now in the First Presidency, President Monson still carries "that same little shriveled note" in the pocket of his scripture covers as a token of their friendship.

Early in his assignment on the Leadership Committee, Neal arranged to have Osmond Harline, director of the Bureau of Economic and Business Research at the U, prepare careful projections of Church growth over the next quarter century, country by country. It was probably the most sophisticated demographic study done for the Church to that date. As soon as Elder Lee saw Neal's presentation of these findings, he concluded that all of the General Authorities needed to see it, because the size and momentum of the coming trend made obvious the need for some office such as regional representative which validated and illustrated all that Elder Lee had been feeling.

In a special meeting called for that purpose, Elder Lee gave a brief welcome to the General Authorities and then astonished Neal by saying, "Now Neal Maxwell will present this material to you." As Neal stood up, he "felt about as smooth as a sack full of old door knobs." But the point of his presentation was clear to all: The future would soon bring not just more members but more stakes, more inexperienced local leaders, the need for more training, and a new set of issues about managing a multinational church. The Church was on the cusp of such expansion that the current leadership approach couldn't possibly manage what was coming. It was a prototypical moment, capturing Neal Maxwell as the Brethren would see him from that day forward presenting extensive data, looking ahead for trends, sensing implications for leadership and training, and articulating his thoughts in memorable phrases.

From 1967 on, Elder Lee became Neal's seasoned master, bringing along and relying upon a promising young apprentice, with both of them always tilted toward their ultimate discipleship of the Savior, whom Elder Lee loved to call "the Master." The Leadership Committee worked hard to assist Elders Lee and Monson prepare to unveil the plan for the regional representatives to the Church's stake presidents, who'd all been invited to general conference. The presentations included not only projections of Church population growth but the reasons for, the nature of, and the future training pattern proposed for the new officers.

To Neal's surprise, his name was included in the list of sixty-nine regional representatives announced at conference. He had seen himself strictly as a young staff support person who'd never served as a stake or mission president, but he concluded that Elder Lee must want him to gain enough experience "in the field" to help their committee do its work. That made sense, because they still had to work through the job description, let alone develop all of the support material for the new officers who would be training the stake presidents in the total program of the Church.

The very concept of regional representative was a change of breathtaking proportions to the presidencies and boards of the general auxiliary organizations and priesthood committees and to others who had seen these traditional offices as essential to operating the Church. The general priesthood committees were dissolved, with many but not all of the former committee members now called as regional representatives of the Twelve. Auxiliary board members would no longer attend stake conferences but would give training only at the regional, or multistake, level. Within a few more years, the boards would shrink to a dozen people each. And every Church headquarters department for both men's and women's organizations would be subject to the single priesthood line to the field, a line that now involved the regional representatives as primary trainers for a geographic region of several stakes.

The specific nature of the regional representative's role took a few years to develop. Some things were clear from the beginning, such as the general point that these men were to watch over the entire program of the Church within their regions, not just selected priesthood or quorum programs. Each was also to "act as an advisor to the stakes and as a liaison officer between stake presidents and the Council of the Twelve," representing the Twelve to the stake presidents rather than vice versa. This meant that stake presidents first discussed their questions about many Church policy issues with their regional representative which, for the first time, gave each stake president an assigned person to whom he could turn for counsel. The new leaders would also hold training meetings with stake presidents, conduct regional meetings in which general board members would train auxiliary leaders from several stakes at a time, review proposed stake boundary changes, and occasionally be assigned as a stake conference visitor to a given stake in their assigned region.

Although the Brethren recognized the need for some kind of officer to help with such functions, they were not ready to give the regional representative full "line authority" over stake presidents. This reluctance stemmed partly from the sheer newness of having a priesthood leader between stake presidents and General Authorities, and the Twelve didn't want them to "come on like gangbusters," giving authoritative direction. Rather, they were to serve as teachers and coaches, not as "super stake presidents." When assigned as a stake conference visitor, for instance, the regional representative was to defer to the stake president as the presiding authority.

This left some people, including many regional representatives, unclear about the boundaries of their ambiguous job description. One of these men said in a seminar a few months after the new office was instituted, "You've told us so many things we can't do. When are you going to tell us what we can do?" And "sure enough," Neal soon found, one regional representative called together the stake presidents in his region to tell them the details of how he wanted them to do their home teaching. When this report came back to the Twelve, the regional representatives were told at the next seminar even more things they couldn't do.

At the same time, the Brethren recognized the new office as an inspired step in the direction of working out an appropriate organization for the expanding global church. More than twenty years later, regional representatives would be superseded by Area Authority Seventies, functioning under the direction of Area Presidencies composed primarily of General Authorities. But in all of these steps, there was never any question about the fundamental principles of correlation that guided the unfolding process.

As Neal watched all of this, he thought it illustrated how revelation guides the Church. "Revelation works in a natural way. There is an unmet need [such as Church growth]. As we ponder over it, the mind and experience can put forward an adequate alternative [for the season, and] the confirmation is the inspiration." Neal didn't think "the Lord should have to do our research for us," nor "should [we] have a feeling that revelation is a push-button kind of thing." Rather, as the Twelve worked out the best organizational pattern, "their experience and their logic will take them well down the trail towards a solution, and often all the way."

Drawing on the entire cluster of correlation concepts, then, the new office of regional representative would seek to implement much that Elder Lee had been teaching for years. The "prime objective," he said, was to place

the Priesthood as the Lord intended, as the center core of the Kingdom of God, and the auxiliaries as related thereto; including a greater emphasis on the Fathers in the home as Priesthood bearers in strengthening the family unit. . . .

And all of this under the direction of the Twelve . . . acting under . . . the First Presidency; and you [regional representatives of the Twelve] are to carry this to the ends of the earth.

From a sociological perspective, Jan Shipps, a non-Latter-day Saint observer of the Church's history, thought that correlation was made necessary by the success of the Church's missionary emphasis after 1950, which sparked a rapid growth spurt that moved the Church beyond its Intermountain cultural base. This created such a need for buildings, training, and other forms of support that without it the Church risked "devolving into 'little more than an institutional umbrella' over a family of diverse congregations." To prevent this "disintegration . . . into a diversity," she thought, correlation created a "more centralized system" that was more efficient and coordinated, producing a "'standardized and simplified brand of Mormonism' that emphasizes families, temple work, and the preeminence of the Book of Mormon." Thus, "correlation is the key to how Mormonism became a movement that did not fracture and fragment."

Of more fundamental importance, Neal increasingly felt that the Lord had prepared Harold B. Lee for "such a time as this" (Esther 4:14), because these developments were all part of the Lord's plan to "hasten [His] work in its time" (D&C 88:73), establishing the Church among all nations. For Neal to be so close to this major transition would bless him through the rest of his ministry, because Elder Lee's mentoring transmitted to Neal a prophetic vision of the future of the Church.

Elder Lee continually expanded Neal's understanding, even if the process occasionally had its stresses. For example, the seminar for regional representatives soon became established as a significant time every year for the Brethren to assess candidly the state of the Church. Because of the small audience of key leaders and the absence of public media, the sermons given by Church leaders at these meetings "emerged as being among the most significant addresses to the priesthood leaders attending general conferences since 1967." The Church Leadership Committee was responsible, in a staff role, to help plan what would happen at these meetings. In 1969, Elder Lee was unable to attend the annual seminar due to minor surgery, so he asked Neal to read his talk to the group. Neal was very uncomfortable, feeling the situation "put him on the spot" in front of the General Authorities, but he learned a "different form of obedience" from doing as Elder Lee requested, in spite of his personal discomfort.

As this incident suggests, it took Neal a little time to feel his way into his relationship with Harold B. Lee, who had a reputation among his brethren for being both intimidating and demanding. In the days before a regional representative seminar in the late 1960s, Neal saw Elder Marion G. Romney working in his yard, which was not far from Neal's home. Feeling a little uneasy about whether he was communicating adequately with Elder Lee, he stopped to ask Brother Romney what he thought about Neal's asking Brother Lee if he felt all right about what Neal was doing.

Elder Romney, long a close friend of Elder Lee and now a friend and neighbor of Neal's, was characteristically blunt: "Listen, if he wants to tell you something, he'll tell you. He'll take the hide off you if it isn't going well. You don't need to go ask him" anything. A few years later, when Neal was working closely with Elder Romney on Church education issues while President Lee was in the First Presidency, he got another dose of Romney-style straight talk when he wondered if he had been too candid. "Neal, you're no . . . good if you won't tell us the truth." Thus did Elder Romney mentor Neal into his mentoring with Elder Lee.

Actually, Harold B. Lee's intimidating nature may well have been one reason he welcomed Neal's assistance on such sensitive projects as establishing the concept of regional representatives. Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, who was watching the unfolding of correlation in the late 1960s as the director of an institute of religion, thought Elder Lee's use of Neal's "immense personal skills, superb negotiating and navigating and sensitivity" on delicate matters of organizational change inherent in correlation "was quite probably intentional" because Neal's deft touch could sometimes put velvet gloves on the Lee hands of steel.

As a regional representative himself from 1967 until 1974, Neal at times accompanied General Authorities on special assignments in addition to working with the stake presidents in his assigned regions, first in Tremonton, Utah; then Ogden, Utah; and later Reno, Nevada. Some of his work was designed to field-test certain Leadership Committee initiatives about training church leaders, but some of it was to carry out ecclesiastical duties that General Authorities had previously performed.

In one early stake conference, Neal was assigned to accompany Elder Lee in choosing a new stake president. There he "saw the Lord reveal his will rather dramatically." After the two visitors had interviewed about two-thirds of the priesthood leaders, the next man on the list entered their office. Neal said that Elder Lee "just looked at me and nodded before the man had ever taken a seat. . . . He had his man and he knew it, and I did too." Also at this conference, they were to select a new stake patriarch. Having met more than twenty leaders during their interviews, Elder Lee asked that a certain man come in with his wife. When he said, "The Lord wants you to be a patriarch in this stake," the burly farmer began to weep. At his wife's urging, he explained that "two weeks ago the Lord told me this was going to happen." Elder Lee turned to Neal and taught him, "You see, Neal, why we have to operate by the Spirit?"

The relationship between Harold B. Lee and Neal Maxwell was not limited to leadership issues. In October 1969, the First Presidency assigned Elder Lee to recommend a statement the Church could release to the public on the subject of civil rights. This need arose from protests during that volatile era, especially against athletic teams at Brigham Young University, which grew out of the Church's policy of not ordaining blacks to the priesthood. Elder Lee asked G. Homer Durham and Neal each to draft a statement the Church might use for public comment and then gave their drafts to Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, who prepared a further draft for review by Elder Lee and the First Presidency. The First Presidency released their statement on December 15, 1969.

Another incident illustrates the relationship that had developed between Neal and Harold B. Lee. With the help of the Leadership Committee, the First Presidency and the Twelve focused on how the Church might do a better job of reclaiming men, especially fathers, who weren't active in the Church. Strengthening the role of priesthood-holding fathers in Latter-day Saint homes was at the very center of correlation's objectives. In 1971, the Church adopted the term "prospective elders" to replace "Senior Aaronic Priesthood," a change that "shows some faith in the future, more optimistic than" the former title, which focused "on past failures."

When President Lee introduced this change at the seminar for regional representatives, he asked Neal to explain some data on sacrament meeting attendance, temple marriage, and the growth in the number of less-active men. The two discussed the information in a team-teaching mode. Summarizing, Neal said, "We are losing ground [at the rate] of about 6,500 men a year, most of whom are fathers." President Lee added, "We are losing more men than we are rescuing." Asking Neal to read a list of ways to engage prospective elders in the Church, President Lee said, "This is . . . [the] kind of thing that can stir people's imagination." The list included inviting prospective elders to serve on phone calling committees, as greeters, ushers, and ward choir members, and by helping "widows and the home-bound." President Lee finished the thought: "And so on and on we could go if we have the talent and imagination."

At other times, however, President Lee might not rely on Neal's help. He was very much his own man, and he did his own homework. During one regional representatives' seminar, for example, Brother Lee asked Neal what information he had on a certain topic. Neal gave him some papers, which Brother Lee scanned quickly and then ignored when he spoke.

Through organizational developments that have flowed naturally from the principles clarified in President Lee's day, the roles of other Church leaders are now more clear than they were then. The functions Neal performed on the Leadership Committee are typically carried out in today's Church organization by General Authorities among the Quorums of the Seventy and the seven-member Presidency of the Seventy. This realization throws into sharp relief the significance of the organizational transition in which he so actively participated in the late 1960s and early 1970s. It also explains the discomfort Neal always felt when asked to perform tasks that his instincts told him belonged more appropriately to people with more authority than he had.

His staff role let Neal serve as a constructive interpreter among the General Authorities, regional representatives, and other general Church officers. Thus he listened to some of his former colleagues on the general boards who worried that the regional representatives were overemphasizing such "priesthood" programs as home teaching and missionary work, with which they were personally most familiar, rather than teaching all of the programs, including those of the "auxiliaries." Neal tried to help those with such questions see that the point was to strengthen all families and all individuals, not to shift from auxiliary "programs" to priesthood "programs." In retrospect, he has wished that this clarification could have been made both earlier and more clearly.

Former auxiliary board members from the 1960s continued to meet annually to reminisce about "the good old days" of their role in a much smaller, mostly western American, Church. In 1995, on the evening the group formally dissolved, Neal told the "EXBOS" (EX-BOard memberS), "We were all privileged to have been a part of something when it was in its crescendo not in its decline." Theirs had been an era of "essentially a North American Church," for which the former approach was "cherished and effective." By 1995, the Area Authority Seventies had replaced the function of regional representatives, and Area Presidencies were well established. "Even so," he concluded, "our nostalgia is understandable." Fortunately, "families and wards will remain human sized," no matter how large the Church grows.
