Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Thirty-Four

Commissioner of Education

In January 1970, President David O. McKay passed away, ending his abundant twenty years as President of the Church. During that time, the Church's membership had nearly tripled, from about one million to three million members, with much of the growth coming outside the United States. Indeed, growth and internationalization had emerged as the Church's primary challenges, inviting, even demanding, a fresh look at everything the Church was doing.

Joseph Fielding Smith became President of the Church with Harold B. Lee as his first counselor. With the momentum of correlation well underway and with President Smith's complete confidence, President Lee was the leading figure in what became a complete reexamination of the Church's structure and programs a natural extension of the correlation process. The Church's educational system soon came within President Lee's searching scrutiny.

It was a natural time to reexamine the future of Church education. Brigham Young University had reached its enrollment ceiling of 25,000 students, which signaled an end to a period of rapid expansion. Ernest L. Wilkinson, who was serving as both president of BYU and chancellor of the Unified Church School System, was seventy-one years old. Other leaders in Church education were also at or near retirement age. The seminaries and institutes were growing fast but had yet to develop a strategic response to the pressing needs for education among Latter-day Saints outside the United States.

The larger American environment also invited a reassessment of the assumptions on which all education, especially higher education, had proceeded for generations. The student revolts of the 1960s had questioned every basic assumption of traditional educational methods, especially the authoritarian attitudes reflected in the personalities of university presidents like Ray Olpin at the University of Utah and Ernest Wilkinson at BYU. So the early 1970s were a time when governing boards throughout higher education in the United States were looking for leaders of a different kind people who were "open, candid, 'men of low profile,' characterized by 'an ability to mediate rather than to polarize.'" They needed leaders who had "a compassionate spirit," who believed that "youth is neither a disease nor a crime." For Latter-day Saint education, that sounded a lot like Neal A. Maxwell.

Since the end of World War II, gaining a college degree had shifted from being an American luxury toward being an American necessity. The GI Bill and the economic and technological expansion of the postwar period had truly democratized higher education not only by making a college education financially available but also by stimulating the entire culture toward education as the basis of "the good life." College was no longer just for the elite and wealthy few it was for everybody who had the will and the wits to give it a try.

As if these forces weren't enough to create a demanding environment, the Church was facing important challenges of its own in the field of higher education. Latter-day Saint youth throughout North America felt the same economic, social, and demographic forces that were motivating almost everybody else to head for college campuses. In addition, the Church, as powerfully exemplified by the life and teachings of President McKay, had given its young people clear religious reasons to seek higher education.

The Church's theology was full of such motivation: "Teach ye diligently, and my grace shall attend you," the Lord had said, not only about religious doctrine but "of things both in heaven and in the earth, . . . the wars and the perplexities of the nations" (D&C 88:78-79). "Seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). And "I, the Lord, am well pleased that there should be a school in Zion" (D&C 97:3).

President McKay had taught and encouraged that vision from one end of the Church to the other throughout his long and influential life. He had been a teacher of English literature and an administrator at the Church's Weber Stake Academy in Ogden when he was called to the Quorum of the Twelve in 1906. Later, as commissioner of education for the Church in the 1920s, he was a persuasive advocate for education among Latter-day Saints of all ages. Then, during his presidency of the Church, he established his optimistic vision of education by leading the expansion of BYU, Ricks College, the Church College of Hawaii, and elementary and secondary Church schools in the South Pacific and Latin America. His decades of teaching were full of exhortation to the Saints about education as a quest for knowledge, wisdom, and character.

In an important sense, then, the far-flung educational system of the Church by 1970 clearly reflected the educational philosophy of David O. McKay a philosophy long shared, though with variations in emphasis, by his predecessors and colleagues in Church leadership. Yet the rising demand for education among young Latter-day Saints was on a collision course with the internationalism and growth of the Church. Just as with its general boards and committees, the Church simply could not continue to fund colleges and schools to match expected growth. What had been possible for a small church in western America was not economically or logistically feasible for a large, international church. Further, in the eyes of some observers, the Church's deep commitment to the value of education in an increasingly secularized society ran some serious risks.

Thomas O'Dea, a Catholic sociologist who taught for a time at the University of Utah, published a book entitled The Mormons in 1957. He described the Church in sympathetic, fairly objective terms. In his conclusion, O'Dea summarized the major "sources of strain and conflict" he believed the Church would face in the near future. Heading his list was the conflict he saw coming between the Church's emphasis on education and its authoritarian theology: "Perhaps Mormonism's greatest and most significant problem is its encounter with modern secular thought." He continued:

From their earliest beginnings, the Latter-day Saints have placed great emphasis upon education. . . . [Yet] little did they realize that in placing their hopes in education they were at the same time creating the "transmission belt" that would bring into Zion all the doubts and uncertainties that, in another century, were to beset the gentile world. . . .

. . . The Mormon appreciation of education emphasized higher education and thereby encouraged contact between Mormon youth and those very elements in modern thought that are bound to act as a solvent on certain aspects of Mormon beliefs. The Mormon youth, who usually comes from a background of rural and quite literal Mormonism, finds that his entrance into the university is an introduction to the doubt and confusion that his first real encounter with secular culture entails. He has been taught by the Mormon faith to seek knowledge and to value it; yet it is precisely this course, so acceptable to and so honored by his religion, that is bound to bring religious crisis to him and profound danger to his religious belief. . . .

Clearly, the dilemma of education versus apostasy is one to which Mormonism has as yet found no genuine solution. . . .

The encounter of Mormonism and modern secular learning is still taking place. It is a spectacle of the present, of which no history can as yet be written. Upon its outcome will depend in a deeper sense the future of Mormonism.

In 1970, Neal Maxwell entered this scene of contradictory currents as the Church's commissioner of education, with a new First Presidency and a new mandate. His response to these issues would make a fresh and lasting contribution to the Church, and to educated members of the Church, that would be among his most substantial legacies. Only his apostolic ministry, with its example of Christian discipleship, is more significant. Working closely with President Lee and his associates, Neal would help devise long-range policies that clarified the place of education in a global church. As for Thomas O'Dea's provocative questions, Neal himself represented the dilemma of which O'Dea wrote and Neal's own example, as much as his speeches and writing, would speak for itself as a productive response to the O'Dea paradox.

Neal came "from a background of rural and quite literal Mormonism." He had encountered with zest the confusion and doubts of the modern secular world at sophisticated levels and had emerged with a spiritual maturity that was enriched rather than undermined by his educational and professional experiences. Then, as a role model, he taught what he had learned to other educated Latter-day Saints, and he brought into key positions in the Church Educational System several people whose encounters with O'Dea's concerns had been as valuable and as positive as was his own. To the extent that the future of Mormonism really was affected by the outcome of the conflict O'Dea described, Neal Maxwell's example suggested a promising future.

In this lofty historical context, Neal's entrance onto the public stage of Latter-day Saint history in 1970 came from a life story that wasn't calculated to leave big footprints on that, or any other, stage. He had the innate ability to play an influential role, but he hadn't designed a career path that was likely to leave very visible marks.

About 1969, Neal was feeling closer to discouragement than he had ever felt before or since. By objective measures, he was not very discouraged; that would have been foreign to his "can-do" nature. But he felt unsettled, as if it were time to "break camp and move down the trail," and he wasn't sure what to do. He felt he was "topping out" at the university, regarding both what he could give and the satisfaction he found, even though his experiences on the U campus and in Utah public service vastly exceeded any expectations he'd had in 1956.

In more recent years, he'd been approached about a possible college presidency, running for Congress, working for a national organization dealing with state legislatures, or heading up the Utah Coordinating Council for Higher Education. Yet none of that had seemed to fit. But fit what? Just as he'd felt when leaving Washington, D.C., to return to Utah, he really lacked a long-term sense of personal direction.

One day he and Jim Fletcher were driving somewhere together, and Neal confided to Fletcher his feelings of uncertainty. Jim responded quickly, telling Neal he was capable of doing anything he wanted to do so he should just pick a path and take it at any level. Neal was honestly surprised at Jim's high assessment of his capacity, and Jim was surprised at Neal's surprise. But Neal "had never thought of myself quite that way. Part of me was still the youngster" not quite good enough for the "in crowd" at Granite High. "I didn't have any game plan. I didn't know what was coming. There was no sense of the commissioner thing, because that didn't exist."

So Neal didn't have calculated ambitions, and he wasn't the elitist that his sometimes highbrow manner of speaking and writing might have suggested to people who didn't know him. He saw himself as something of an underdog, trying hard to do his best to help society, happy to work wherever needed until something or someone drew him elsewhere. "I believe we are supposed to make the world as good as we can make it," he would say. "We should not be like Jonah and sit on the mountain top waiting for Nineveh to go up in flames."

Yet there was in his background an enigmatic lack of conscious preparation. After graduating from college, he worked for a few years as a Senate staffer but chose to forgo further educational or career options that might reasonably have prepared him to wield real influence. When he took the public relations job at the U, he was following a spiritual urge that he didn't fully understand. If he had been serious about a political career, arguably he should have stayed on Senator Bennett's staff. Or, after returning to Utah, he should have become more involved with the Republican party doing what people do who later plan to seek political office, such as supporting candidates and taking on political tasks that pay one's dues with the party.

And if he had been serious about a college teaching career, or even an administrative career in higher education, arguably he should have obtained more educational credentials. If he had wanted to qualify for a college or university presidency, or work in academic administration, those jobs called for a Ph.D. or some equivalent level of advanced study. As Elder Dallin H. Oaks has said, however, Neal Maxwell is "the only master's degree person I know of who leads and supervises Ph.D.s who hasn't apologized for not having a Ph.D. He's not the least bit apologetic because he saw himself as a practitioner." Paradoxically, "this man, more than any Ph.D. I've ever met, is incredibly visionary. He's a theoretician. And he's so good at the theoretical that he doesn't need to have a Ph.D. It's as if Abraham Lincoln had to explain why he didn't have a political science degree. The man had it in his bones to do what had to be done." Or, as American philosopher William James is reported to have said, "Native distinction needs no official stamp."

Something about Neal's "native distinction" evokes a memory of his choosing to hasten his service in the infantry. He never felt sorry for himself about that, never felt he was somehow above that humblest of military choices. On the contrary, he would say with the Duke of Wellington that it would not have done for him not to be there. Still, it seems inexplicable that he would have pursued the infantryman's version of a career in higher education or politics, especially to those who came to appreciate him for the richness of his intellect and his natural gifts of statesmanship. As Deseret News staffer Jerry Johnston wrote in 1981, Neal "has a reputation for having one of the brightest intellects in the Church." Yet in earlier years, perhaps Neal didn't know how full of promise he really was. Perhaps, despite his outward appearance of competence and assurance, he was more inherently meek, like his father, than he was even aware.

As it turned out, this combination of personal willingness and lack of career planning actually let Neal accumulate the experience, the practical skill, and the insight that President Harold B. Lee was looking for and that the Church now needed but without the personal agenda or self-absorption that had troubled President Lee about some self-conscious intellectuals. President Lee was known for his distrust of so-called Church liberals, but he had said a liberal is a person "who does not have a testimony," someone who reads "by the lamp of [his] own conceit." Intelligence, as such, is different disciplined by faith, it is always a blessing, whereas what Neal has called "unanchored brilliance" is a threat. Thus President Lee had respected and embraced such bright "schoolmen of spiritual stature" as West Belnap, Reed Bradford, Daniel Ludlow, and Antone Romney BYU professors he had mentored among the executive secretaries to the first Church correlation committees.

Harold B. Lee's confidence in Neal didn't arise in a vacuum. For one thing, several of President Lee's most trusted confidants had already come to know Neal's nature and his heart Presidents N. Eldon Tanner, Marion G. Romney, and Spencer W. Kimball. And President Lee's own experiences over several years let him see Neal in an unvarnished way for who he really was, including his paradoxically loyal tendency to consider steadying the ark.

There was, for instance, Neal's visit during his college days to Elder Lee's office, muttering in good faith about the quality of Church manuals. Neal's role with Oscar McConkie in shaping student wards at a state university in ways that didn't match existing Church programs. Neal as a young YMMIA General Board member traveling with Elder Lee on his first stake conference assignment. The Leadership Committee, in which Elder Lee saw Neal at his unique best analyzing the issues, casting up fresh alternatives, and blazing new trails in a context where he "felt free to make suggestions, to think about the unthinkable." The times called for fresh and energetic thought, which could emerge only in a climate of total two-way trust. The relationship between Harold B. Lee and Neal Maxwell enjoyed just such a rich blessing.

On a sunny June day in 1970, then, President Lee called Neal's office at the university, asking if he could drive right down to a meeting with the First Presidency Presidents Smith, Lee, and Tanner. Neal was halfway there before he realized he was wearing an informal sport jacket. But there wasn't time to change to a suit. Besides, the members of the First Presidency knew him.

President Lee spoke for the Presidency, informing Neal that they had decided to re-create the office of commissioner of education, and they wanted him to accept that assignment. They wanted the entire system of Church schools and religious education evaluated and reorganized as needed; they wanted the president of BYU to report to the commissioner no longer directly to the First Presidency; and Neal had their total confidence.

Neal asked only three questions in the fifteen-minute interview. Would he move to BYU, where Ernest Wilkinson and the seminary and institute leaders all had their offices? The answer was no they wanted the commissioner to be "near the Brethren," in more ways than one. Did all of the First Presidency and Twelve support Neal's appointment? Yes, without question. Was there any job description? Not in detail they'd work that out.

A few days later, Neal wrote a short letter, to which President Lee replied, reflecting

upon the delightful relationship I have had with you over the last few years when I have had the privilege of sounding the depths of your soul intellectually and spiritually, and have never found you wanting. . . . My associates . . . have entertained similar feelings, but likewise I am profoundly impressed that the Lord has had you in mind as one of His choice ones to meet the challenge of the great need of our youth, particularly in the educational field today. I have, since the first of my acquaintance with you, felt assured that the day would come when you would have a prominent place in our educational structure. We . . . are thankful that the Lord has brought forward one like you to fill that need.

. . . President Tanner . . . remarked to me how delighted he was to see the manifestation of your grasp of the situation and your attitude of loyalty and faith and earnest desire and selfless qualities seldom to be found among us today.

Be assured of my full confidence and my prayers. As you now set up your organization, my door, my heart, and my time will always be open to you.

Later on, Neal would feel that perhaps some inspiration had prevented him "from going off and doing some of these other career things," like the options he raised with Jim Fletcher in the car that day. Had he been more logically ambitious about planning his life, the path of his discipleship probably would not have developed as it did. Ralph Mecham, who was especially close to Neal since their college days, wasn't surprised. He had a "feeling back in the early 50s" that Neal "sensed early on that he had a mission to perform" for the Church, somehow, someday. Neal's relationship with President Lee had become the catalyst for that mission to begin to unfold.
