Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Twenty-Seven

President Olpin and Political Science

When A. Ray Olpin became president of the University of Utah in 1946, a liberal arts college embarked on a massive transformation to become a full-fledged university. G. Homer Durham said at Olpin's funeral that "more than any single individual" he had "made the University of Utah what it has become and may yet become."

Nationally, the GI Bill and other postwar trends opened American college campuses to a flood of increased enrollments. Conditions in Utah accelerated these trends. With a historic commitment to education and a high birthrate, Utah's high school graduates attended college at twice the national rate. From the time Neal Maxwell went to the university in 1956 until he left in 1970, enrollment doubled, from 10,000 to 20,000 students.

Knowing this flood was headed his way, Ray Olpin searched for growing room. He discovered that in 1850 Brigham Young and the other founders of the university (then called the University of Deseret) originally planned for a campus more than six hundred acres in size. Later the federal government used much of that land to create the military's Fort Douglas. With World War II now over, the fort became a tempting target its land adjoined the campus to the east. When General Dwight Eisenhower visited Utah in 1948, Olpin had the pluck to hold an impromptu huddle with him.

When Ike saw the original campus maps and heard Olpin's plea for space to educate "the boys that went overseas," the general "scribbled out an order" that eventually transferred 300 acres of Fort Douglas to the university. As Paul Hodson later wrote, "No one ever did a better half hour's work for the state of Utah" than President Olpin did that day. The university soon moved half of its departments into what had been military buildings.

This incident illustrates the creative energy Ray Olpin employed to create a fine university under the sturdy gaze of that white block "U" on the northeastern hills overlooking Salt Lake City. He helped build a major graduate institution that eventually attracted many new students, research funding, a medical center and other major buildings, several superstar faculty, and a reputation as one of the best state universities between the Midwest and California.

President Olpin was from Pleasant Grove, Utah. He had served a Latter-day Saint mission in Japan before doing graduate work in physics at Columbia University. He worked at Bell Labs and then at Ohio State University before his appointment as university president at Utah. In addition to expanding the U of U campus, Olpin relentlessly scoured the nation to recruit faculty members. He believed passionately that "it was preferable to bring a great scholar to many students in Utah than to send a few Utah students east or west in search of graduate and professional training." Many of the people he hired went on to distinguished careers elsewhere Meredith Wilson became president of the University of Oregon, G. Homer Durham became president of Arizona State, and Sterling McMurrin became U.S. Commissioner of Education. Olpin also made the university into a cultural center, with a summer theater program and arts festival, and he encouraged the creation of KUED, the educational television station.

Those who knew President Olpin well praised his capacity and contributions even as they acknowledged that his aggressive style ruffled a few feathers. Elizabeth Haglund said that although he "did remarkable things for the university, he wasn't a smooth man." He had "unostentatious courage" but needed the diplomatic skills Neal Maxwell brought to his office. He was nonetheless effective in his own way. Once Utah governor J. Bracken Lee sent some regents to "rein in" Olpin's expansionist tendencies, and Olpin ended up persuading them to support his aspirations.

Neal said at his funeral that Olpin's "deep caring for the university was encased in an exterior which covered that caring to the casual viewer. He may have done this to protect the institution at a critical time when it was . . . becoming a genuine university." Working at his side, Neal found him "stern, but strong and courageous," a man who often "took criticism that should have gone to others."

Neal performed a variety of tasks for Olpin background staff work, agendas, and follow-up for meetings ranging from the three-person university management committee to the board of regents. When Olpin needed help on a speech, he might tell Neal his general themes and then invite him to draft language for Olpin's review which usually took several revisions. The caption under Neal's smiling, youthful picture in the 1961 U of U yearbook said, "Hard work and quick efficiency help Mr. Maxwell keep abreast of his unending duties."

The board of regents appointed Neal as their secretary in 1961, a job he held for two years. Although ostensibly a clerical task, it put him in contact with board chairman Royden Derrick, president of Western Steel Company, and the other regents. As Neal's stature gradually increased with that group and across the campus, the regents apparently looked to him for more than a clerical role which may have made President Olpin a bit uncomfortable. Olpin wrote in his journal on July 2, 1962: having "my executive assistant as secretary to the Board" is a "most unusual organization." The secretary "does not manage the university all he does is make records of the activities of the Board . . . and follow their instructions."

Neal also represented the university in other functions beyond the role of a typical staff assistant more evidence of his growing influence. In 1960, he was the university Founder's Day speaker, citing founder Orson Spencer's desire for the university to produce "a hundredfold and be pleasing unto the Lord." He also represented President Olpin with remarks at a university banquet. Afterward, Elder Marion D. Hanks of the First Council of Seventy wrote Olpin, "While I have known Neal for many years and have always [respected] his abilities and character, I was never more sure that we have in this man great and powerful capacities." The next year Neal gave the baccalaureate address at Carbon College in Price, Utah.

In the meantime, with Homer Durham's help and the credential of Neal's new master's degree, he began in the fall of 1961 to teach a political science class. He held class in the Biology Building, conveniently located near his office in the Park Building.

His class was titled "American Political Thought," a year-long course divided into three quarters, treating the history of American political ideas since the nation's founding. He gave his students a demanding reading list, sparked discussion with provocative questions, and sprinkled his lectures with anecdotes from his Washington experience. At first he assigned his students a research paper but found he didn't have time to read the papers carefully. For nine years, Neal's classes became a stimulating, well-directed group conversation about history, politics, and the ideals of the Founding Fathers. He loved the teaching, and his students responded in kind.

Jim Jardine, one of those students, would later graduate from Harvard Law School, serve as a trustee at the University of Utah, and head up the project to create an endowed chair in Neal's honor in the political science department in 1999. Jim considers Neal his most influential teacher. To describe Neal's effect on him, Jim quotes Oliver Wendell Holmes that a mind expanded by an idea can never return to its original dimensions. Neal sparked just such ideas in Jim's mind. "His classes were full of the electricity, the crackle of ideas." He was moved by Neal's "joy in learning and exploring new ideas." He also shared wonderful reading lists that passed on to his students his infectious passion for "the best books."

In addition to the intellectual stimulation of Neal's classes, he was a natural role model for such promising students as Jardine. Liz Haglund has seen former students from "all over the country who feel that Neal is their mentor. Hundreds of them are different today because he helped them see what they could do." In 1966, the Delta Gamma sorority gave him their "Favorite Professor Award."

Neal's influence had particular meaning for Latter-day Saint students. Though he was circumspect about the limits on religious teaching at a state institution, students "saw his commitment to the gospel, that it was rational, spiritual, wholehearted. He really was a shining young man," without being "self-conscious or goody-goody" about his religious beliefs. His example encouraged them to take on "some of his attributes and [they] found it working for them."

Opinions about Professor Maxwell on the campus were generally favorable, but they weren't unanimous. One student thought that while he was an able teacher, he occasionally came across in class as "a bit officious, even arrogant." That same student has "seen the metamorphosis" since those early years, as he watched Neal, over time, become more "humble and spiritual-minded."

Differences about his performance also cropped up in the political science department. Most of the faculty recognized his strengths as a teacher, a writer, and a practicing political scientist. Because he taught only part-time and never earned a Ph.D., however, some of them muttered about his academic title. Neal was given the title of "instructor" when he began teaching in 1961 and was promoted to assistant professor in 1964. In 1961, he published an article that drew on his master's degree research, "The West on Capitol Hill," in a book called Western Politics. He later updated his research on this topic, his writing full of characteristic Maxwell prose about "political patriarchs" and "regional redwood." He concluded, "What we see, therefore, is clearly neither a requiem for a region nor a resurgent regionalism, but change."

During the 1960s, when Neal's students and his political science colleagues viewed him mostly as a member of the faculty, he was actually a full-time administrator, along with forays into public television, public service, and many other projects. Neal wasn't even aware during those years that on two occasions some of the department faculty recommended that his academic title be changed from assistant professor to lecturer. Both times, the proposal failed to carry the needed votes because of his strong record in teaching, writing, and public service. Indeed, in 1970 the university promoted him from assistant to associate professor an unusual step for a part-time professor with no doctoral degree. His department chairman wrote that "all members" of the relevant committee "wished that Professor Maxwell had been able to finish his Ph.D." before being consumed in university administration. But "after considerable discussion," it was their "almost unanimous consensus" that Neal's "long involvement and manifest contributions in government, politics, and civic and public affairs, both in Washington and in Utah, had compensated for the lack of the Ph.D."

The record showed that Professor Maxwell was "a truly excellent classroom teacher" and his scholarly publications were "first-rate work reflecting careful scholarship and felicitous craftsmanship." Professor J. D. Williams wrote that "Neal is worth his weight in gold to our students" by showing that political science "has something to contribute to the public good." This comment referred to Neal's service as chairman of Utah's Constitutional Revision Commission, which began in 1966.

When he learned about these academic disputes, Neal thought the committee had raised legitimate questions about his title, but he knew that under the circumstances he couldn't have been a full-time, Ph.D.-holding faculty member. He wasn't that concerned about his academic rank, so long as he "could teach students." Colleen had been right, then. By accepting that first public relations job, he did end up influencing students in a way he couldn't have predicted. And more student contact was just around the corner.
