Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

The Church Educational System 1970-76

Thirty-Five

Creating the Church Educational System

On July 19, 1970, G. Homer Durham who had a sense of history about such things wrote in his journal that his former student and close friend, Neal Maxwell, was the new commissioner of education for the Church. The Brethren, he wrote, are "reviving the old office held by JAW [Elder John A. Widtsoe, a member of the Twelve and Durham's father-in-law, commissioner from 1921 to 1924 and 1934 to 1936], JFM [Elder Joseph F. Merrill, also of the Twelve and commissioner from 1928 to 1933], and F. L. West [Franklin L. West, commissioner from 1936 to 1953]." Homer called Neal's appointment "a fine choice," though it "leaves a gap in the U of U leadership of a strong, visible churchman who is also respected, and has commerce with the sensitive Utah non-Mormons."

In August, the university held a farewell dinner for Neal, at which President Fletcher quipped, "I don't really feel we've lost an executive vice president, but we've gained a church." He added that in his "short career," Neal had found "the realization of the American dream: successful and happy." When the lights on the block U on the hill above campus blinked their farewell that night, Neal was emotional. After three years as a U student and fourteen years in its administration, he felt a tender nostalgia. He told the dinner guests that he was "a better Mormon because of my non-Mormon friends at the university. In a gentle way, they have reminded me of what I should be."

A Deseret News editorial noted the problems Neal faced now growing enrollments, a complex educational system, Brigham Young University at its enrollment ceiling, and LDS youth "exceptionally beset by unsettling tests of faith in an era of uncertainty and instability." But his appointment "brings together a man who's used to meeting challenges [with] a program that faces them."

Meanwhile, Edith Bronson, still Neal's secretary, found that not everybody was all that impressed as she and her boss began their new jobs. On the day she arrived at the Kennecott Building, where they would office for two years, she could find neither a typewriter nor a desk. So she called the Church purchasing staff and said, "This is Neal Maxwell's office. We're trying to furnish an office." After a pause, the purchasing secretary replied, "Who's Neal Maxwell?"

This was but one of several hints that "going to the Church" would create a few adjustments. Soon after they received their furniture, President Lee called and asked if Neal would come to his office. Caught off guard, Neal had to run next door to ZCMI to buy a white shirt he could hurriedly don before crossing the street to attend the meeting. Further, Neal had been known to let a mild cuss word slip out occasionally when he was trying to do something mechanical that wouldn't work. But not any more. The same with his driving. His congenital impatience had made him a Type A driver, wearing out brakes "more rapidly than a lot of people would." Now he was taming his road style as well.

Edith already knew that "above all, Neal was religious. That was his main thing." But she was still unprepared for the day she walked into the commissioner's office to give him something and "he was praying at his desk." She apologized for interrupting, but Neal said calmly, "It's okay. I'm through. I just had a question I needed an answer to."

These little examples are but subtle hints of what those closest to Neal began to see on a larger scale he took the new job seriously, he liked it, and it let him be himself. The Church and the gospel had long been his highest priority, and now he could breathe and drink what he called "the inexhaustible gospel" all day, every day. His family noticed that he was more fulfilled and happy, even though he had thoroughly enjoyed his university years.

Joe J. Christensen, who had known Neal at the U and would now work with him in CES, watched the new commissioner teach a religion class at the U institute. Joe said Neal seemed liberated, "much more free to talk about what he wanted to than he'd ever felt" in a political science class. Now he could "overtly express his testimony" to students, no longer constrained by the realities of a state university. It was "a flight to freedom," where he welcomed "the values of the gospel [in his professional work] with the joy of the returning pilgrim." As Edith said, "I think he loved it. . . . I think he finally felt like he was home."

But now came the huge project of turning the Church's loose-knit confederacy of educational entities into a real system built to serve whatever long-term purposes would contribute most to the Church's future. Neal quickly found that although some elements of a system existed, there was little overall strategy. He would have felt "blessed if I could have been given a couple of pages that say this is the policy . . . , this is who we are going to educate, this is what we can afford, but there was none of that."

A big issue was whether higher education especially BYU should claim the lion's share of both budget and attention. Should BYU be expanded? Reduced? Should the Church build other college campuses? Should the Church try to build new elementary and secondary schools in other countries where it was expanding internationally, as it had already done in a few locations? Where did religious education fit seminaries and institutes when compared in priority to schools and colleges? How important were educational needs compared to other growing claims on the Church's budgeted funds?

To begin with, it helped that President Lee could personally tutor Neal in a vision of Church education that, as noted earlier, had a short but potent chain of title over the generations. Karl G. Maeser had been the tutor to Brigham Young's children. Then in 1876 Brigham Young sent him to Provo to start BYU (originally Brigham Young Academy). There he let the best of his German intellectual discipline serve the broader vision of his unqualified commitment to Brigham Young's primary request not to teach even the alphabet or the multiplication tables without the Spirit of God. As the first general superintendent of Church schools from 1888 to 1901, Karl Maeser passed the torch of this vision to an entire generation of LDS teachers, including young James E. Talmage, who mentored young J. Reuben Clark, who mentored young Harold B. Lee, who mentored young Neal A. Maxwell.

With natural variations on the theme of this basic vision, Church education had gone through several adjustments as the Church adapted to its own growth and a changing Utah environment. During Karl G. Maeser's day, the Church established "academies" (high schools, some of which later became junior colleges) throughout the intermountain Church, because there was no adequate state school system. As early as the 1890s, the First Presidency had also dreamed of having a genuine university to lead this armada of schools. They even designated James Talmage as the first president of such a campus, to be located in Salt Lake City. But the economic depression of 1893 made that project impossible. Then, gradually, Brigham Young University assumed the flagship role.

By the late 1920s, state high schools in the West were becoming stronger, and the First Presidency could see that it wasn't feasible or necessary to duplicate them with expensive Church schools. The concept of providing religious education through seminary classes for LDS students attending state high schools had worked well since its introduction at Salt Lake's Granite High in 1912. So the Brethren decided to encourage support for the public schools and to expand religious education. In 1926, they established the first institute of religion for college students at the University of Idaho in Moscow, and other institutes soon followed.

In the early 1930s, the Church donated nearly all of its postsecondary academies to the states where they were located. In Utah, these academies included Dixie College, Snow College, and Weber College. The Church also offered Ricks College to Idaho at no cost, but the state found even that price too high. Idaho was unwilling to assume the annual operating costs, so the Church kept Ricks. This context established fairly early the principle that, if it had to choose, the Church would give higher priority to religious education than it gave to Church schools, because that would offer a spiritual perspective on education to the most students at the least cost.

Then, as the Church began to expand internationally during President David O. McKay's tenure, a renewed interest in Church schools arose. With some LDS schools already operating in the Pacific, the Church established a college in Hawaii, a high school in New Zealand, and a few primary and secondary schools in Latin America. In the mid-1960s, the First Presidency approved, then later withdrew, the idea of creating several junior colleges as a feeder system for BYU.

From Karl Maeser's day forward, the Church's commissioner of education theoretically oversaw all LDS schools, seminaries, and institutes of religion. By the time Commissioner Frank West retired in 1953, however, each Church school was really operating independently from the others and from the seminaries and institutes. William E. Berrett, who supervised the seminaries and institutes during much of the 1950s and 60s, described this situation with polite understatement: "This independence of the various educational units was prompted by personality differences among those heading the various units." To Neal, that history had a familiar sound it was much like Utah's colleges before the state adopted the centralized system he had helped design in 1969.

This situation meant that each school had its own governing board, sometimes duplicating the Church Board of Education or the Pacific Board of Education for the schools operated by missionaries in the South Pacific. The Brethren tried to achieve some unity by appointing Ernest Wilkinson as "chancellor" of a "Unified School System" during the early part of Ernest's service as president at BYU (1951-70). Although that helped, Ernest was often preoccupied with the growth of BYU and issues related to a possible system of junior colleges.

In 1965, Harvey L. Taylor, a vice president at BYU, was appointed as administrator for all Church schools other than BYU, and William E. Berrett continued to lead the seminaries and institutes under Taylor's direction. Just as his old friend Ray Olpin at the U of U had felt about his relationship to the Utah legislature, Wilkinson didn't want to give up his direct reporting line to the First Presidency. So BYU stayed outside the Church school system.

By the time of Neal's appointment, however, Wilkinson, Taylor, and Berrett had all reached retirement age, as had John L. Clarke, the president of Ricks College. With these personnel openings, with numerous big and unresolved issues, and also with a new First Presidency in place, Neal felt the urgency of establishing both unity and a clear strategy for all of Church education. That feeling matched the attitude of the First Presidency. Elder Thomas Monson said the new First Presidency definitely "had an idea of where they wanted the program to go," beginning with an "amalgamation" of the various educational entities.

Perhaps the most important factor in developing the needed unity and strategy was the two-way relationship of confidence and trust that developed between the First Presidency and Neal. Like ripples from a pebble thrown into a pond, the strength of that relationship soon reached in all directions to create a mutual sense of harmony that included, on one hand, many other General Authorities and, on the other hand, many faculty, administrators, and students in the Church's classrooms everywhere.

Joe Christensen, who became Neal's associate commissioner, looked back on those years as a Camelot-like "era of intense creativity and a feeling that you could plumb the depths of your imagination" and "your ideas would at least have a hearing." In trying to help the Brethren create a real "system" of education, Neal's staff kept sensing they had "pretty well a blank page," and the Brethren were "so supportive and accepting of [their] ideas" that they felt great responsibility to do their homework prayerfully, because the "chances were they'd approve" what Neal's people would submit.

From the perspective of BYU, Neal's six years as commissioner rallied most of the faculty troops there with fresh vision. By 1976, one senior faculty member would say, "I don't suppose the Church has ever had a commissioner so incomparably fluent in both the language of faith and the language of scholarship . . . [and] so admired by the rank and file of the LDS academic community, particularly the faculty and students at BYU."

Dallin Oaks also saw how Neal brought the BYU faculty into a relationship of mutual trust with the Brethren. "More than anyone I've known," he said, Neal "was able to do that. He was very, very good at it." From the standpoint of seminary and institute faculty, Joe Christensen saw the same thing, that Neal was "as significant as any individual in the Church in raising the confidence level" of senior Church leaders in their religious educators.

Neal became a genuine two-way interpreter between LDS faculty members and the Brethren. And the way people in those two groups felt about Neal clearly affected the degree of confidence they felt in each other. That mutual confidence was the important point. This wasn't a popularity contest about Neal; it was a conscious exercise in directive-participative leadership. Neal believed in what he was doing, as he candidly and honestly looked for ways to help those in both groups understand, appreciate, and trust one another.

He nourished this harmony as he interacted with them both. His talks and writing showed the faculty that he understood and participated in their world, yet he always looked at their academic disciplines through the lens of the gospel. He also built their confidence informally, occasionally inviting promising new faculty members to his home for dinner, or participating actively in faculty conferences. Much of what Neal did in these settings was more a reflection of his personality than any particular techniques. As historian Richard Bushman put it, Neal's "genius [is the way he appealed to] people with quite different temperaments. . . . Something in his personality . . . won the confidence of academics and people with little sympathy for [academic matters]. It was something about his openness, the sense you got that he understood and liked scholarship." His "irenic touch" also generated feelings of peace and cooperation between people with differing bases of experience and attitude.

Truman Madsen added to this perspective that, during Neal's years as commissioner and later as a General Authority, he developed a remarkably broad set of relationships. His interest and his support have not been reserved for people in the areas of his personal interest; rather, he has nurtured and encouraged LDS scholars all across the spectrum of the professions and academic disciplines, from psychology, literature, and history to law, business, and the sciences. Madsen reached this conclusion after making a list of all the people he could think of who felt that Elder Maxwell had taken a special interest in their work.

With the Church leaders, Dallin Oaks said Neal took a "much more subtle" approach than "lecturing the Brethren in a trustees' meeting," which is how some people would have tried to help and which is "totally counterproductive." Neal's style was to provide "informal explanations" about educational issues or personalities to General Authorities, in conversations of all kinds. At the same time, he helped faculty members at BYU and elsewhere in Church education understand the unique perspectives and concerns of the Church leaders. Said Elder Oaks, then president of BYU, "Neal helped me . . . to understand the Brethren. He'd give me little tutorials about, 'Well, bear in mind that this is [what] they're worried about, and you'd do well not to use that argument. It's a good argument, but it will be misunderstood, or it's counterproductive.'"

Some of Neal's service was that of a translator, building communications bridges between people within and outside the academic world. This function was not new to him at the University of Utah, he'd been interpreting the university community to the local community, and vice versa, for years. On a later occasion, for example, BYU presented to its board of trustees a sensitive document that had been labored over for months by a faculty committee. A senior board member entered the meeting room a little early, having just read the long memo. He held it up and asked with a wink, "Why does this thing have to sound like it was written by a bunch of professors?" The first to respond, Neal said good-naturedly, "Well, the Doctrine and Covenants says everybody's entitled to hear the gospel in his own tongue."

In this climate of growing harmony, the Commissioner's office engaged head-on the diverse interests, policies, and reporting lines of its far-flung educational network. Their task was to bring unity and coherence out of great diversity. Elder Boyd K. Packer watched Neal bring it "together in a way that somebody from BYU might not have been able to do. . . . This is a big Church and BYU may be the flagship, but it isn't the only ship in the armada. He could see the other ships, even the rowboats."

Soon the commissioner's office recommended, and the board approved, a new organization called the Church Educational System (CES), with its own sense of identity, visibility, and brotherhood. For Neal, the task was analogous to creating the American Constitution to replace the old Articles of Confederation. Jeffrey Holland, who would replace Neal as commissioner in 1976, agreed. "Neal created this new world and new logo, new offices, and new appointments. He legitimized [CES] in a new way, and it's been that way ever since."

This development didn't occur in an exclusive, private corner. Neal, the student of participative leadership, wanted the plans to reflect the collective desires of the Church leadership, so that it would be both right and lasting. His access to President Lee let Neal sense almost continually the First Presidency's concerns and priorities. President Lee had many long-held views about most of the general issues they faced, but he respected Neal's own vision and skill enough that he wanted the commissioner to scrutinize all assumptions and options to verify "our scope" and "our limitations" before making key decisions.

Neal also obtained permission to take several new, inclusive steps to broaden the base of participation in that entire process. One such step was the appointment of a personnel search committee from among members of the Church Board of Education. Elder Marion G. Romney chaired the committee, joined by Elder Boyd K. Packer of the Twelve, Elder Marion D. Hanks, an Assistant to the Twelve, and Neal. Because principal leaders in Church education would soon retire and new positions needed to be filled in the commissioner's office, there would be a clean sweep of leadership posts. Neal worked closely with the search committee for most of two years as they actively helped select his three associate commissioners (Joe J. Christensen for religious education, Kenneth H. Beesley for schools and colleges, and Dee F. Andersen for finance), new presidents for Ricks College (Henry B. Eyring), BYU (Dallin H. Oaks), Church College of Hawaii (Steven Brower), and the first dean of the BYU Law School (Rex E. Lee).

At Neal's urging, all of the institutional governing boards began meeting in one combined meeting, even though separate minutes were kept to meet the legal requirements for each entity. At that time the board included the First Presidency, all of the Twelve, one or two other General Authorities, the Presiding Bishop, and the general president of the Relief Society. Next, Neal requested that each of his associate commissioners attend each board meeting, along with the president of BYU. The First Presidency initially wondered why all of these people were needed in the meetings, but Neal felt, and experience confirmed, that their participation would enhance both the board members' understanding of the issues and the CES leaders' understanding of the board's attitudes.

Then, in order to make the meetings both meaningful and efficient, the board agreed to several guiding principles Neal proposed. One of these was that, helped by the commissioner's staff, the board would develop a series of general policies and then delegate to the staff and the CES institutions the authority to make certain decisions that were "within policy." The development of basic policies in Neal's early months as commissioner thus took on considerable long-term significance.

Neal also built a style of candid teamwork among his associates and the school presidents. In a departure from some past practice, he assured board members that they'd all receive full disclosure about any important issues good news or bad and that nothing would come to them outside regular channels or without having been carefully reviewed at his level. He also wanted his team members to hear and respond to one another well before they took proposals to board meetings. These approaches helped build a unified system, and they ensured valuable peer review through internal critiques as proposals were developed.

In the early months of CES, after two decades of feeling free to take BYU needs directly to the First Presidency, Ernest Wilkinson was less than keen about attending weekly commissioner's staff meetings. Neal valued his relationship with Ernest, but his instructions were clear: BYU now reported through the commissioner. In one early board meeting, Wilkinson asked if he might raise a certain BYU matter, although he hadn't yet discussed the topic with Neal. Neal spoke up, explaining that until the two of them had considered the issue, it wasn't ready for board discussion. The board supported Neal's response, and everybody learned together about creating a real system of education.

Neal's own role in shaping the new system was significant, but much of what he did was simply catalytic. For one thing, he believed that the board's agenda was the CES agenda, even though someone in his role was needed to ask hard questions and do thorough homework. He also believed deeply in participative governance, knowing that a true sense of ownership among the participants was essential to developing a lasting CES strategy. Sometimes he referred to "those future First Presidencies" that would emerge from the members of the Twelve seated around the table, and that gave his search for consensus a long-term character. At the same time, as Dallin Oaks could see, "They respected him greatly, and he had a great vision of what ought to be done." Besides, Neal's vision was "in accord with the direction they wanted to go. So I think the new CES policy formulation process was 60 percent Neal and 40 percent" the board.
