Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Thirty-Six

New Leaders

As soon as Neal saw the scope of his task and the approaching retirement of so many key individuals, he began praying to find the best possible people. There really would be a clean sweep of Church Educational System leadership. It was a bold stroke, but it appealed to him. As Jeffrey Holland said, "Neal likes a new broom." Neal also must have believed in the maxim that the most important factor in solving human problems is the competence and the character of the people trying to solve them and he was willing to search hard for both qualities. He had long believed that "80 percent of leadership is to get the right people." Choosing these people would be as significant as anything he would do as commissioner, and some of the choices would affect the future leadership of the Church.

Working closely with Elder Marion G. Romney and the search committee, Neal first found his associate commissioners. He had come to know Joe J. Christensen at the University of Utah, where Joe had replaced Lowell Bennion as director of the institute of religion. When Neal discovered in August 1970 that Joe had just left Utah to preside over a mission in Mexico, he could have assumed Joe was unavailable. The willingness of the Brethren to interrupt Joe's mission before it was really underway showed the level of their support for Neal's recommendation that Joe become associate commissioner for religious education. Other committee members also knew him. Elder Romney later said of Joe, "He's about as conservative as you can be in the gospel, but still have new ideas." Joe would later serve as president of Ricks College and then in the Presidency of the Seventy.

Neal had exchanged letters with Kenneth H. Beesley, a Salt Lake native who had been on the faculty at Columbia Teachers' College in New York before becoming executive dean at Fresno State University in California. Neal liked Ken's background, and he liked the idea of including the perspective of LDS educators from outside Utah. One of his hopes as commissioner was to create a feeling of community among all Latter-day Saint scholars, wherever they taught. Ken was appointed associate commissioner for colleges and schools, with supervisory responsibility for Ricks College, the Church College of Hawaii (CCH), LDS Business College (LDSBC) in Salt Lake City, and all elementary and secondary schools. He would later serve as president of LDS Business College and then play a leading role in opening far-off Mongolia to missionary work.

Dee F. Andersen rounded out the commissioner's office with his assignment for finance and budgeting. Dee was another U of U administrator with a strong background in accounting and campus financial planning. Neal knew and respected Dee from their U days. He would later serve as Church budget officer, administrative vice president at Brigham Young University, and then as a mission president and temple president.

So far this made it four for four nobody on the commissioner's staff was from BYU. Jeffrey Holland thought that bringing in all young outsiders perhaps unsettled a few "old timers" in Church education who were used to seeing people within the system work their way up into leadership positions. And Neal wasn't through yet.

Hal Eyring, the thirty-eight-year-old son of Neal's longtime U of U colleague Henry Eyring, taught at the Stanford Business School, having earned his doctorate in business at Harvard. He also served as bishop of the Stanford student ward. One Saturday night a few months after Neal's appointment had been announced, Hal's wife, Kathy, awoke and asked, "Hal, are you sure you're doing the right thing with your life?" They discussed her question. Then she asked, "Are you sure you shouldn't be doing studies for Neal Maxwell?" Neither of them knew Neal or his work well enough to know what that could mean. Hal was having trouble seeing Kathy's point. "Would you pray about it?" she asked. So he did pray, right then, and felt no answer.

The next morning during his bishopric meeting, Hal had a strong impression that he shouldn't do again what he had done the night before. Then the previous night's puzzled feeling returned. He had recently received some calls about intriguing job options that would take him away from Stanford and away from education, and Kathy knew his heart was in education. So he concluded that he had erred, not having prayed about those inquiries, and he promised himself he would pray about any other job offer that might come along.

Meanwhile, Neal and the search committee were looking for a replacement for John L. Clarke, the retiring president of Ricks College. The committee was at an impasse when Neal "went back to my office and one of those strong impressions came through to me . . . about Hal Eyring." So he immediately called President Romney and asked if the committee could reassemble, which it promptly did. Neal presented Hal's name, and "it was warmly received."

Within a week of the midnight conversation with Kathy, Hal received a call from Neal Maxwell, asking him to go to Salt Lake the next day. They met at Hal's parents' home. Getting right to the point, Neal said, "Hal, I'd like to ask you to be president of Ricks College." Stunned but remembering his experience of the previous week, Hal said he'd need to pray about it. Neal said that was fine, but they'd be seeing the First Presidency the next morning. Hal, who knew absolutely nothing about Ricks, prayed hard that night.

The next day, after a brief visit with Neal and the First Presidency, Neal told Hal that the position was his if he wanted it. Within a few days, he accepted. Later on, after his own call to the Twelve, Elder Eyring said his experience "gives you a feeling for Neal's style as commissioner. I would say the main characteristic of it is that the Lord went before him."

Replacing Ernest Wilkinson at BYU was the next big step. Wilkinson had written a letter of resignation to the First Presidency just before Neal's appointment as commissioner. But the board delayed announcing his release as long as possible, not wanting to make him a lame duck president. Neal pushed for an early announcement and a wide-open search, feeling that the Romney search committee and the natural leaders of the BYU faculty really needed an extended two-way conversation about BYU's future. He knew that some BYU faculty members were restless, feeling that the Wilkinson years, despite remarkable growth at that university, had lacked some of the participation and political tolerance Neal had already written about.

On March 9, 1971, President Lee and Neal announced Wilkinson's release at a BYU devotional. They paid tribute to Ernest, whose energy and vision had created a university of great size and substance. They also announced that he would help to establish the J. Reuben Clark Law School at BYU. Then Neal said the search committee would proceed openly but quietly to find "whom the Lord would have preside over this institution," adding that there were no "prior commitments" to anyone, "in spite of some of the speculation that you have heard." The committee immediately began soliciting names and interviewing people about BYU's needs.

The committee was looking for a leader who had spiritual and academic depth but who also would accept Neal's role, ensuring that BYU not dominate the newly minted CES. Still, Neal believed deeply that BYU must have a strong president. He had learned from his years in the Utah system that the board should pick a president in whom they had confidence and then support him, rather than expect the commissioner to micromanage him. When the search began, neither Neal nor anyone else on the committee knew Dallin Oaks personally.

In his early searching for possible candidates, Neal heard high praise for Oaks from very divergent sources and that fact alone got his attention. One source was his friend Jerry Andersen, University of Utah academic vice president, an able, tough-minded, and politically liberal non-LDS law professor who had tried to recruit Dallin for the U law school faculty. The other was the politically conservative Ernest Wilkinson, who had known Dallin as a BYU student, had encouraged him to attend the University of Chicago Law School, and had referred Dallin to Carl Hawkins at the Wilkinson law firm in Washington, D.C., who helped him obtain a Supreme Court clerkship. In 1971, Dallin was a thirty-eight-year-old University of Chicago law professor who had served as acting dean of the law school there and was executive director of the American Bar Association's professional research organization. He was also in a stake presidency.

Dallin and June Oaks were driving late one night to Williamsburg, Virginia, for some professional meetings. June was asleep. Dallin heard on the radio about Wilkinson's resignation and about the new law school at BYU. When June awoke, he told her the news and said he had the feeling that this announcement would affect their lives in some way and that they'd probably receive a phone call about it in Williamsburg. The next day Neal called Dallin to invite him to meet with the search committee. Because Dallin's schedule didn't allow a trip to Utah for another two weeks, he met with the committee after Neal had gone to Europe for a prior educational commitment. Before leaving Utah, Neal briefed the committee about Dallin and then talked often with President Romney by phone during the search process.

When Dallin went to the Chicago airport, he found a problem with his flight to Salt Lake City, so he switched his ticket to a different airline. As he boarded, he saw Harold B. Lee on the flight, next to a vacant seat. Dallin introduced himself, and President Lee invited him to visit for fifteen minutes until the plane took off. President Lee and President Tanner also met with Dallin after he saw the committee. Weeks later, when the search committee had decided to recommend Dallin, President Lee said, "'We all know who the next president is going to be.' Apparently [he] knew before the . . . committee [made its decision], although the impromptu interview aboard the plane in Chicago had never been mentioned to anyone."

Soon President Lee called to invite Dallin to be the president of BYU. He called back in a few days to say the Brethren wanted Neal and Dallin to meet before making a public announcement. So Neal flew from England and spent a day at the Oaks home in Chicago. Elder Romney thought this step would "impress upon BYU's new president that he would be reporting to the commissioner" and would be part of CES.

Dallin believed "the Brethren probably wanted Neal to meet my wife and feel the spirit of my home before they really went ahead with this. I was unknown to any of the authorities of the Church when they interviewed me. . . . If the purpose of his visit was to test the chemistry of the Oaks-Maxwell relationship, that was resolved very quickly." The two men found almost "instant agreement" on their most essential goals and approach and the rapport between them simply kept growing. One day Elder Maxwell would say he'd gladly give Elder Oaks authority to act as his proxy well in advance of any decision, and Elder Oaks would say he'd never known a person with whom he had "more harmony in thinking and decision-making." And the more important the issue, the more likely it was that they would agree whether in CES or later on, when both were members of the Twelve.

Neal's involvement with Jeffrey Holland's appointment as dean of religious education at BYU was more indirect but it illustrates how certain seeds of future Church leadership were being sown during Neal's years as commissioner. Jeff, a career teacher in the institutes of religion, knew Neal just well enough to call him for advice about his job options when he finished his doctorate in American Studies at Yale. Neal remembered the call nearly a decade later as he spoke at Jeff's inauguration as the BYU president who replaced Dallin Oaks. Jeff remembered it years after that, when he wrote to Neal, "I wouldn't even have been in CES if it hadn't been for your natural willingness to shepherd young unknowns."

With Neal's encouragement, Jeff taught briefly at the University of Utah Institute before taking a staff position in a new program at Church headquarters for single adults. There the two of them interacted frequently enough that Neal could respond warmly when the BYU administration recommended Jeff as the new dean of religious education at BYU in 1973, when he was thirty-two years old.

In the search for their new dean, a number of religion faculty members at BYU had expressed a preference not to have someone who was either young or an outsider. Because he was both, Dean Holland's appointment was one more reflection of the fresh breezes blowing in CES. Within only three more years, he would replace Neal as commissioner of education and would always think of him as "my mentor and tutor on Church education."
