Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Thirty-Seven

Religious Education and Church Schools

As the commissioner's team gradually came together, so did a set of long-term strategic policies for the Church Educational System. Since his military days, Neal had been conscious of the distinction between strategy and tactics. He often used such adjectives as strategic and tactical, but by now he had discovered that not everyone recognized the difference between the two. Nor did others always assume, as he did, that institutional boards and top executive officers should focus more on strategy than on tactics. So, as he saw an endless array of tactical issues looking for some path into CES staff and board discussions, he looked for ways to draw the Church Board of Education into a process of developing a broad CES strategy.

It didn't seem to him a good use of the board's time, for example, to spend twenty minutes deciding whether to build new animal pens at the Church school in Tonga. Nor did it seem sensible to talk about approval for a new school in a South American country until the board had clarified its criteria and goals about Church schools in general. Historical precedent was an insufficient guide because the Church's present, let alone its future, was starting to look very different from its past.

Neal's first step was to allocate time in board meetings for broad discussions of what he called "reaction papers." He would ask his associates to help sketch the background, alternatives, costs, and benefits regarding approaches to a given issue even though no immediate proposal was before the board for decision. For instance, he urged the board to develop guidelines for the number of students required to justify building a new seminary building or adding a full-time teacher. Then, when a policy was in place, CES staff members were less likely to pursue something the board really didn't need to see, unless an exception to policy was clearly justified. This also allowed a more efficient approval process when specific projects were "within policy." The approach was new and refreshing for many on the board, and it seemed to work.

Neal brought what turned out to be his most important reaction papers to the board as early as the fall of 1970. He prepared himself by testing his questions on President Lee and the CES staff and then took early drafts of the papers to the board's four-member executive committee, which functioned as a filter for action and discussion by the full board. One of the papers asked whether CES should move faster to develop seminary and institute programs in international areas. It included data on membership growth and college-level enrollments in various countries. The second paper weighed the pros and cons of establishing more two-year business colleges, like LDS Business College in Salt Lake City, listing advantages and disadvantages. The third paper outlined a summary of general aims and future directions for CES. The executive committee was not interested in the second paper, and it saw the first one as related to the third. Thus began the process of CES strategic planning.

As revised for full board discussion, the general reaction paper asked what consensus existed about certain assumptions that would shape other policy principles. The first assumptions addressed the value of education and the connection between religious and educational goals: The Church has "an excellent history of membership growth in which we did not simply 'enroll' new members, baptizing and forgetting them; rather, we have helped them to prepare to cope with the practical problems of life." Education could thus help with personal development, economic self-reliance, building the Church's local leadership base, and contributing to the local culture. Another basic premise was that religious education, designed to build faith and testimony, should have top priority.

The ensuing discussions led to a formal report in 1971 from the commissioner of education entitled "Seek Learning Even by Study and by Faith." It presented three guiding policies for CES (1) literacy and basic education are gospel needs, (2) the Church will not duplicate available state-sponsored education, and (3) all Latter-day Saint high school and college students should have access to weekday religious education. Within these policies were several general goals CES would seek to develop youth with firm testimonies of the Restoration, stronger local Church leadership, parental effectiveness, community leadership, job skills, self-esteem, problem-solving ability, and preparing youth for missions and temple marriages.

The report discussed specific implications that flowed from the goals. For example, religious education should be expanded to follow the Church's growth, no new campuses for higher education should be added, and additional Church schools should be considered only when state systems aren't available. Data on all CES operations followed.

With three decades of hindsight, combined with his own experience from 1976 to 1980 as commissioner, Elder Holland regards this report and, more importantly, the process that created and implemented it as "the best illustration I know" of Neal Maxwell's strategic thinking.

It was new. It was the kind of thing that was expected of him. . . . But he had to wrestle with where Church education was going. Would there be feeder schools for BYU? Would we set up more elementary schools? What came out of this was remarkable, calling the future about as accurately and persuasively as anyone has done forecasting around here. . . .

And the freight train, the lifeblood vehicle, would be seminaries and institutes. In the last few years, the Twelve have revisited where Church education should be going, and almost to the bullet, it was the Neal Maxwell call of 1970.

Consider now the way Neal and his associates applied these criteria over the next five years in religious education, LDS primary and secondary schools, and higher education.

It was clear to Neal that President Lee wanted to give religious education a higher priority than Church schools or Church higher education. This was the Church's unique and most essential educational contribution, it was the least expensive, and it was the most adaptable to the enormous variety of circumstances to be found in an international church.

So Neal looked to Joe Christensen to recommend ways to expand seminaries and institutes even internationally, if possible. The Utah style of released-time programs (classes during regular school hours) in Church-owned seminary buildings wasn't realistic. And the prospects for replicating weekday religion classes across the globe in multiple languages, complete with manuals and faithful teachers, were truly daunting. Since its beginning, seminary had been confined to the Church's areas of high population in the western United States. But Harvey Taylor and William E. Berrett had already sensed the international need enough to do some pioneering. In the late 1960s, they had introduced a few seminary and institute classes into selected other countries, even though by 1970 no regular course materials had been translated into any non-English language. Their experiments laid the foundation for the most significant expansion of Church education during Neal's tenure taking religious education wherever the Church went, as missionary work took hold around the globe.

The hunger for religious education had clearly been growing in the international Church. In Mexico, for instance, seminaries were established in several locations in the 1960s. This was done, in part, because Mexican law forbade religious instruction in the Church's numerous elementary schools in that country, so the students took religion classes in nearby LDS chapels. The first early-morning and home-study seminaries in South America were introduced in early 1970, after an "eloquent appeal" to the First Presidency from Buenos Aires Stake president Angel Abrea, along with repeated requests from other priesthood leaders. CES personnel who had earlier served missions in those countries went back to launch classes on a trial basis. Europe, Australia, and New Zealand took similar first steps during the late 1960s, mostly on a home-study basis in pilot stakes.

But the priorities of the new CES strategy gave these experiments an unprecedented momentum. Joe prepared a complete proposal for expanding the seminaries and institutes "wherever the Church went." Neal defended the proposal in the next budget review so strongly that he said he would take the needed funds from other CES operations, if new money was not available.

Joe constantly felt the pressure of Neal's desire to move "very, very rapidly," even though Neal tried to be empathetic about the complexities of language, distance, and quality in maintaining CES standards. Soon, aided by skilled and creative zone administrators, Neal and Joe sent out American CES people with a mission to return home as soon as they could accomplish three "scaffolding" mandates in each country: (1) start the program among the youth, (2) develop and maintain good relationships with local priesthood leaders, and (3) train local people to take over all administration and teaching within three years. In other words, they were to set up the scaffolding with teachers from the United States, build the building, and then remove the scaffolding.

They began in Latin America and Germany, enrolling in the first year about 700 students in Guatemala, in Argentina, and in Uruguay, with more than 900 in Brazil. Soon they expanded to Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and the Philippines. Joe Christensen would later say, "I know of no other Church program that moved toward globalization and nationalization so quickly."

Traditionally, seminary and institute teachers were full-time personnel, but it was impossible to sustain the international expansion on that basis. CES leaders hired some full-time supervisors, but eventually nearly all international teaching was done part-time by the most faithful local teachers they could identify, hire, and train with consultation and support from local priesthood leaders. They also learned from experience that, surprisingly, both enrollment and completion ratios were higher with early-morning seminary than with home study classes.

And they didn't wait until the Church was already established. Joe and Neal traveled to Madrid, Spain, when missionary work was just beginning in that country. They worked out with the mission president, Raymond Barnes, how they could start seminaries and institutes at "virtually the same time the Church's missionary efforts were starting."

By 1976, Neal could report to the board that CES had expanded its standard materials from one to sixteen languages, moving from seventeen to fifty-one countries, using classroom-based programs in such flexible locations as chapels and homes. Moreover, all teaching and local supervision was in the hands of local personnel. As Elder Jeffrey Holland saw it,

This whole dream that religious education would be the wave of the future, the idea that we would take it everywhere, was all under Neal's direction. . . . It was part of this larger vision . . . those sparks flying off the flint and steel, as his unique creative energy latched on to the strategic vision CES had developed with the Brethren.

Pretty soon people started to recognize that if youth went to seminary, they usually went on a mission. Then that returned missionary would be a good branch president someday, and next thing you knew, he would be stake president. The connection of what seminary was doing to build first a missionary force and then a kind of priesthood/family base in the Church was almost instant. . . .

Over time it really has had an impact. That's where much of the future strength of the Church is.

By 2001, the total seminary and institute enrollment outside North America was about 340,000 students, almost half of the CES worldwide enrollment.

Interestingly, as Elder Henry B. Eyring noted, this high-energy effort got underway just ahead of President Kimball's stirring call in 1974, which took the Church's international missionary efforts to a new and higher level. President Kimball challenged each country to prepare itself to supply its own missionaries, who would sorely need exactly the preparation that seminary offered them.

It was with gratitude for President Lee's prophetic instincts, then, that Neal told the seminary and institute teachers in 1983 that the eventual "history of the Church . . . will show . . . a strong, even profound, correlation between the growth and quality of our seminary and institute program . . . and the growth of the Church's full-time missions. It is not accidental that the seminary and institute program spread coincidentally with the spread of the missionary work around this globe."

Developing a consistent policy for Church-operated schools as distinguished from religion classes only in international areas became Neal's most vexing problem. The arguments for Church schools were strong ones, even with a general CES policy against establishing more Church schools in countries with acceptable public systems. Many countries had only marginal schools, the educational immersion of students in an LDS atmosphere with LDS faculty would better fulfill the complete purpose of Church education, and a number of Church schools were already operating successfully in the island countries of the Pacific and in Latin America.

Nevertheless, schools were very expensive to build and maintain, experienced and faithful LDS teachers were hard to find in many countries, and financial factors made President Lee very reluctant to give the impression that the Church would provide schools whenever local Church members desired them. Additionally, the desire of Church members for LDS schools was not just an international issue. A number of American Latter-day Saints had requested Church schools for their children because they were disenchanted with the quality of U.S. public schools, especially with the increasing influence of secular values in those schools.

The closer they looked at public school systems, however, the more Neal and the board became convinced that the Church should do all it could to support public schools, in every country, as a matter of basic citizenship. Nonetheless, as he noted in his final board meeting before leaving the commissioner's post, this commitment to public education was contingent upon the schools' maintaining an acceptable moral and educational climate, a concern that would grow in his mind as he experienced the increasing influence of secularism.

Always desiring good homework before making policy, Neal requested a "study of educational needs" in the international Church. One of the first studies called for a review of Church schools in Mexico. Many of these schools had originally been established not because public schools were unavailable but because of a desire to nurture students' religious faith more fully. This study became the basis for a board policy that no new schools would be created unless there were 150 LDS students in a given location who had no access to public schools. This policy later led the Church to close most of its schools in Mexico.

In Asia a team of researchers from BYU, assisted by Neal's CES staff, assessed educational patterns and opportunities among Church members. They found that a higher proportion of Korean Latter-day Saints had college degrees than Church members anywhere, with other positive reports from Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and the Philippines. Because they found that local school systems were adequate, the study team only recommended expanding seminaries and institutes into these countries. Then, to minimize costs and to build the Church locally, they suggested a Church-sponsored international student loan fund to encourage LDS students to seek education in their home countries.

The international loan fund did get a very modest start during this era, but, more importantly, it planted the seeds for the more comprehensive Perpetual Education Fund that President Gordon B. Hinckley would announce nearly thirty years later as a major effort to support local education for qualified students.

Neal also worked hard to understand local school conditions for himself. One of his first and most extensive data-gathering trips as commissioner took him in October 1970 through the Church's school system in Hawaii, Samoa, Tonga, Fiji, New Zealand, and elsewhere in the South Pacific. He knew the stories of David O. McKay's first trip through that region in the 1920s, which had ignited Elder McKay's affection for the Polynesian Saints and his desire to support their access to education. He knew of President McKay's commitment to the Church College of Hawaii (CCH), established near the Hawaii Temple in 1954 on the wings of prophetic promises about the school's future.

Neal soon developed his own deep admiration for the Polynesian Saints. As just one example of this feeling, he spoke to a BYU group in 1975 about President Kimball's call for each country to supply its own full-time missionaries, so American missionaries could go elsewhere. "The first country to comply," he said, "wasn't western Canada or some other place where the Church has been for a long time, but the little kingdom of Tonga in the Pacific, where there are 156 full-time missionaries, of whom 150 are Tongans."

Still, his early probing failed to uncover a clear set of goals for CCH, or a clear enough connection between that college and the Church's schools for younger students in other Pacific islands. He had assumed that CCH would be concerned primarily with "returnability" returning to their island countries the students it had educated. But he found no real data on that issue. He was also concerned whether the CCH curriculum had enough of a vocational orientation to make returnability feasible. In other locations, he was troubled to find a few cases where junior high school students were living away from home to attend Church boarding schools. Neal found himself feeling that these schools needed more local teachers and leaders, rather than being "colonial" places staffed mainly by American expatriates. Only in this way would the schools fulfill the long-term spiritual goal of building local Church leadership.

Neal encouraged Alton Wade, later the president of CCH (by then BYU-Hawaii) to study the actual "return home" patterns of CCH graduates as part of his doctoral dissertation. Wade's findings showed no clear pattern in the rate of student returns, and in time, the entire subject became more complex than Neal had originally thought.

Then he remembered a presentation he'd once made to Native American students from many tribes at the University of Utah. He had told them, "You've got to decide whether you want to live on the reservation or be part of American society. Until you make that decision, all these other decisions [about education and career] can't be made." The reaction of his audience had told Neal he touched a nerve with that question their fundamental concern was that they were uncertain about their own identity. Finding out who they were and where they fit in a shrinking, global, multicultural society was very difficult for them to do, except as each individual gradually found his or her own answer.

During his six years as commissioner, Neal helped the board work to clarify its policy on Church schools. The first case of closing a school arose in 1974, when the government in American Samoa asked to buy the Church school there. The board agreed, concluding that the local public schools were adequate. This case later became a precedent for the painful process of closing Church schools in Mexico, Chile, and elsewhere, because administrators courageously applied the board's clarified policy if local systems are adequate, no Church schools are needed. In three other cases, after Spencer W. Kimball became President of the Church at the end of 1973, exceptional local conditions prompted the board to open new schools in Fiji, Tonga, and Kiribati (the Gilbert Islands). Over time, however, the overall number of Church schools shrank dramatically.

In that same time span, the schools also progressed toward Neal's strongly held goal of having local administrators and teachers. He knew this policy wouldn't be easy to implement, because the local people needed to measure up professionally, and it would take time to locate and develop the needed talent. Competent expatriate Americans, who often served as educational missionaries, were far more experienced and more plentiful. But, in the long run, Neal wanted to build up the Church locally, not simply have a few good classes taught by missionaries.

In February 1974, he wrote from Australia to Cory, who was serving on his mission: "We are in the most delicate stages now of the policy [we] started three years ago of passing the baton of leadership to non-Americans in the Pacific portion of the CES. If we move too fast or too slow we will hurt the work. Each country is a separate challenge. Generally, the 'passing of the baton' is going well."

Ironically, the board's policy of entrusting CES supervisory duties to strong, local LDS educators occasionally bumped up against an unexpected concern. Because they were moving so quickly toward local governance, CES at times identified, hired, and trained able local leaders, and then, because of their spiritual maturity, those leaders were more rapidly prepared to serve and were at times so called as stake and mission presidents. Some people worried that these decisions might create the appearance of a paid ministry, which obviously ran counter to Church doctrine on lay leadership.

Neal responded by identifying and encouraging strong personal role models among those who first faced this challenge. He began by saying, "Well, [the man involved] wasn't stake president when we hired him." He also liked to quote Alma 29:8, because this point was for him a doctrinal key to establishing the international Church: "The Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have." It really didn't surprise Neal that the same people might be the most qualified for both ecclesiastical roles and for Church employment, especially in the early stages of establishing the Church. Over time, the risk would gradually take care of itself because those faithful enough to be asked to serve in both positions were usually mature enough to keep their roles separated, setting an example for others as the Church grew in their country.
