Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Thirty-Eight

Higher Education and Brigham Young University

Among the most clear-cut of the new priorities of the Church Educational System was the ceiling on both enrollments and new institutions in higher education. By 1970, Latter-day Saint colleges enrolled 32,900 students, while 200,000 LDS students were enrolled in other institutions, with 50,000 of them also enrolled in institutes of religion.

During the mid-1960s, Ernest Wilkinson had proposed the creation of a complete system of Church junior colleges in the western United States as "feeder schools" to Brigham Young University. President David O. McKay was especially sympathetic to the plan for junior colleges, but he and others, including Harold B. Lee, worried about its financial costs. The board at first approved the concept but then dropped it after a thorough feasibility study. Yet the hunger among Church members for more access to Church-sponsored higher education increased, as the population of college-bound LDS students continued to grow after the board capped BYU's enrollment at 25,000.

Neal's appointment was barely announced when a group of Church leaders from California asked to see him. They asked if the Church might buy a college campus that was available in their area. Because Neal wasn't involved in earlier discussions on the junior college system, he went to the First Presidency, to whom he expressed his own concerns about funding, faculty availability, and the effect of such a precedent on future expectations. The Brethren were unequivocal, reiterating the factors that led them not to pursue the earlier junior college plan.

This showed Neal that the strategy for higher education in the CES policy document needed to state clearly that BYU's enrollment would remain capped and that no new institutions would be considered. Nonetheless, Neal "didn't want to lock the Brethren in forever," so the statement consciously said that no other institutions were "presently" planned. Then, over the next few years, he and other CES leaders "kept saying that, and people finally realized we meant it," despite repeated requests for other campuses, including some from Europe.

Within the boundaries of existing campuses, however, Neal urged the leaders at BYU, the Church College of Hawaii, and Ricks to look for every possible way to accommodate more students. The first significant innovation occurred when BYU adopted a new academic calendar. After considering numerous options with his staff for several weeks, President Oaks one day took his notes and disappeared for an afternoon into Provo Canyon. There he prayerfully considered the complex variables and came back with a unique calendar proposal, which he called "4-4-2-2." Fall semester would begin early enough to end before Christmas and then, after a regular winter semester, would come two half semesters spring and summer terms. It was a creative and demanding idea, but it worked, adding thousands of student credit hours to BYU's annual educational output.

Neal believed the inspired spirit of cooperation at BYU would help the new calendar succeed, even though other universities had been unsuccessful with trimester-style formats. When the new system was clearly working by 1974, he thanked the BYU students, faculty, and staff for their "unique and deeply felt commitment to 'making things work out.'" It also helped that enrollments at Ricks College had not been capped, so the Ricks student body gradually increased, easing somewhat the pressure on BYU.

Another step that increased overall enrollments was the 1974 decision to change the name of CCH to BYU-Hawaii (BYU-H) and then have BYU-H report to BYU rather than to the commissioner's office. CCH was already a four-year school, but its educational mission needed clarification, and it needed logistical and academic support that BYU-Provo was better equipped to give than was the commissioner's office. The change instantly enhanced the school's academic credibility, and its enrollment moved from around 1,000 toward a ceiling of 2,000. It also resolved what Neal considered one of his "most complicated" challenges, by clearly establishing BYU-H as a university campus.

The presidents of Ricks, CCH, and LDSBC did not attend the regular CES meetings in Salt Lake City in the early 1970s, because they reported through Associate Commissioner Kenneth Beesley. Those presidents therefore interacted less frequently with Neal than did BYU president Dallin H. Oaks. Still, reflecting his interest in Ricks president Henry B. Eyring and in system-wide long-range planning, in 1971 Neal asked President Eyring to chair a select committee on higher education. He charged the eighteen-member committee, with its representatives from all of CES higher education, to "make fresh exploration of the possible need for change or refinement in present academic patterns or policies in the [CES] colleges and university." The committee's 1972 report explored a wide range of long-term issues, recommending that CES (1) focus on academic areas where Church doctrine made the most difference, (2) organize experiences that produce leaders of families, and (3) produce ideas that serve the Church while blessing the world. Interestingly, many concepts in this report prophetically sowed seeds that would sprout more than twenty years later when Elder Eyring served as commissioner of education in the 1990s and beyond.

Even if BYU couldn't grow much numerically, one of Neal's hopes as commissioner was to nourish BYU's growth spiritually and academically. The university was clearly sailing in the CES armada now, not off on voyages of its own. And it was still the flagship, so the way BYU flew the Church flag sent important messages to the community of LDS scholars, teachers, students, and other Church members. As the system's major university, BYU played an especially important role in demonstrating how "Mormonism's . . . encounter with modern secular thought" could truly bless the Church's future.

Just as Neal's relationship with the First Presidency was the most critical factor in his overall contribution to CES, his relationship with Dallin Oaks became the most critical factor in his contribution to BYU. Their friendship, forged in the trenches of trying together to mold a good Church university into an excellent one, would last to become a productive partnership for the contemporary Church.

It took a few experiences to launch the Maxwell-Oaks relationship. At first, Dallin was so overwhelmed with the combination of BYU's size and his newness that he was less than thrilled about driving to Salt Lake City for a weekly commissioner's half-day staff meeting in addition to two monthly meetings with the board and with its executive committee. A colleague in their first few staff meetings watched Dallin quietly reading his huge stack of daily mail during an extended discussion of some CES issue in which BYU's interest was obviously remote, but Neal wasn't troubled, because he "knew what [Dallin] was trying to do."

By contrast, in another early staff meeting, an issue arose in which Dallin saw serious trouble for BYU's interests, so he took ten minutes to articulate a strong argument against the proposal. He concluded by telling Neal firmly, "If you decide to go ahead on this, I will oppose it and insist" on discussion before the full board of education.

After the meeting, Neal drew Dallin aside and said, "You don't need to do that. Let's just work it out between us. Give me a phone call." Suddenly Dallin realized that someone other than Neal had wanted the issue raised, and Neal didn't think it wise for staff relationships for Dallin to use such "overkill" in their meeting. Dallin should have answered in thirty seconds, not ten minutes. This incident taught him that Neal's mind is so quick that "often he'll make up his mind before you've spoken one and a half sentences." He is also so skillful at reading other people and solving problems outside formal settings and knowing the best way to handle formal settings that it's best just to tip him off and follow his instincts. That day was the only time Neal ever gave Dallin any direct advice, and for Dallin, "it was a formative event in our relationship."

On another occasion, Dallin had taken great pains to prepare a lengthy memo on an issue important to BYU. He showed it to Neal, who read it in a flash and began tearing it up. "I thought at first that he was rejecting it," said Dallin, but "soon learned that meant he was persuaded and was glad to have me handle it." Joe Christensen had a similar experience. Both came to know soon enough that Neal read fast, approved what he liked, didn't want extra paper, and would rely on a memo's author to keep his own file copy.

After a few such get-acquainted sessions, the Maxwell-Oaks partnership moved into high gear, where it has remained ever since. As their mutual trust grew, so did their ability to anticipate each other, like two musicians in a very harmonious jazz group, and each learned when to let the other improvise. They had two very different, highly complementary, working styles. Neal's style was that of the visionary chief of staff who works on strategic plans at army headquarters; Dallin's style was that of a field commander a nice balance for running BYU within the broad goals of CES. Neal became Dallin's foremost mentor about higher education, teaching him at the level of concepts and principles and never looking over his shoulder or saying "here's how we did it at the U."

As time went on, other synergistic contrasts emerged. Dallin found that Neal "is a speed reader," while Dallin's reading is "painfully slow." "He reads a book a week. I read a book every fifteen or twenty weeks. But I will find things in the book he has not seen." His visionary approach gives Neal "an incredible perspective," while Dallin inclines toward "a thoroughness and noting of detail. He keeps a clean desk; I keep a cluttered one." Dallin once told some BYU leaders in Neal's presence that one reason Neal's desk is cleaner is that he "can sweep everything off his desk and onto mine," because "I'm the one who works on the detail to bring the vision to fruition."

Elder Oaks added that Neal's talks are "filled with poetic imagery; mine are dominated by explanations and declarative sentences. He is something of a pessimistic worrier; I am an incorrigible optimist." Comparing their speaking styles, Dallin once said he uses words the way he'd use work horses to pull a load. He wouldn't dare try to use words as show horses, for fear he couldn't control them as Neal does, and then the show-horse words would "jump a nearby fence and run around in the field with their tails in the air."

Their work on BYU matters grew in future years into collaboration, often by assignment, on many other Church projects. Through it all, Dallin found that Neal's "major contribution" is his "remarkable vision," from which "over the years, thousands have benefited." Neal will "raise strategic problems, present and prospective, that I have never seen. But when I study the things he has raised, I see ramifications in detail that he has not seen." Elder Oaks also offered this comparison between Neal and another visionary colleague, President Boyd K. Packer:

President Packer's vision . . . is what I would call a "seeric" vision, in the sense that he sees far ahead on the basis of spiritual impression, not necessarily by an analysis of the facts. Neal Maxwell's vision . . . is an analytic vision, or a vision of wisdom. He takes facts available to everyone (which he absorbs at an incredible rate) and then with unique spiritual gifts finds meaning in those facts that is not evident to the rest of us.

As their relationship has ripened with time, including more than sixteen years together in the Quorum of the Twelve, Dallin would feel "like I've always known him and always worked with him." And Neal would sometimes feel that his long and intimate friendship with Dallin Oaks gave him the brother he never had in his own family.

With this unusual degree of mutuality paving the way, Neal and Dallin in 1971 joined in a quest to increase the spiritual and the academic capacity of BYU. Their first priority was to lift both the religious faithfulness and the professional quality of the faculty. The faculty retirements they were most glad to see, said President Oaks, were not the academically unqualified people but those "who weren't totally loyal to the Church. . . . We were trying to raise the spiritual quality . . . at the same time we were raising the academic quality. . . . We worked very hard at both" goals.

A prerequisite to pursuing this two-pronged strategy was to invite the academic departments, the faculty, and the board into a participative process, decentralizing many university functions in ways that both depended on and increased the level of two-way trust. Each of the groups was in the mood for such a change, and Neal and Dallin possessed the attitudes and skill that made the changes possible in ways the Brethren warmly supported.

Ernest Wilkinson had been at BYU for two decades, and he had assembled a capable team of administrators, had recruited many able faculty, expanded the enrollment fivefold, and built an impressive campus. Dallin kept Ernest's two key vice presidents, Robert K. Thomas and Ben E. Lewis, as his own closest associates. But the Wilkinson presidency had been an intensely personal one, and some faculty members had resented his aggressive, controlling style, even though that style had in many ways helped BYU become as large and strong as it was. By 1971, the BYU community was anxious to enjoy greater communication and participation at every level.

An early, major theme of the Oaks administration, then, aided both by Neal's philosophy and his role with the board, was decentralization of tasks, authority, and responsibility. This changed the campus atmosphere, relaxing a climate that had at times been contentious. Both Neal and Dallin emphasized spiritual, not political, priorities as the guideposts to understanding the major premise of BYU's educational mission. They also made clear that BYU would remain an undergraduate university where the main purpose of research was to strengthen teaching quality. BYU would remain a culturally conservative place by national standards, but Dallin told the faculty very early that he thought the words conservative and liberal usually were not helpful labels. His view affirmed Neal's long-held conviction about the ineffectiveness of dogmatic approaches at either end of the political spectrum.

The board thus authorized the delegation of a new level of university governance to deans and department chairs, involving them much more in faculty hiring and promotions, salaries, budgeting, and other decisions. This shift in overall philosophy brought with it an increase in candor, efficiency, and flexibility across the campus, helped by the board's responsiveness to Dallin's recommendations, which had in turn been encouraged by the high level of confidence the board felt in Neal, who fully shared Dallin's views and attitudes.

Neal and Dallin were wholehearted in their harmony with the board. They shared President Marion G. Romney's understanding that BYU was "a Church institution . . . administered the same way the Church is administered that is, by the priesthood. . . . We are aware that there are universities in which the administration [or] faculties [or] students" play the primary role in policy formation. "Whatever justification there is in such universities for this type of government does not exist here." The Brethren always had ultimate responsibility for policy. At the same time, the board remained "deeply interested . . . that scholastically BYU be unexcelled," so long as the quest for that excellence and the "urge to compete with other universities in academic honors" were always subordinate to "the . . . saving of souls."

As he encouraged decentralization and participation across the campus, Neal continually reiterated that BYU's greatest strength was in its unique relationship to the Church, in which hierarchical authority was an honored, even divinely revealed, pattern. Within that pattern, BYU would always be part of CES and subject to board direction, but the university community would be included in a fruitful blend of participation with authority a Church leadership philosophy Neal had articulated well before becoming commissioner.

Neal found his own ways to send this message to BYU faculty. He would tell them that they must always keep their citizenship in Jerusalem and use their passports to go to Athens. Or he would say, "LDS scholars can and should speak in the tongue of scholarship, but without . . . losing the mother tongue of faith." Another time he put it this way:

For a disciple of Jesus Christ, academic scholarship is a form of worship . . . another dimension of consecration. Hence one who seeks to be a disciple-scholar will take both scholarship and discipleship seriously. . . .

No wonder a true community of scholars would qualify to be part of a larger community of saints. . . .

Consecrated scholarship thus converges both the life of the mind and of the spirit! . . .

Genius without meekness is not enough to qualify for discipleship [because] meekness facilitates working on what is lacking. . . .

Though I have spoken of the disciple-scholar, in the end all the hyphenated words come off. We are finally disciples men and women of Christ. . . .

The greater the submission, the greater the expansion!

Neal always taught the BYU faculty and other LDS scholars in a way that lifted their scholarly and teaching aspirations, even when he was making it clear that one's religious citizenship, mother tongue, and discipleship were really the highest priorities. Once he told the BYU faculty, for example, "We cannot let the world condemn our value system by calling attention to our professional mediocrity." On another occasion, he told BYU students and faculty they must be like Joseph in Egypt. In times of great famine, Joseph drew on divine power to be part of the solution not just another hungry mouth to feed but he leaned "into the fray" and was "involved with mankind."

Neal taught this perspective in an informal retreat for university leaders in August 1974 at Timp Lodge in Provo Canyon. After updating the group on recent CES developments, thereby reinforcing BYU's identity with the larger armada, he concluded with a metaphor about BYU that reflected his own lifelong attitude about the value of being engaged in helping the surrounding society, rather than trying, Jonah-like, to escape it.

Taking his cue from the remark of a recent convert to the Church, Neal compared BYU with the Abbey of Cluny, founded in 910 A.D. in France. Most monastic orders in that era were concerned only with their own salvation. Having "turned inward," they didn't feel a duty to the surrounding culture. But "the Abbey of Cluny under some special leadership was like a pebble thrown into a pond [whose] ripples reached the most distant shore of the then Christian world." The abbey rallied people against the forces of immorality and materialism, creating a "cultural counterpoint," concerned with both spiritual reform and "social responsibility." "The monks left their cloister" and provided "leaven for a much wider world of which they were a part."

Neal urged that Latter-day Saints should do the same thing in their own times and places. Despite the deterioration of medieval society, this tiny group of monks blessed their church spiritually while preserving the best of human knowledge from barbarians. And the value of their work later rippled its blessings across the waters of history. That's what BYU must do, he said, because there is so little hope for secular reform. The Abbey of Cluny "didn't remain monastic, an island of excellence." Rather, the people at Cluny influenced others, long term. For BYU to do this in its time, its scholars must be "unarguably on a par with" the professional excellence of their peers, so that they will be "listened to and be influential."

These were fresh and encouraging insights from a commissioner of education who increasingly exemplified the common ground on which the Church Board of Education and LDS faculty and students everywhere could meet not only to gather but to mutually reinforce one another, joined by their shared vision of having a university in Zion.

Standing on that common ground, Neal and Dallin gained approval from the board for several specific developments that illustrate their shared vision about BYU and its place in CES. For one thing, they clearly established a pattern for future BYU presidents and CES commissioners, showing that BYU could successfully report through, and be part of, CES. Neal's "ecumenical" style about CES institutions also brokered an attitude of sharing and cooperation, such as when he asked BYU to assume responsibility for the Hawaii campus. When he encouraged a blending of BYU's continuing education programs with those of CES. When he encouraged BYU and CES personnel to work together to develop the first CES literacy projects in Bolivia. When he urged the consolidation of several CES fund-raising organizations into the LDS Foundation. Or when he asked that BYU's physical facilities staff assist all CES higher education institutions in planning buildings, thus avoiding the need to have a second facilities staff working directly for CES.

One of BYU's challenges when Dallin Oaks arrived was that the campus clearly needed additional physical facilities, although the board had already stated its intent not to authorize more BYU buildings as one way of controlling the enrollment ceiling. Neal had learned at the University of Utah that the best way to help legislators evaluate major building requests was to show them the problems and let them decide for themselves. So Neal and Dallin eventually took the board to Provo to show them the campus needs. These trips resulted in such decisions as closing the "lower campus," a set of venerable buildings some distance from the main campus, building a new library that doubled the previous space, and eventually constructing the Kimball and Tanner buildings.

With Neal's encouragement, Dallin also conducted a major review of religious education at BYU, which resulted in several changes that reflected what Neal had long sought in his own approach closer integration of the religious and the secular. These changes signaled that, as Elder Packer put it, "religious education [should] be an influence contributing to, and drawing from, every segment of the university." They invited more BYU faculty from regular academic departments to teach religion classes, and they invited others to do research related to religion. This included the creation of an Institute of Ancient Studies, headed by Hugh Nibley. Neal took a special interest in this field, anticipating his later support for the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies (FARMS), the Joseph Fielding Smith Institute for Church History, the Encyclopedia of Mormonism, and the Center for Religious Studies.

The J. Reuben Clark Law School, which had been announced at the time of Ernest Wilkinson's retirement, opened its doors in 1973. Adding a major new professional program was truly an exception to the board's pattern of limiting rather than expanding BYU's offerings, but Presidents Lee and Romney had taken particular interest in the law school project, originally proposed by Ernest Wilkinson. Their interest was strong enough that they chose to go ahead with it even after Dallin Oaks, who had a rich background in legal education, told them during his BYU presidential search interview that he saw no need for the new school. Then they deferred continually to Dallin's judgments about the nature and approach of the school, which favored a school of national academic and professional influence rather than a narrower, practitioner-based approach.

The Romney search committee, which had chosen Neal's original CES leaders, added Elder Howard W. Hunter and then chose the law school dean one more young person who would have future influence. Dean Rex E. Lee, then a thirty-six-year-old lawyer in Arizona, later served as Solicitor General of the United States and eventually as president of BYU from 1989 to 1995.

President Romney, who took a strong interest in the law school, also reflected the religious, nonpolitical nature of the First Presidency's attitudes toward education, a model both Neal and Dallin gladly followed. He once said his committee had selected Dallin Oaks, Hal Eyring, and the others in the only way he knew how to choose a leader by following the same spiritual process he had come to know in choosing new stake presidents: searching interviews, much prayer, and an openness to inspiration.

As for depoliticizing attitudes, one of President Romney's assignments was to interview all prospective faculty for the new law school. He said to one candidate, "Now let's talk about your politics. Are you either a John Bircher or a Socialist?" Startled, the candidate replied that some people think those are the only two choices. President Romney said, "I know. That's why I asked. So are you in one of those groups or the other?" When the candidate said no, President Romney said, "Well then, you're all right."

Another major development that Neal felt reflected the high level of trust between the First Presidency and BYU was the decision in 1974 to build the Church's new Missionary Training Center near the BYU campus. Neal told BYU leaders that this expensive, complicated task "could not have been ventured at all" without that level of trust. "That building will probably have more influence on this planet than anything else I can think of [except a temple]." And it's at BYU. "That ought to tell you something."
