Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Thirty-Nine

Becoming a Spiritual and Educational Leader

Commissioner Maxwell's talks in 1970 showed the growing variety and reach of his voice. In his first talk to the Brigham Young University faculty and staff, he shared his strategic vision for the Church Educational System and BYU's place in it. BYU, he said, should be "the nerve center of Latter-day Saint scholarship" but must "play its role as part of the total system, rather than standing apart from that system. You have much to offer to your institutional partners, and something to learn from them."

A few weeks later, the First Presidency asked the new commissioner to speak in the priesthood session of October 1970 general conference. He addressed directly the enrollment ceiling at BYU, stressing the Brethren's encouragement that LDS college-age students should attend school near their homes and enroll in institute classes. Then he told priesthood leaders how to help with the education of their young people, showing how comprehensively he saw CES. Leaders, he said, should help youth identify with seminary and institute, direct them toward vocational counseling, assure them they can pursue learning without fear, teach by the eloquence of example, and strengthen the families of the Church.

Neal's writing and speaking were becoming more visible to LDS and other public audiences. In the September 1970 Improvement Era, he called the Church "an ecclesiastical Everest," rising "above the Himalayas of secular philosophy." That year he gave a "Last Lecture" talk to BYU students, reflecting on the connections he'd discovered between political science and the gospel. He also published an essay entitled "Democracy and Dissent" in the December 1970 issue of Perspectives on Utah Education. Here he wrote with an experienced voice to the general public about dealing with the disturbing legacy of student revolt in the 1960s: "With so much change under way . . . dissent may be our constant companion."

In December, Neal spoke to the Maryland state legislature, drawing on his experience with legislative reform in Utah. He was also introduced as a Church representative at a time of some public criticism against the Church's then-current policy of not conferring the priesthood on African-American men. His audience included numerous African-American legislators. He prayed for, and felt he received, spiritual help; he also received a standing ovation.

Perhaps Neal's most influential message to educators outside Utah was his speech in 1972 to the Association of College Unions meeting in St. Louis. This was a national audience of student life personnel. His identification with the Church this time drew vocal opposition from a dissident delegate, who tried from the floor just before Neal's talk to urge the group to pass a resolution censuring BYU for the Church's policy on eligibility for the priesthood. Although the motion failed, the atmosphere remained a little tense.

Neal spoke about "the now and future student." He began by describing two LDS schools he'd recently seen in Bolivia and Samoa, observing that students are "impatient with marshmallow men and institutions, for [they] seek a hard core of meaning." He said higher education was caught between higher student demands and lower public support, partly because colleges and universities had let themselves "be seen almost as a substitute religion." Then college students discovered "that the cathedral of learning was . . . manned by mere mortals, some of whom dispensed to a society hungry for hope doctrines of existential despair." He concluded that democracy itself depends on what higher education does now, and colleges must focus on students. By the time he'd finished speaking, the audience had become increasingly attentive.

During his early years as commissioner, Neal's letters to Cory in the mission field (he served in Duesseldorf, Germany, from 1972 to 1974) offer some rare glimpses of his private reflections amid his busy public life. These excerpts suggest how his letters echoed Clarence Maxwell's faithful and detailed messages written to Neal years before in Japan and then in Canada. Because of what those letters meant to him, Neal knew what his would mean to Cory:

You are my only son, but what a fine son and your future is bright with promise. . . . I . . . am so happy that our separation is for such a sweet and significant purpose.

We savored your letter written Tuesday with great relish.

I am . . . pleased with your indication that these communications did not make you homesick. You . . . have crossed an important psychological phase line.

We fasted for you this Sunday.

There's mundaneness in proselyting, but duty and routine serve us well. Sometimes duty simply carries one over the discouragement we are past the low points almost before we notice them. . . .

Keep your fine sense of humor, because missionary work has, like all of life, its own incongruities and implausibilities.

Often, when I wake up in strange hotel rooms with my hectic schedule of travel, I might wonder 'what am I doing here?' except that I feel encapsulated in our Father in Heaven's love and have that sense of purpose which makes the little inconveniences bearable.

I had a busy trip can you imagine 38 takeoffs, or landings, in the space of 12 days? I did not sleep in the same bed twice, but we got everything done . . . and were blessed with health and safety.

[Written during the midst of the Watergate affair in Washington, D.C.] You work for the only 'Outfit' that is going anywhere in the world, Cory. It has divine leadership [and] direction.

On November 15, 1972, Neal received an unexpected visitor in his office, who came with a proposal that would cause him no little anguish over the next several weeks. Senator Wallace F. Bennett closed the door and told Neal, confidentially, that he had decided to retire from the United States Senate after serving more than twenty years. After much thought, he wanted Neal to run for his seat in the 1974 election. Bennett was prepared to give Neal's candidacy his full support, including the use of all his contacts, access to fund-raising, influence with the Republican Party, and anything else he might need. The senator said he was confident that Neal would win, for Neal had ripened and prepared himself in a way that would attract wide support, and his candidacy would please Senator Bennett greatly.

Neal looked at Senator Bennett in astonished wonder. He had first been encouraged to consider running for Congress in 1962 by Utah Congressman Sherman Lloyd. His name was mentioned as a possible congressional candidate in the Salt Lake press in 1965. That same year, the Utah Alumnus magazine teasingly said in the introduction to an article Neal had written, "It's an open secret that Neal likes the heady taste of Potomac water." But he'd never been seriously interested in the House too many Congressmen in one body and having to run for reelection every two years, and neither he nor Colleen wanted to live in Washington, anyway.

But the Senate? It was the one political office that had long appealed to him. As Abraham Lincoln's biographer wrote of Lincoln's failed campaign for the Senate, "All of Lincoln's talents seemed to point him to the Senate his literary gifts, his love of rational debate, of delivering logical and eloquent speeches from a prepared script." Yes, Neal was "somewhat tempted" to reach for "the laurel wreath in politics." Not that he was a shoo-in to be elected, even with Bennett's support. Yet he did learn later that both Jake Garn and Wayne Owens, who ended up running against each other for Bennett's seat, would have chosen to step aside had Neal been a candidate.

Bud Scruggs, who managed senatorial campaigns for both Garn and Orrin Hatch, knows Neal and politics unusually well. Upon hearing the story of Senator Bennett's 1972 inquiry, Scruggs thought Neal

would have been a fantastic senator, because he is such a student of history and . . . policy, and his eloquence would have made him a national figure. He is so intensely interested in policy and its mechanics, and he understands human ambition. . . . He could . . . build consensus. . . .

He would have been not just a good senator, but a great one. Though perhaps not as great a candidate, because he doesn't like to talk about himself, doesn't believe there's anything qualifying in his background. And his interest in attributes like meekness and submissiveness, even in 1974, wouldn't have been particularly well suited to a Senate race.

The next day, Neal wrote to Cory, "I am not presently inclined to do this, but I will think about it and pray about it." For reasons he had a hard time expressing, he wasn't feeling the same "fire in his belly" about political office even this one that he might have felt even two or three years earlier. Still, the offer of Senator Bennett's total support blew a little oxygen on whatever sparks remained of that fire. So he went to see President Lee, who "was gentle and nondirective in his counsel, leaving the decision to me," though Neal sensed that he "wasn't that excited about my running." Then an experienced campaign manager called Neal to say he knew of Bennett's idea, and he wanted to help. He assured Neal that fund-raising would be no problem, and he thought he could win.

Meanwhile, the Senator went to see President Lee himself. By mid-December, Neal hadn't heard what came of that meeting, and he "wasn't too keen about asking" about it. Because being commissioner was a professional appointment, not a Church calling, he knew President Lee wasn't likely to tell him what to do. He wrote Cory that his prayer was, "I'll go where You want me to go." In a few days, he flew to Israel on a BYU tour, having promised Senator Bennett an answer soon. While traveling, he found a time to offer a special prayer for guidance, in which he said his own judgment was not to run, but he was willing if he should. He soon felt, definitely, that he shouldn't pursue it and that was that, even though Senator Bennett went to see President Lee again in March of 1973 "to make one last effort to see if I can be 'encouraged' to run for the Senate, [but] I am still content with my decision."

Some of Neal's closest friends thought this might have been a kind of Abrahamic test for him. Others were more matter-of-fact about it. Liz Haglund said, "If the Lord has your heart, you know what to do." And that's how it was for Neal. Her comment suggests an apt line from Neal's general conference talk in October 2000: "Discipleship may keep the honors of the world from us. As Balak told Balaam, 'I thought to promote thee unto great honour; but, lo, the Lord hath kept thee back from honor' (Num. 24:11-12)."

Within less than a year, Neal would be tested again, in an even more poignant way. Harold B. Lee, now President of the Church, told Neal in the fall of 1973 that he had "made up his mind to call [him] as an Assistant to the Twelve." At the time, that office was a lifetime calling as a General Authority of the Church. Neal was "surprised but said nothing to anyone, including Colleen." He thought a formal call might be extended at October conference, but no call came. President Lee repeated his intention after conference, and Neal didn't know what to say in response, so he said nothing.

Then on December 26, 1973, after serving as President of the Church for only eighteen months, President Lee died of a sudden illness at age seventy-four. The entire Church was stunned, having expected he would serve many years as the Lord's prophet. Most people felt as did President Spencer W. Kimball, who said at President Lee's funeral, "A giant redwood has fallen." "I never thought it could happen." On December 27, Neal wrote to Cory:

It is my sad duty to inform you . . . of the death of President Lee. . . .

I feel a special sense of bereavement because of the special relationship which it has been my privilege to have with this great and marvelous man. In many ways, he was like a second father to me. . . . [The last time I saw him alive,] his parting words to me were to tell that lovely queen, Colleen, of his love for her. . . .

As a family, as soon as we heard the news we knelt in [a] prayer [of] gratitude for [his] memory and powerful example. . . .

Yet I know that no man comes to the presidency of the Quorum of the Twelve who has not been foreordained to that task, and so President Kimball will bring his own specially impressed stamp to [the Church].

The last line in this letter restates the conviction Neal had shared with President Lee a short while earlier when Joseph Fielding Smith passed away and the prophetic mantle fell upon Harold B. Lee. On July 5, 1972, Neal had written him, "No man can come to the task you will assume who is not so foreordained, and in the soberness of these special hours you are entitled to that reminder." Reflecting the closeness of their relationship, President Lee mentioned this note, but not the name of its author, when speaking at President Smith's funeral: "I had a comfort from one who wrote [about the foreordination of those called to lead the Church]. If I didn't believe that, I wouldn't dare stand . . . where I am today."

President Lee's death brought Neal to his knees with sorrow. He really had lost a kind of father figure, and it had happened with awful suddenness. By now they had worked so intimately together on CES and regional representative matters that, for a time, Neal must have felt he'd lost not only his personal tutor but also his liahona of direction for the Church's future. It had motivated Neal to his soul's depth that this man for whom he had such respect had "trusted me so much," and that trust had moved Neal to "work so hard for him."

After the shock wore off a little, Neal couldn't keep himself from wondering what it meant, that President Lee had said he planned to call him as a General Authority. He was grateful he'd not mentioned it to anyone. He assumed that the likelihood of such a call had perished with President Lee. In January, as he was seeking some spiritual confirmation about that conclusion, Neal was in far-off New Zealand on CES business, having spent the day at the Church college near Hamilton. He was "weary and tired and missed Colleen and the family." Late that evening, "the sweetest spirit of reassurance and serenity came over me, [that] the Lord appreciated my labors . . . and was mindful of my concerns." He was at peace.

Within a few weeks, Neal and Colleen drove with President and Sister Romney to BYU to attend a meeting announcing that the expanded library would carry President Lee's name. With no forewarning, President Romney asked Neal if he had told President Kimball what President Lee had said about his call as a General Authority. Neal, very startled, said he hadn't mentioned it to anyone. Have you told President Tanner? No. President Romney seemed surprised. President Lee had obviously told him, as his counselor in the First Presidency, what he had said to Neal.

Soon President Kimball invited Neal to his office. He asked him to be frank and relate what President Lee had said to him. Neal answered his questions, making it clear he did not regard the conversations as a call. Then one evening just before conference, April 4, 1974, President Kimball, unannounced, visited the Maxwell home. He said he had parked down the street so no one would know he was there. Neal, who seemed to have a hard time being dressed with the formality appropriate for such occasions, was in a sport shirt and slacks with bare feet. (In 1981, President Kimball would call him to the Twelve while Neal was in a hospital bed.)

Neal hurriedly put on his slippers, and President Kimball extended an official call for him to serve as an Assistant to the Twelve. He was to remain as commissioner of education but would now also begin a regular routine of stake conferences and other purely ecclesiastical assignments. President Romney liked to remind Neal that the call was originally issued by Harold B. Lee. However the call was issued, President N. Eldon Tanner wrote to Neal, "There is no doubt that the Lord called you to this position."

When Neal was sustained as a General Authority, he had been commissioner nearly four years. His call seemed to give the First Presidency's stamp of approval to what he'd been saying and doing in the Church Educational System. It also assured those who had come to appreciate his attitudes and gifts that his influence in Church leadership would extend well beyond his interests in education.

Commissioner Maxwell had come to the stage of Church history at a time of unprecedented growth in the proportion of Church members who were college graduates. His visibility and example, along with that of the other CES leaders he brought to the attention of Church leaders, thus came at a time of increasing need among younger Latter-day Saints for role models whose lives would illustrate how to combine the worlds of the spirit and the intellect within the framework of a faithful gospel perspective.

Neal himself lived through, and so his own story illustrates, the transformation of American culture into an information-based society in the last half of the twentieth century. This vast change, enhanced and often fueled by increased educational opportunity, was accompanied by a postwar "baby boom" that magnified the social and economic effects of all the other changes. The birth rate in the United States nearly doubled between 1936 and 1957, from 2,315 babies per 10,000 population to 4,308. This demographic bulge has since moved through history like a python trying to consume a pig, fueling demands for education and many other needs and forces in the consumer society as never before. And the children of the baby boomers spiked the demand for college enrollments all through the decades of the seventies, eighties, and nineties, which included much of the enrollment pressures at BYU. Historian William Manchester wrote of this education-driven epoch:

The sociological implications of this can hardly be exaggerated. In 1900 only 4 percent of Americans of college age were enrolled in a college or university. In 1957, the figure was 32 percent; when Kennedy . . . died [in 1963] it was 50 percent. . . . Between 60 and 70 percent of all Americans belonged to the middle class [which was] swiftly becoming the only class, the values of which were those which had once belonged to a small, highly educated upper middle class.

These cultural forces thrived on, even depended on, the increased availability of higher education. More recent data show that college enrollments in the United States tripled from 1947 to 1967 and then doubled again between 1967 and 1997. Some 2.3 million students were enrolled in 1947, and within fifty years, that number rose to 14 million.

The emphasis on education among Latter-day Saints visibly hastened these strong national trends in the Church. The number of eighteen-year-old Latter-day Saints in the United States and Canada nearly doubled from 56,000 in 1978 to 91,000 in 1998. Of this number, more than half attended college.

Among the general population, the nation's greater participation in higher education has tended to reduce religious belief because of the pronounced secularization of American society. This was a trend Neal Maxwell worried about and discussed often during his years at the University of Utah, in CES, and thereafter. As co-ed dormitories came to replace the old in loco parentis philosophy on American campuses, it was clear to all that the country's mores were changing. Secularization also meant that, as more people accepted higher education's nonreligious explanations of history and science, traditional religious ideas and standards simply enjoyed less social acceptance.

No wonder, then, that Thomas O'Dea would in 1957 wonder if "by encouraging [higher] education and giving it a more central place in both its own activities and its world view, Mormonism exposed itself more vulnerably to the danger" of a general intellectual apostasy. In this atmosphere, he speculated, educated LDS youth might be less willing to accept Church authority and less likely to believe literal interpretations of scripture. O'Dea had historical support for his concern, because highly educated people have "frequently been in the vanguard of . . . the 'secularization of culture,'" challenging religion's "fundamental viewpoints." And by the late twentieth century, the majority of Americans embraced these secular values, which "had once belonged [only] to a small, highly educated middle class."

What O'Dea might not have anticipated was that many of those young Latter-day Saints, who typically came from a background of "rural and quite literal Mormonism" to the nation's campuses, would emerge having mastered the intellectual world but with their literalistic religious commitments actually strengthened rather than weakened by their educational experience. Indeed, reliable research now shows that the greater the educational attainment of a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the higher will be the level of that member's church activity a phenomenon that runs counter to the experience of other religious groups, for whom higher levels of education usually mean a lower level of religious commitment.

Neal Maxwell was only one of this number, but he was a very visible one, drawing on his rural pioneer heritage to give not only intellectual but also spiritual leadership to a community of believing teachers and students who turned a potential source of conflict into a source of strength. Neal and the others did this not by finding some clever way to outwit or avoid the authority and scriptural literalism of Church doctrine. Quite the contrary. Neal's unqualified acceptance of that authority and literalism let him put his own intellectual experience into a larger, spiritually based perspective. Then he found not only that education isn't a barrier to the religious life but that faithful Church members really can use education to enhance their spiritual contributions.

The apparent conflict between submissiveness to religious authority and the independence fostered by a liberal education creates a paradox that can seem difficult to resolve until one sees the paradox resolved positively in the lives of real people, whose actual experience demonstrates both a stronger spiritual life and a more disciplined intellectual life. O'Dea himself saw that point, in the epilogue he wrote after he had first described the risks of more education to the Latter-day Saints. He put his questions to a small group of LDS graduate students at Harvard and "asked them what they really thought." Their informal, personal responses were "more persuasive than any analysis could possibly be." The students showed "thoughtfulness" and "awareness" in demonstrating creative "vitality." "Mormonism was meaningful to them," wrote O'Dea. "Their testimony must be admitted as eloquent."

Because personal resolutions are "more persuasive" than "analytical" ones, the best way for LDS students to grow through the natural paradox of freedom versus authority is to have a good teacher a mentor, whose modeling they can watch and follow. Usually such mentoring occurs in a personal, student-teacher relationship of the kind Neal had with G. Homer Durham or Harold B. Lee. Former BYU social science dean Martin Hickman once said that he and Neal had both been among "Homer's boys" as students in the U political science department. Those young apprentices, said Martin, didn't all want to be political scientists like Homer, but they all did want to emulate his "striving for excellence," which for Homer embodied both spiritual and intellectual values.

Martin compared Homer's influence on his "boys" to Neal's influence on Latter-day Saint college students generally, both as commissioner of education and in his Church assignments. Martin could see how in the modern age, in which books and television provide broad access to the thought and influence of individual leaders and thousands of Latter-day Saint college students need mentoring, Neal has become

a legend in the Church for the depth of his thought, his knowledge of the scriptures, the elegance of his language . . . , and for his compassion for those in and out of the Church who need comfort. . . . What G. Homer Durham did in the way of counsel and guidance for students [at the U] Neal Maxwell now provides for a generation of young Latter-day Saints, who come not only from the valleys of the Wasatch front but from the continents and isles of the sea.

Elder Alexander Morrison, an emeritus General Authority, described how Elder Maxwell has had that kind of influence on his life. Elder Morrison was once assistant deputy minister in Canada's federal health department. He first knew Neal in the same long-distance way that most Church members know him, but then they came into a few years of closer association. For him, Neal's "ability to have a foot in the camp of the intellect and a foot in the camp of faith" is a "great example of how" educated and professional "people can make sense of the secular world." Neal's whole approach shows that faith and intellect "are totally compatible and acceptable," especially when combined with his "personal example of humility and love and kindness." He has discovered that Neal

has a respect for the intellectual life [but] he's not intimidated by scholars. They see him as one of their own . . . but he doesn't fawn all over them either. He sees the inability of the human mind to explain everything in rational terms. So, for him, the intellect builds on a foundation of faith rather than replacing faith. . . .

His faith sustains him, but his intellect gives him . . . immense joy. Highly educated Church members have had his example before them, and they see a kind of spiritual kinship with him.

Elder Marlin K. Jensen of the Seventy has felt similar impressions about Elder Maxwell. For Elder Jensen, when someone so gifted has "ranged widely over the field of human knowledge" and believes so deeply in the Lord and the scriptures, "it is a great boost to my own faith when he . . . teaches and bears testimony." Because Neal is so cosmopolitan and can "respond to . . . the tough questions" while being "so secure in his own faith," he offers a "personal example of intellectual curiosity through a lifetime," enfolded in "a wholeness of Christian living."

Neal's mentoring of this kind is not limited to those who know him personally. Just one example is Craig Raeside, a young stake president in Australia who is a practicing psychiatrist. He once said it had been difficult for him to find mentors in the Church in Australia who could help him see how to put the gospel and his family first while also serving effectively in a demanding professional field. Then he said he did have one mentor Neal Maxwell and that mentoring has all come through talks and books: "I began to realise that I was being taught the scriptures, one on one, by an Apostle of the Lord, through the Spirit."

Craig has met Neal only twice. When Craig was twenty-four, he saw Elder Maxwell briefly at a stake conference priesthood leadership meeting. There, "with the impertinence of youth," Craig asked Neal why the plot in one of his books "seemed to get a bit lost in the middle." The second time was a quick handshake at a general conference just before Craig was called to be stake president. Then, as he read more deeply in the scriptures and in Neal's writings, he "started to see things in similar ways. I developed a great love for the scriptures and for the Savior . . . and a great love for the Brethren."

Over time, he has noticed that Neal has "tended to focus ever more on . . . truly Christ-like [personal] qualities." Finally, encouraged by a mutual friend, Craig wrote Neal the only letter he's written him, which ended, "You truly have been and are a close personal mentor for me. . . . Your instruction, your example, your testimony are precious to me. I hope to be able to do justice to the things you have given me."

These observations from such individuals as Martin Hickman, Elder Morrison, Elder Jensen, and President Raeside are not so much tributes as illustrations of the way Elder Maxwell has contributed to the lives of Latter-day Saints near and far, not only reassuring Church leaders about the value of education but reassuring educated Church members about the value of the spiritual life. Elder Dallin Oaks was once asked how he thought Neal has most helped educated Church members become followers of the Savior. Is it the way he writes or speaks, or is it more the content of what he says? Said Elder Oaks,

Probably it is his personal example, more than any other thing. Anyone who knows him knows that he is an intellectual in the best sense of that word always pushing to learn, always reading, always thinking, always using his critical faculties. And yet he has become a remarkably humble man, remarkably meek, a prototypical disciple of Christ.

With or without an extensive educational background, the best way to teach discipleship is to live it.
