Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Student Ward Bishopric

Neal's secretary at the university, Edith Bronson, typically described his 1970 appointment as commissioner of Church education as "going to the Church." To her, that's how it felt. She continued working for Neal as they moved from the University of Utah to the Kennecott Building in downtown Salt Lake City, where the Church Educational System was housed until the new high-rise Church office building was completed two years later.

With Neal switching from blue shirts and sports jackets to white shirts and dark suits, with office meetings now opening with prayer, and with a calendar of frequent appointments with General Authorities, it might have felt to Edith like stake conference every day. It was clearly a watershed time for Neal, but he'd actually been gravitating toward ever more involvement with the Church and its leaders for several years.

When the Maxwells moved back from Washington, D.C., in 1956, they bought a small home on Evergreen Avenue in the East Millcreek stake, not far from where Neal had grown up. Their stake president the first two years was Gordon B. Hinckley, though they had little personal contact with him. Neal served briefly in ward callings, including helping other members construct a chapel across the street from their home a task he felt ill-equipped to do: "A few of the bent nails still in that roof are mine. I wasn't much help."

The Church also expected the ward to help pay for its new chapel. Neal and Colleen responded, gladly, if gulping slightly, when their bishop asked if they could contribute, in addition to their tithing, an amount equal to 10 percent of their annual income. When the Church later began to construct chapels entirely from churchwide tithing donations, Neal applauded, though he also wondered if "we could have lost something in the process" of reducing the sacrifice expected of faithful members.

In 1957, Oscar McConkie was made bishop of one of the first two student wards at the University of Utah, and he called Neal to be his counselor. Student wards had just been introduced at Brigham Young University, where Ernest Wilkinson would later say this concept was the most important innovation to occur during his BYU presidency. Oscar McConkie and Wilford W. Kirton Jr., who were partners in the law firm that did most of the Church's legal work, had served in a stake presidency together near the University of Utah campus. When they heard about the BYU student wards, they went to see Elder Henry D. Moyle of the Twelve, assuring him that there were "fit candidates for salvation at the University of Utah." Elder Moyle encouraged them to create a student ward in their stake, adapting normal programming to the needs of university students. They hadn't the slightest idea how to approach the task but thought they had a relatively blank check to find the best format.

Looking back, Neal felt the idea of student wards was inspired. He thought that if all those Latter-day Saint college students after World War II "could have been somebody's counselor in a Church calling when they were students," the Church might have avoided the "needless hemorrhage" of many promising young people during that era. In student wards, they would see their inquisitive but believing friends develop their religious faith honestly, fearlessly, and successfully under the tutelage of experienced bishopric and Relief Society leaders.

Elder Moyle and Elder Richard L. Evans, also of the Twelve and a member of the board of regents at the university, took a special interest in the U of U wards. Elder Evans set Neal apart as a member of the bishopric and occasionally spoke at ward functions. Once President Hugh B. Brown, then of the First Presidency, was scheduled to speak to the students. When he was delayed, Elder Evans "warmed up the crowd" until President Brown arrived.

Neal had first met Elder Evans just after his mission, when Neal occasionally assisted Elder Evans and Elder Marion D. Hanks in their assignment to oversee the program for visitors to Temple Square. As a regent at the university, Elder Evans also saw Neal in his various university roles. Elder Evans had been unusually close to his own mentor, Elder John A. Widtsoe, whose approach to the relationship between higher education and the Church had long been a role model that shaped Neal's views. Neal's friendship with Elder Evans and his admiration for Elder Evans's eloquent style of speaking and writing kept that same model alive.

Bishop Oscar McConkie's innovative approach to student wards sometimes surprised certain general Church officers. When the Presiding Bishopric called in the McConkie bishopric and some BYU bishoprics to ask how the regular Church youth manuals were working in the student wards, Oscar said they'd found the manuals less than relevant, so they had designed their own curriculum. As others in the group looked on in mild shock, a member of the Presiding Bishopric said, "Well, I'm glad there's somebody here who agrees with me." President N. Eldon Tanner offered similar support for program flexibility in student wards, calming the anxieties of some general auxiliary leaders.

Oscar found that thirty-year-old Neal, with all his talent, was still in the early stages of his development. He was sometimes "not sympathetic to those who didn't catch on quickly," but over time he learned from experience. His conscious effort to "cultivate Christian works" prompted him to develop more kindness and empathy. For example, if Neal stated "some political maxim in a bishopric meeting and I didn't get" it immediately, "he'd look at me like I wasn't bright enough to understand . . . and he was probably right." Another time, Oscar visited a graduate student who was estranged from the Church. When he told the bishopric about the visit, Neal, perhaps wanting to empathize with the student's perceptions, said, "So when he decided that Jesus didn't want him for a sunbeam, he quit." Oscar found this an early reflection of Neal's impatience with people who criticized the Church without understanding it.

A key experience that expanded Neal's compassion was his call as bishop of a student ward from 1959 to 1962. In that capacity, he learned to delegate administrative functions to his counselors so he could spend the hours needed to counsel young ward members who were dealing with behavioral or intellectual challenges. Often, though not always, he found that an intellectual issue masked a behavioral one. When he didn't know the answer to some intellectual puzzle, he would say something like, "I don't know. But what do you think about the Book of Mormon?" Or, "Is this something you're going to let keep you from being touched by the rest of the gospel?" His ward members learned and grew from his counseling, and so did he. Neal would later say that being bishop was his most satisfying local Church experience, because he could "touch people's lives directly" and was "present at the moment of truth in an individual's life."

President Olpin, to whom Neal was executive assistant at the U when he was called as a bishop, was bothered about the call, feeling that it risked church-state conflicts between Neal's university and ecclesiastical roles. Neal told the president he saw no conflict and thought his church life was strictly a personal issue. Olpin accepted that response but only until Neal was named dean of students in 1962.

Neal's call as bishop took him away from his home ward, but Colleen compensated for that when she took their children to add a little life and youth and family role modeling to student ward sacrament meetings. Colleen also insisted on inviting all two hundred ward members, a few at a time over many months, to the Maxwell home for Sunday dinner.

Bishop Maxwell was a proactive shepherd for his flock of single and married students. When he might have been sitting on the stand in the minutes before ward meetings started, he was probably still standing in front of the chapel, hoping to catch someone walking by from one of the nearby sorority or fraternity houses. He collected information from Church headquarters showing him the names and addresses of Latter-day Saint students who lived within the ward's large boundaries, and then he and other ward leaders would call on them to invite them to come join with the ward. One of the people he touched in such a visit was Michele Monay, who would become the wife of Larry Staker, the physician who, years later, was so close to Neal when he first learned he had leukemia.

Neal learned for himself about the workings of inspiration while watching his congregation, from the stand or in hallway conversations. Then he'd follow up on these impressions, sometimes telling a student, "I don't know why, but I have a feeling you and I need to talk." And he would learn in the quiet privacy of those talks about walking the road to repentance or about clearing up some doctrinal misconception. Sometimes these ward members wrote back, years later, thanking him for interventions that turned out to be life-altering.

From these experiences, he discovered he needed a slower, more flexible interview schedule, because these were human issues, not just tasks on a list. He also found that he needed to wait, listen, and interact, resisting his urge to give quick, direct answers. Yet whatever he learned about ministering more effectively, he also saw that he couldn't hold every marriage together or ignite every wavering testimony. But he did learn to take every personal problem seriously, and that alone expanded both his vision and that of the people he counseled.

Bishop Maxwell found that the gospel, applied person by person, was the heart of his work, not the activities that sometimes appeared to be the ward's main function. A young woman once told him, "Bishop Maxwell, we don't need more activities. We need the gospel." He also found that questions from busy graduate students about accepting a Church calling were more about faith than about time schedules, even though he followed President Moyle's counsel about helping Latter-day Saint students take school seriously. As the proportion who accepted ward callings gradually increased, he saw how student wards helped to increase faithfulness among educated members throughout the Church.

While Neal was bishop, Elder Harold B. Lee of the Twelve visited their stake on an assignment. During that visit, Oscar remembers, Elder Lee placed a hand on Neal's shoulder and whispered to President McConkie, "The Lord has great things in store for this young man."
