Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Early Years as a General Authority 1974-81

Forty

Called to His Ministry

The day of Elder Maxwell's call as an Assistant to the Twelve April 4, 1974 was one of those hinge days on which the doors of history turn; not because Neal was called then, but because of two other events that same day which expressed, both literally and symbolically, the dawning of a new era. One could almost hear the surrounding rocks tumbling as "the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands" suddenly began rolling faster. With a burst of new momentum, one sensed the stone would now surely "roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth" (D&C 65:2).

The literal part that day was Spencer W. Kimball's first talk as President of the Church to the regional representatives. It would become known as The Talk about missionary work. No one who heard it would ever forget having been there. Ezra Taft Benson, President of the Twelve, said of it, "No greater address has been given before any seminar. . . . There is in very deed a prophet in Israel." A few days later, Neal wrote to Cory that this was "the greatest speech on the Church's responsibility to missionary work . . . that I have ever heard! He is truly going to insist that the Church preach the Gospel to all nations of the world. It was a dramatic and historical moment."

The themes that flowed from this talk, that day and in the months afterward, soon became household phrases throughout the Church: Every worthy young man should serve a mission. Every country should supply its own missionaries. Pray for the Lord to open the doors of the nations. As soon as the Church is ready, the Lord will open the doors. The Saints must prepare. Is anything too hard for the Lord? Do it.

The symbolic part was that, with no planning, during the same hour when President Kimball was delivering this message, Grant Romney Clawson was painting a huge new mural on the wall just outside the meeting room where the prophet spoke. Protected by a massive plywood barrier typical of construction projects, Clawson was painting a scene twelve feet high and seventy-five feet long, depicting the Savior commanding His disciples just before His Ascension, "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations" (Matthew 28:19). The painting was an enlargement of an original work by Harry Anderson. It would permanently adorn the east wall of the main lobby in the twenty-six-floor Church Office Building.

That mural would become nearly as well known throughout the Church as President Kimball's teachings on missionary work, and nothing could more aptly capture the central message of his presidency. This scene formed the backdrop for the globalization of the Church, which President Kimball's teachings so dramatically accelerated. Following in the wake of this primary thrust came several major changes attendant to his central message, including the organization of the First Quorum of the Seventy, the clarification of ecclesiastical and temporal lines of authority, the three-hour block of Sunday meetings, and the revelation that the priesthood is available to every worthy male.

On such a day and in such an historical context, the Lord's servants called Neal Maxwell to His full-time ministry. It was a fitting context not only because Neal had been present at the time of other recent changes but also because the vision of his own journey of discipleship would now begin to expand, reaching for the contours that would guide the increasingly global Church.

In setting Neal apart on April 7, President Kimball blessed him that "you may use your unusual talents to build up the kingdom; that you may even have increased powers . . . to help spread the work about the world." He should "continue your closeness to your Heavenly Father, to bear witness." He was no longer the staffer or the educator but a full-time, set-apart servant of the Lord. That would expand him spiritually, but it would also require more discipline, as his general discipleship took on the more focused character of "called" discipleship: "Behold, I am a disciple of Jesus Christ. . . . I have been called of him to declare his word among his people, that they might have everlasting life" (3 Nephi 5:13).

The call introduced Neal to a new relationship with the members of the Church. He remained commissioner of education for two more years, but he began seeing the Church with fresh eyes. One colleague in Church Education said Neal didn't change his style of leadership, but "you could see the mantle of his call in his more overt spirituality." Now when he went to stake conferences, he felt an added degree of responsibility that he hadn't felt as a regional representative. When he was assigned to interview prospective missionaries whose worthiness was questionable, for example, he had to make the final decision about whether they would serve. He "felt the weight of that" duty "about as much as anything."

Along with his assignments in CES, his days now included telephone calls from stake and mission presidents about Church policy issues and personal worthiness issues involving members or missionaries. Often these were calls about matters not already clear in Church handbooks; otherwise, the call wouldn't have been necessary. As time went on, Neal was grateful for so much variety in his counseling diet, from very hard problems to spiritually poignant moments. His duties did not require that he deal only with difficult cases all day; if they had, he might have experienced burnout, which he once said is "caused by staring too long into the abyss of abnormality."

Among his more spiritually demanding experiences was the preparation of his general conference talks. When he was first called as an Assistant to the Twelve, all General Authorities spoke in each conference. His speaking style was so distinctive that some of his early talks left conference audiences a little breathless. They weren't accustomed to such phrases as "Included in the awful arithmetic of the Atonement are my sins." Or "The living of one protective principle of the gospel is better than a thousand compensatory government programs which are, so often, like 'straightening deck chairs on the Titanic.'" Or, "Hearts 'set so much upon the things of this world' are hearts so set they must first be broken."

Neal's conference talks reached out to all Latter-day Saints more broadly than when he had spoken as commissioner. One memorable early example was "Why Not Now?" in October 1974. He spoke to those "who fully intend, someday, to begin to believe or to be active in the Church. But not yet! . . . They will not come inside the chapel, but neither do they leave its porch." In his tender yet piercing invitation, he said, "If, however, you really do not wish to commit now," then let me warn you:

Do not look too deeply into the eyes of the pleasure-seekers about you, for if you do, you will see a certain sadness in sensuality, and you will hear artificiality in the laughter of licentiousness. Do not look too deeply . . . into the motives of those who deny God, for you may notice their doubts of doubt. . . . Do not think too much about what you are teaching your family, for what in you is merely casualness about Christianity may, in your children, become hostility. . . . Do not think, either, about the doctrine that you are a child of God, for if you do, it will be the beginning of belonging. . . . Joshua didn't say choose you next year whom you will serve . . . 'Not yet' usually means 'never.'"

As a stake conference visitor, Neal's approach was informal, especially in the Saturday training meetings for leaders. Someone who was in a meeting during one of Neal's conference visits to Canada in the late 1970s said that Elder Maxwell encouraged "a great deal of group participation." He would move "into the audience and roam around with a traveling microphone" that involved people as he taught them. He was also "very receptive to whatever people had to say," and he conveyed "spiritual receptivity and humility" in moving the discussion toward the point of his intended message.

He would work at getting to know the stake presidents he visited, often teaching them about family priorities and leadership in ways they didn't quite expect. One Utah stake president said that as he and Elder Maxwell began a conference weekend with some time scheduled just for the two of them, Neal asked, "What would you be doing if I weren't here today?" The stake president said he would be "over in the school gym, watching my son play basketball." Neal's quick response was, "Let's go." So they went to the gym and sat "with the rest of the overzealous parents" and watched till the game ended. Then Neal met the young men and their coach. And the stake president learned "a lesson for a lifetime" about being a father.

In the stake presidency meeting, Neal put the brethren through an exercise that drew on his leadership training background. He showed them a diagram with a shield called "My Personal Crest," which was divided into four quadrants. Using that model, he had each man sketch a representation of what he would do if he had unlimited resources, a significant accomplishment in his life, and a truth he held dear. In the fourth quadrant, each was to describe himself in three words. As one by one the members of the stake presidency explained their answers, the stake president said, "We became more introspective, shared more, and became more intimate as a stake presidency" than they had in years.

In his later ministry, Neal was less likely to do this kind of exercise, because, over time, he found himself gravitating more exclusively toward scriptures, doctrine, and core spiritual insights about family life and the Savior. But he still maintained his instinct to mentor stake presidents quietly and personally, as the need arose. Once after he became a member of the Twelve, for example, he sensed that a stake president was worried that Neal had come as the conference visitor to release him because of difficulties associated with his daughter's troubled marriage. Neal soon realized that his main mission that weekend was not "to increase the home teaching by two percent" but to reassure the stake president "that the Lord loved him and needed him." So, among other gentle things, he played basketball with the stake president's son.

One of Neal's early assignments as a General Authority was to serve on the Church's Special Affairs Committee, which dealt with public communications issues. This combined his new Church perspective with his personal background. Elders Hinckley and Faust had led this committee until Elder Faust was sent to Brazil in 1975. Then Neal began working with Elder Hinckley. It was a natural spot for Neal, because he had previously accumulated much experience about civic matters and the people involved in them.

He continued to address civic groups, even though he now spoke as a general officer of the Church. In the late 1970s, for example, he addressed the Utah Conference on U.S. Social Security, the Utah Association of Counties, a governor's conference on Energy and Economic Development in Mississippi, and various Utah education groups. In these venues, Neal would quote some of his favorite lines about how to maintain limited government, such as, "If we are to restrain governments, we must first restrain ourselves." Or he would quote Will Rogers, who said he was thankful we don't get all of the government we pay for. Or Thomas Jefferson, who warned that government shouldn't attempt to do more good than the public can bear.

He often linked governmental themes with his concern about secularism: "Secularists so often define 'good' as being more . . . creature comforts. [And yet] the governmental scratching goes on even after the [social] itching has stopped." With American society becoming more secular, he saw that when religious values wane, somehow government surges. "A religion of ten thousand regulations has emerged in place of the Ten Commandments." Thus, "it is increasingly difficult to render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's and also to render unto God that which is God's because Caesar is asking too much."

Neal took opportunities to encourage Church members to be involved in civic affairs, rather than simply trembling on the sidelines, "filled with Martha-like anxiety about America." He commended the two-party system, urging Latter-day Saints to get involved, not waiting for others to create the political options and choices among candidates. "Going the second citizen mile includes not only Church service, but community service as well." These themes and attitudes had taken shape in Neal's mind years earlier.

His insight on public affairs issues helped the Brethren in what proved to be an unusually busy season. Traditionally, the First Presidency has been very reluctant to issue statements on public issues, preferring generally to encourage members to participate as individual citizens and to support the principle of separation between church and state. Between 1977 and 1981, however, a few exceptional cases arose, involving moral issues important enough to warrant official Church comment. These included statements opposing gambling, the Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, and deployment of the MX missile in Utah and Nevada.

Members of the Church arguably played enough of a role to affect in some degree the outcome of the national debate over the Equal Rights Amendment. Congress had approved the proposed constitutional amendment in 1972 and submitted it to the states. By 1980, thirty-five states had ratified it (though five of these later withdrew their ratification), leaving only three (or perhaps eight) more state ratifications needed to achieve the constitutionally required three-fourths majority. This circumstance created considerable pressure on the state legislatures in the remaining states, where Church members and leaders joined in the public discussion without apology. The First Presidency issued statements opposing the ERA in 1976, 1978, and 1980, urging Latter-day Saints to join the public process in their own states. As it turned out, the proposal fell short of obtaining ratification in the necessary thirty-eight states.

As an example of Neal's involvement, he spoke to an anti-ERA rally sponsored by a citizens' coalition in Florida on March 23, 1977. He expressed deep doubts about both the need for and the "safety" of the amendment. He said the action wasn't necessary, given the Constitution's equal protection clause in the Fourteenth Amendment and given the passage of many recent laws against gender discrimination. Of greatest concern, he said, the ERA would deprive lawmakers of their ability to "honor vital differences in the roles of men and women," especially in the family. That could produce "undesired, uncertain, unintended, unforeseen and unwanted consequences" for both family life and society.

Neal had watched the Brethren at close range for years, so he was fairly realistic about his new role. He'd seen their relentless travel schedules enough that, in his first general conference talk, he quoted Elder Richard L. Evans a little wistfully, "Have you ever gotten homesick on the way to the airport?" And he understood that he was, in some ways, less free now to dart across organizational lines or propose special projects. "There is such an important sense of seniority and protocol within the ranks of the General Authorities," said Elder Holland, "that you really defer to quorum relationships." When "Neal was a staffer, so to speak," he could more easily be called on and used by other leaders for a variety of "freelance work."

Once Neal helped prepare an agenda of challenging issues for discussion by a committee that included several senior General Authorities. When the meeting concluded after a lively discussion, staff members were gathering up a few papers left on the table. At the spot where Neal had been sitting, someone found a paper clip that was bent beyond recognition. "What on earth happened to this paper clip?" he asked. Still in the room, Neal looked at it and said with a little smile, "That's what you do when you're junior [in seniority]."

In another reflection of his realism, Neal attended a meeting in which several of the senior Brethren had been talking about issues related to President Kimball's stirring vision of taking the gospel to countries where the Church was not yet established. After the meeting, someone said, "Is President Tanner all right? He didn't say much, and he seemed a little pensive." Neal noted that President Tanner was responsible to oversee financial support for whatever the Church did. Then he said, "He's okay. He's just thinking about what it will mean to take the Church welfare program to India."

One demanding but elevating dimension of his new call was his growing need, and desire, to find spiritual guidance. He drew assurance from his patriarchal blessing, which told him that "the spirit of testimony may accompany all your acts," and that he would have "the spirit and power of inspiration . . . while representing the Lord in [laboring] for the salvation of mankind," for "there is an invisible power operating between you and the Master."

More experienced Brethren had taught him how to recognize the promptings needed for such lasting decisions as choosing new stake presidents. He wrote Cory, "I know personally that President Lee gets direct guidance from God, because I've been witness to several situations where the outcome made the reality of revelation apparent." As time went on, he was present several times when he knew revelation came to the First Presidency and the Twelve. After sometimes lengthy discussions, perhaps with periods of waiting for weeks or months, "then comes the prophetic intervention. There is a calmness and a serenity . . . even though a few moments before we might have felt differently about a matter."

Sometimes these impressions would come about individuals. "It doesn't have to be spectacular," he said. "It's the personalness of revelation that matters the most." For instance, once he thought he should pray for a woman he knew had cancer but almost instantly felt an inner sense that his prayer wasn't necessary. An hour later, he received a call informing him that she had passed away.

Another time he received a pleading letter from a missionary at the Missionary Training Center, asking if he could write to persuade the missionary's companion not to go home. He placed the letter in his stack of correspondence, planning to respond in due course. Then a feeling came over him that he should write immediately. He called in his secretary, dictated a letter, and arranged for the letter to go to the MTC that day. A few days later, the missionary wrote again. He said his companion had packed his bags and was waiting for a bus, unwilling to talk further with anyone at the MTC. He "went to the mailbox in desperation and there" found Elder Maxwell's letter. He dropped the letter in his companion's lap and left him alone in an office. "He completely broke down. . . . I don't know what went on in there, but ten minutes later he came out," unpacked, and stayed. "I refuse to believe that this is coincidence."

Individual premonitions had played a role when Neal and the CES search committee were looking for new leaders. That process continued in his new assignments. When he was made managing director of the Correlation Department in 1976, for instance, he needed someone to direct the department's new Evaluation Division. As he issued the invitation to assume that role, the man he selected confided that there had been a period a few months earlier when Elder Maxwell kept showing up in his dreams.

Neal also at times felt direction from what he called "the voice in the mind" in preparing his talks or writing, occasionally offering something as specific as a needed phrase or image. Colleen has often been aware of those moments, including experiences when she's been with him at Church gatherings. After hearing him as often as she has, she has sometimes been amazed at a new thought that will come to him to fit the local circumstance. In Neal's words,

Unlike the roar and crash of artillery followed by a delivering silence, these smaller moments involve the Lord's periodic whisperings to my mind. Over the years, these whisperings have guided me and reassured me. They give me . . . sudden strokes of ideas and occasionally the pure flow of intelligence. These moments are as real for me as what happened on Okinawa. These are inward things, often taking the form of a directing phrase. I have found that the Lord gives more instructions than explanations.

At the same time, many spiritual experiences are "not shareable." Neal remembers President Romney's comment that we probably would have more spiritual experiences if we didn't talk so much about them. Sometimes that is because the Lord will "brace or reprove you in a highly personal process not understood or appreciated by those outside the context."

With all of this potential for both service and spiritual growth in Elder Maxwell's new duties, one can easily imagine that Clarence Maxwell might have wanted to write his son as did Mormon to Moroni: "My beloved son . . . , I rejoice exceedingly that your Lord Jesus Christ hath been mindful of you, and hath called you to his ministry, and to his holy work" (Moroni 8:2).
