Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Forty-One

Lengthening the Church's Stride

In the later 1970s, Elder Maxwell told an interviewer that "the volume of 'operational revelation'" in the Church "is at the highest level it's ever been." Much of this was simply the Lord's timing but Neal also felt that some of it was the unique combination of President Kimball's energetic vision, President Tanner's organizational skill, and President Romney's closeness to the Spirit. Whatever the reasons, he felt that the Church had gone for years without seeing decisions of the magnitude it was then encountering on a regular basis. From the recent foundation of President Lee's leadership, which had clarified the principles of correlation, President Kimball launched the international Church so fully that Neal said this "had never happened before on this planet." It was the day of which all the prophets had dreamed, when, for the first time, "the church of the Lamb, who were the Saints of God" were truly "scattered upon all the face of the earth" (1 Nephi 14:12-14).

In the judgment of Elder Bruce R. McConkie, whose service as a General Authority spanned several decades, the three Church developments in his lifetime that would do the most for the Lord's work all occurred within the five years from 1975 to 1980. They were the organization of the First Quorum of Seventy in 1975, the extension of the priesthood to all worthy males in 1978, and the publication of the Latter-day Saint edition of the scriptures beginning in 1979. Elder Maxwell shared particularly in the first two of these events.

The organization of the Seventy was significant because they would eventually become the leaders responsible for operating the daily affairs of the worldwide Church. This step would merge in a new light and a new unity what had earlier been the work of the First Council of Seventy, the Assistants to the Twelve, and the regional representatives. The Seventy, in several quorums, would become the only organizational layer between the stakes and the Quorum of the Twelve. The Area Presidency for each geographic area of the Church would be composed of three Seventies. Members of the First and Second Quorums of Seventy would be full-time General Authorities, and the members of the other quorums would be part-time (like bishops and stake presidents) Area Authority Seventies.

The process of reaching these conclusions, which now seem so natural, actually came one step at a time. President Kimball first announced the creation of the First Quorum in October conference 1975. A year later he expanded the Quorum by releasing the seven-member First Council of Seventy and the twenty-one Assistants to the Twelve, placing all of them in the First Quorum of Seventy. Seven members of the reconstituted First Quorum were then sustained as the Quorum Presidency. One of these was Elder Maxwell. All General Authorities were then members of the First Presidency, the Twelve, the Seventy, or the Presiding Bishopric. Within a decade, stake seventies quorums would be discontinued.

The idea of organizing the First Quorum of Seventy had been under discussion for many years at Church headquarters. The scriptures already authorized such a quorum to "preach the gospel, and to be especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world" (D&C 107:25), acting under the direction of the Twelve "in building up the church and regulating all the affairs of the same in all nations" (D&C 107:34). Seventies had been called and ordained at various times since the Church's early days, often to serve as missionaries. As part of his call to serve a mission, Neal himself had been ordained a seventy in 1946 by Elder S. Dilworth Young, who in 1976 was still serving in the First Council of Seventy.

The Brethren's questions in more recent times had sought to clarify the scriptural role of the Seventy and their relationship to other general and local officers issues that the Church's international growth had now made urgent. Regarding the Seventy, the Lord had revealed to President John Taylor in 1882 that "everything that shall be necessary for the future development" of His kingdom would be given through appointed channels "from time to time." The First Presidency had asked Elder B. H. Roberts of the First Council of Seventy for a memo on the subject in the 1930s. In 1952, Elder John A. Widtsoe wrote about the increasing workload of the Twelve and their Assistants, adding, "The First Quorum of Seventy will no doubt be called into being to help meet the situation." In 1968, the entire First Council of Seventy proposed reconstituting the First Quorum, and they later offered to be released from their callings in the First Council if that would facilitate the Quorum's creation.

In the mid-1970s, the First Presidency asked Elder Boyd K. Packer for a complete review of the subject. Consistent with the Lord's words to President Taylor, during Elder Packer's prayerful homework in the scriptures, he discovered that "the call of a Seventy was not a local priesthood call; rather, it was henceforth to be as the Lord had said; the Seventy 'form a quorum, equal in authority to that of the Twelve special witnesses or Apostles'" (D&C 107:26).

During the summer of 1976, the First Presidency also asked Neal, as managing director of the Correlation Department, for a memo sharing his ideas about the new Quorum. He warmly endorsed the concept, as did others who saw it taking shape. Then, as a member of the Quorum's Presidency, he lived through the first few years of its implementation. As with correlation, the regional representatives, and the Church Educational System, Neal was again present at the creation of some historic steps in Elder Holland's words, he was "clearly involved with the architectural work behind the Quorums of the Seventy concept and what that has become."

The next revealed step was the extension of the priesthood to all worthy males. On Friday, June 9, 1978, the First Presidency and the Twelve called the Seventy and the Presiding Bishopric into a special meeting in the Salt Lake Temple. Here President Kimball announced the culmination of his long pleading to the Lord for guidance about making the priesthood available to every worthy male. As the First Presidency's 1970 statement on civil rights had made clear, this subject had weighed heavily on the minds of previous prophets. But the revelation of which President Kimball spoke in the temple was about more than civil rights. It was the revelatory extension of the spiritual prodding he had felt with great intensity since that monumental 1974 talk to the regional representatives about fully establishing the Church in every nation. In process and direction, the announcement on the priesthood could only be compared with in fact, its effect was a natural step in the revelation Peter received to take the gospel to the gentile world: "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him" (Acts 10:34-35).

Neal was profoundly moved as the group unanimously approved the statement proposed by the First Presidency and the Twelve. As President Kimball invited responses from all who cared to speak, each man responded. As they did, Neal felt a spiritual witness that this step was "revelation, not accommodation. The waves of the Spirit washed over us like surf, and I shed many tears." He gave the tear-soaked handkerchief he used in that meeting to Colleen for safekeeping, without its being washed, as a permanent keepsake from the experience. He later recalled this event as he carried another white handkerchief when he was assigned to create the first stake consisting entirely of black Latter-day Saints.

In his role with the Special Affairs Committee, Neal was assigned to call several people to notify them of the revelation before it was announced publicly. In every case, he couldn't read the statement without weeping again. Then, shortly after the public announcement, Neal received a call about it from the White House. The call came from his friend and former student, Jim Jardine, who was working as a special assistant to Attorney General Griffin Bell in the administration of President Jimmy Carter.

Jim told Neal that President Carter had heard the news and wanted to express his support to the Church. President Carter had met President Kimball on several occasions and developed a friendship with him. Because President Carter didn't understand the entire context of the announcement, he wanted to state his feelings appropriately. His press secretary asked Jim to draft a telegram that President Carter could send to President Kimball. Jim Jardine was calling to read Elder Maxwell his draft and ask for suggestions. After a brief review, "that was the telegram President Carter sent to President Kimball."

Two years later, Neal was asked to put this event into historical and future perspective. He said that the universal extension of priesthood blessings was the step that would move the Church toward true internationalization, making the Restoration's blessings available to everyone. The implications were dramatic. "Major quantitative growth is probably the greatest challenge the Church will face," Neal envisioned. Then would come a hastening of temple building and temple work. He quoted Brigham Young, who said that "there will be hundreds of [temples] built and dedicated to the Lord." Associated with the temple work, Neal expected that the Church would see "Elijah-inspired family research in ways not possible in the painstaking past." Spoken nearly two decades before the Church adopted FamilySearchÂ on the Internet and before its current temple-building era, these were prophetic words.

The Brethren authorized two other changes during this time that visibly influenced the traditional patterns of local congregations. Both changes reflected their concern about the difficulties of carrying the practices of a western U.S. church to the distant parts of the globe. Neal was involved in the deliberations leading to these adjustments.

One change was the shift in 1980 to a three-hour meeting block on Sundays. Before this time, the typical schedule called for priesthood meeting and Sunday School during the morning hours and then sacrament meeting in the afternoon. Relief Society, Young Women, and Primary meetings were usually held on weekdays. That approach was far easier for Church members who lived close to their ward chapels in Utah or Idaho than it was in Asia, Latin America, or elsewhere, where each family's trip to the chapel could place heavy demands on their time and money. This was a time of increased energy costs and gasoline shortages but mostly, as Neal put it, "we're in a global Church. If a Filipino family can [barely afford to] make it to church on Sunday, do you want them to . . . go home and try to come back again for sacrament meeting?"

The other change dealt with the financial demands the Church made of its members. In 1980 Neal was assigned to the Member Finance Committee, which looked at ways of reducing the costs of Church membership. This committee, along with other groups among the Twelve, made recommendations leading to policies that emphasized tithing as the Lord's way of financing His work. This renewed focus on tithing allowed for the elimination of supplemental methods of financing Church costs, such as local building funds, ward budget requests, and welfare assessments.

Elder Mark E. Petersen, whose personal meekness Neal especially admired, chaired the Member Finance committee. "When any credit or praise was passed out, he would, as it were, sit in the corner hoping to be unobserved."

As President Kimball was lengthening the Church's stride, he was also conducting a tutorial in human kindness for Neal Maxwell. Because they had lived in the same ward for a few years, the Maxwells and the Kimballs were well acquainted. But after Spencer Kimball became President of the Church, Neal began to work closely with him on CES matters and then other Church assignments, until their acquaintance bloomed into a personal mentoring relationship. Neal came to see in President Kimball a rare blend of spiritual vision, tireless labor, and an unself-conscious tenderness toward other people. Perhaps because Neal himself shared an instinct for visionary leadership and the energy for constant labor, which helped him develop additional appreciation for the tenderness, his admiration gradually moved toward emulation.

Long before he became President of the Church, the depth of Spencer W. Kimball's work ethic and religious commitments was already legendary. As one child said of him, "When I get big, I want to be like Spencer Double Dependable." But his tender, personal side became more visible to Neal as the two of them drew closer. By 1976, Neal said President Kimball had helped him see that

you just keep going even when you're too tired to keep going. And he has a sweetness in the midst of great firmness. . . . He's taught me the importance of maintenance of relationships in sweetness, as seen in his visiting the sick and afflicted. He's just tireless . . . And there's a kind of innocence about him in that he doesn't realize how special he is. . . . That's a great lesson for me to see. I need to do more of that in my own life.

Seeing and responding to President Kimball's personal example brought Neal into a new apprenticeship a renewed study in self-sacrifice, empathy, meekness, and ministering with compassion to those in affliction. Neal was already seeking these attributes of discipleship, and now he'd found just the right role model for some accelerated course work.

Shortly after President Kimball was sustained in 1974, he attended fast and testimony meeting in his home ward where the Maxwells also attended that day. After enduring a meeting full of tributes to himself, President Kimball stood and expressed his love for the ward members but then he said, as Neal wrote in a letter to Cory, that "as long as he had studied the scriptures, he had never read of any special heaven for General Authorities. He then went on to give a splendid sermonette on the Democracy of the plan of salvation."

Soon the paths of the two men began crossing frequently. Sometimes, as was his self-effacing style, President Kimball would "just show up" at Neal's office and ask, "Is Brother Neal in?" At the end of a letter he wrote Neal about some Church business, he added, "I am mighty glad we have you where you are, with your humility and strength, with your clear thinking and your perfect organization." Another time, he sent Neal a draft of a talk he'd been working on and asked for his comments:

I am wondering if I would dare to ask you to glance it over and see, first, does it have merit, second, have I made any statements that are improper, third, is it too long? . . . I realize . . . you are already so extremely busy, but I have such great confidence in your . . . judgment that it gives me a sense of security to know that you have approved it.

President Kimball sometimes met Neal's early attempts to be similarly self-effacing with his gentle humor. Once when the First Presidency had given a difficult assignment to Neal and Elder James E. Faust, President Tanner said, "President Kimball, I don't think we could find two better men for this task than Brother Faust and Brother Maxwell." Neal responded, "Surely, you can find better men than the two of us." With a smile, President Kimball replied, "Well, while we're looking for two better men, would you two mind going ahead with the job?"

As he watched President Kimball's quiet ministry to sick and other troubled individuals, Neal followed a similar pattern with increasing frequency. He enjoyed recalling a time when President Kimball was in the hospital as a patient himself and his nurses kept having to look for him in other rooms where he had instinctively gone to "visit the sick." Often when Neal whispered to President Kimball that someone they both knew was in the hospital, President Kimball would say, "Yes, I know. I have already been there."

In 1979, while attending his home ward, Neal was seated next to President Kimball on the stand. Just before the meeting started, President Kimball took Neal by the hand and whispered to him, "Do you know that I love you with all of my heart?" The next week, the President asked him, "Do you remember what I said to you last week?"

On a warm spring day in 1982, Cory's wife, Karen, noticed President Kimball sitting in a lounge chair in the yard of his home. She and her children Peter and Emily went over to say hello to him. He took Peter by the hand and kissed it, saying, "I love all my boys. Elder Maxwell is one of the great men of this time." Neal confided these experiences to his personal notes, adding, "He is so marvelous to encourage us all. We feel his love, and we sense that he has no favorites."

When President Kimball passed away in 1985, the Ensign invited Neal to summarize his life and teachings. His article described President Kimball's prophetic vision, the courageous opening of the entire globe to missionaries, his multiple battles against illness and adversity, the revelation on the priesthood. But with all these strengths, it was President Kimball's gentle charity that most captured Neal's heart. He entitled his essay "Spencer, the Beloved: Leader-Servant," noting there "how uniquely beloved" this Church President was, creating a "discernible dimension of affection" for him:

There was a pervasive warmth in [his] ministry . . . the loving but penetrating look of his eyes, his embrace, his holy kiss, his tenderness felt by so many all created a deserved aura about this man, not of unapproachability, but of special warmth. His love was inclusive; no one ever felt left out. [He] epitomized the central virtue in the first two great commandments love of God and of his fellowmen.

Later, when Neal spoke at Camilla Kimball's funeral, he remembered "the authority of [her] example." He said, "President Kimball articulated and demonstrated 'lengthen your stride,' but there were actually two pairs of legs striding." The Kimball marriage, like the Maxwell marriage, was an equal partnership. And Camilla's attributes, many of them like her husband's, were, for Neal and Colleen, worth emulating: "In her meekness she did not fully realize how extensively she had developed Christlike traits."

Disciples learn much from knowing and following other disciples.
