Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Forty-Two

The Correlation Department

As 1976 began, the First Presidency gave Neal a new assignment, in addition to his duties in the Presidency of the Seventy, which soon proved so demanding that it required his release that same year as commissioner of education. He became managing director of the Correlation Department, a new department that had resulted from the First Presidency's continued efforts to streamline the Church headquarters organizations in accordance with the now-familiar principles of correlation. Neal was once again present at the creation of a cutting-edge project, as the Brethren positioned themselves in one more way to understand and to lead a global Church.

The child, youth, and adult correlation committees originally created in the early 1960s focused on age-based curriculum reviews, while other organizational steps such as the regional representatives concept gradually trimmed the size and function of many general boards and committees. The age-based committees were dissolved in 1972 with the creation of the Internal Communications Department, which now directed the preparation of curricular materials for all quorum and auxiliary organizations, using a combination of professional educators and Church-service committees.

These steps were consistent with the correlation principles of both harmonizing and simplifying all Church programs. Prior to this time, the general boards of the priesthood and auxiliary organizations, such as Relief Society or Sunday School, had each written their own lesson manuals, trained local leaders in their programs, and then evaluated "in the field" how the programs were being implemented and how they could be improved. Now, however, these general auxiliary presidencies and boards played a more limited role, giving general input and review to lesson materials prepared by a centralized curriculum department and providing only selective regional training and evaluation.

With this change in place, correlation could take on an additional role first envisioned by Harold B. Lee the "correlation review" of all teaching and training materials to create a "single voice" and "final filter" in communications from Church headquarters to Church members. In 1973, President Lee had called this a plan to "'audit' the teaching materials of the Church" to ensure spiritual security and consistency. His biographer wrote that "this early insight was the forerunner of the . . . Correlation Department," which Neal would now manage. Even in 1973, President Lee already "had in mind the one man who had the vision and the ability to do what was needed in this [correlation review] venture, Elder Neal A. Maxwell."

By 1975 Presidents Kimball, Tanner, and Romney were ready to take this next step. And, as part of a new, centralized process that President Tanner especially had encouraged, they assigned to the Correlation Department two other functions not seen before at Church headquarters: evaluation and long-range planning. The new department with its three divisions reported to the Correlation Executive Committee, then chaired by Elder Mark E. Petersen and including five members of the Twelve plus the Presiding Bishop.

The first division, Correlation Review, was responsible to "audit" for doctrinal and policy consistency all lesson manuals, program changes, handbooks, Church magazines, and any other communications to local Church units from all organizations at Church headquarters. Correlation Review was also charged to find ways to reduce the complexity and volume of Church programs, which meant Neal now found himself having to resist politely the advocacy of some of his General Authority colleagues who were advisers to Church programs or departments. As the years went by, this function became known at Church headquarters simply as "correlation," because every lesson, manual, or magazine article had to "go through correlation" before it was cleared for distribution to the Church.

Some of this function had occurred within Internal Communications since 1972, but by 1975 the Brethren desired a more arm's-length process, separate from the auxiliaries and other "originating organizations." When Neal began managing the department, he kept Daniel H. Ludlow as the director of Correlation Review, a function Dan had already been performing in Internal Communications, aided by Church-service committees. Brother Ludlow, the former dean of Religious Instruction at Brigham Young University, was a walking encyclopedia of Church doctrine and policy, which made him invaluable to oversee such a "final filter" review process.

In his role as managing director, Neal soon developed a few disarming one-liners and stories to help people see the need for this sometimes intimidating review function. He would say that every organization needs a chief skeptic who can ask dumb questions. Or he'd use a military analogy to comment wryly that we need to keep our friendly fire from having a bigger caliber than the fire of our enemies. Sometimes when new programs were proposed, Neal would try to help everyone see that those giving overall direction to Church programs need to be "in on the takeoffs as well as the crash landings." Another favorite was his tongue-in-cheek "apocryphal" account about "how correlation got started in the Church":

A federal army [Johnston's army, in 1857] was sent out here to harass the Saints. The Brethren had decided on a policy of irritation without violence. In keeping with that policy, Porter Rockwell and Lot Smith were dispatched to a distant army camp where Lot . . . was to . . . remove the pins from the army's wagon wheels while Porter . . . was to drive off all of the army's horses. In the dark of night, Lot was busily taking out wagon wheel pins, and Porter war-whooped into the camp and drove off all the horses, including Lot Smith's. Lot later walked wearily many miles back to Church headquarters and reportedly said, "Brethren, we've just got to get correlated."

The other two divisions Planning and Evaluation were brand new, and Neal needed to create them from the ground up. As it turned out, the long-range Planning Division never really got beyond a box on an organizational chart. Neal made some modest efforts to encourage a little long-range curriculum planning, but he sensed early on that the First Presidency and the Twelve were, by their natural, scriptural function, the true organizational planners whose seeric vision would always guide the long-term working of the Church. The idea of having staff people assist with this process in a centralized or "correlated" way had enough merit to be considered, but Neal and the Correlation Executive Committee never felt quite ready to propose a general planning staff.

The Evaluation Division, however, did come into being, and it has remained. Now called the Research Information Division, it employs about thirty full-time professional staff. The initial charge to the Evaluation Division was simple to "evaluate the effectiveness of various Church programs," because the Church was now so large and so diverse that the General Authorities could no longer rely on their own firsthand impressions to know "what is going on in the field." As Neal liked to say about the limits of informal data-gathering processes, let's avoid being "victimized by our own personal impressions and anecdotes." He enjoyed quoting someone who said, "All Indians walk single file; at least, the one I saw did."

So here Neal was again, involved in an interesting new start-up organization that, like some of his innovations in the Church Educational System, would eventually become a routine part of the Church's headquarters work. But when it first began, the Evaluation Division, like some of what he did in CES, required incubation time before it was widely understood and accepted. Neal had always liked having reliable "data" as the "homework" for a large institution, including the Church, to understand what is really happening before making major policy decisions. That was the impulse that had prompted him to ask for demographic projections on Church growth, which helped President Lee to explain the need for the regional representatives. A similar urge had prompted Neal as commissioner to request a study of the educational needs of international Church members, which helped clarify the policy of giving high and rapid priority to religious education rather than simply building more Church schools. This approach was Neal's "analytical vision" at its best.

At the same time, the Church had never used professional researchers in any large-scale, systematic way before. Some senior leaders and department heads were initially quite cautious about the use of social science or organizational behavior methods to study the Church, its programs, and its people. There were good reasons to hesitate. For one thing, the Brethren would need to have complete trust and confidence in the research staff before giving them access to the Church's internal processes. Both institutional and personal privacy issues were at stake in allowing research teams to study Church statistics or interview Church members and leaders with enough depth to yield reliable findings. And a few Latter-day Saint researchers, like some LDS professionals in other fields, had sometimes let their secular training and attitudes take priority over their Church commitments.

For Neal, these issues were similar to what he'd encountered in trying to strengthen the BYU faculty in both teaching and research. He believed that professional research tools in the hands of people who clearly placed the Lord's work first in their lives could be a blessing to the Church. Professionalism, like education, didn't need to be a master that subordinated Church loyalty; rather, Church loyalty was the master and professional tools were the servant. It was second nature to him that research yields only "data about the reality of things out there"; it won't ever "take the place of inspiration or scriptural direction."

Neal was also a realist about the limitations of statistical or other social science research. While he always said he didn't understand math enough to help his children with that part of their homework, he had used research studies enough to know how to spot their implications. He knew the difference, for example, between causation and correlation a crucial factor in knowing what conclusions to draw from research.

Suppose, for example, that statistics show that BYU students are more likely to serve missions than LDS students at other colleges or universities. Neal could explain why that fact alone doesn't necessarily show "causation" that is, it doesn't prove that attending BYU "causes" increased missionary service. It's quite possible that the same spiritual motivation that moves a student to attend BYU may also move him or her to serve a mission. Showing a cause-and-effect relationship would require more careful research that "controls for" the motivation variable, such as comparing the future missionary service of students who want to attend BYU but are not admitted with that of students who want to attend BYU and are admitted. Thus Neal "realizes that data [by] itself is not self-interpreting. It has to be put into a context and utilized."

In the end, it was not Neal's expertise so much as his personal credibility that let him become a two-way bridge of communication between Church leaders and the researchers in the Correlation Evaluation Division. His work as commissioner had earned the trust of both the Brethren and the LDS academic-professional community, and once more, Neal could help each group learn how to work with the other. He understood their worlds, and they understood him. Their confidence in that understanding built their confidence in each other.

To launch the Evaluation Division, Neal asked Bruce C. Hafen to take a two-year leave from his position as a law professor at BYU to help him figure out how the division should function, what kinds of research tools and professional staff to use, and how to approach the evaluation process. Neal got Bruce's name from Dallin Oaks at BYU, where he had worked the previous few years as President Oaks's assistant on special projects that included the staff work to help plan for the new law school. Dan Ludlow and Bruce became the Correlation Department staff, meeting almost daily with Neal and weekly with the Correlation Executive Committee. They were succeeded after about two years by Roy W. Doxey, former dean of Religious Education at BYU, and Stan E. Weed, who had initiated evaluation research for the Presiding Bishopric.

As he'd done with CES and the Church Board of Education, Neal worked hard to build the trust of the Correlation Executive Committee in the evaluation process. He was careful to check basic signals frequently by taking general "reaction papers" to the committee, and he was very selective about both the research projects and the research personnel he recommended. That selectivity was aided by a Church-service Evaluation Correlation Committee composed of both professional researchers and lay Church members who helped ensure consistent quality control.

One of the first studies involved an evaluation of the effectiveness of regional meetings, in which general board members and regional representatives trained stake priesthood and auxiliary leaders. Partly because of these findings, the regional meetings were soon discontinued.

Another early project evaluated the effect of a TV special produced by the Church Public Communications Department. That study found, among other things, that being personally acquainted with a Latter-day Saint creates a more positive impression about the Church on the attitudes of individuals of other faiths than does a TV production.

Still another project examined which items on statistical reports were the most likely to predict overall stake activity or performance levels. The study found, for instance, that the proportion of adult males who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood is the single strongest predictor of a stake's other activity levels, such as attendance at sacrament meeting and youth activities. This work helped facilitate a simplification of the Church reporting system.

A later important study examined the influences that affect the decisions of young men to serve missions. That study, a summary of which was later published in the Ensign, found that children whose parents are married in the temple are five times more likely to serve missions and three times more likely to be married in the temple themselves than are children whose parents have not been married in the temple. It also found that "private religious behavior," such as personal prayer and scripture reading, was a much more reliable predictor of a young man's future missionary service than such "public religious behavior" as attendance at Church meetings.

In addition to undertaking its own evaluation studies, the new division also coordinated the work of other Church departments that were pioneering the use of research techniques to evaluate the effectiveness of training and programs. The Presiding Bishopric's office had already examined the effectiveness of the Church's bishopric training program, and the Missionary Department was using evaluation tools to improve missionary work.

Eventually the Evaluation Division also launched some large-scale, multiyear projects that drew on a series of studies and teams of researchers. A study of the conversion process, for example, looked at differences in the results of proselyting among various missions and countries and under different mission presidents. This project also examined, through personal interviews and other methods, why people moved toward conversion or away from it. The resulting data helped Church leaders consider where to deploy missionaries, how to improve the training of mission presidents and missionaries, and how to revise the missionary discussions.

Although these studies were for the Church's internal use, a few people who are familiar with such organizational research have seen some glimpses of the Church studies. Rodney Stark, a well-known sociologist of religion, wrote in a professional journal that

the research efforts of other denominations shrink to insignificance when compared with the quality, scope, and sophistication of the work of the Mormon social research department. Much of this work is not yet readily available outside the Church. . . . Even if we must wait awhile, what is really important is that the right data are being collected in the right way. . . . Suppose that the Apostle Paul had not only sent out letters, but questionnaires?

As General Authorities and other leaders began to make use of these findings in their own teaching and program assessment, their confidence in the research process also grew until the Research Information Division became a tool of regular use. In retrospect, Elder Oaks believes the Church can thank Elder Maxwell for the utilization of this work, because it is unlikely to have won acceptance without him. As Elder Holland said, "All Neal Maxwell ever wanted to do was work good enough that it spoke for itself." "That's also part of the Maxwell legacy that we're open" to using professional research staff who keep their work in channels and in perspective.

In February 1977 the First Presidency announced a clarification between the "ecclesiastical" role of the Twelve and the "temporal" role of the Presiding Bishopric, which for a short time involved Neal in a delicate task that grew out of his assignment with the Correlation Department. Although his role was temporary, the larger distinction between the ecclesiastical and the temporal arms of the Church has proven significant in supporting its international operations.

The First Presidency made clear that the Twelve were respon-sible for all spiritual or ecclesiastical affairs, including the work of the Seventy, the stakes, and the missions. They also stated that the Presiding Bishopric were responsible for all temporal or logistical support functions, such as physical facilities, finances, records, and translation and distribution of Church materials. Eventually this distinction led to a pattern in which each Area Presidency had the dotted-line support of a local director of temporal affairs who received training and line supervision from the Presiding Bishopric. Thus, the ecclesiastical and temporal functions came together at two points: once in the field at the area level, and once at Church headquarters in the relationship between the Twelve and the Presiding Bishopric.

Elder Maxwell became involved in the headquarters connection when the First Presidency created a Church Planning and Coordinating Council (CPCC). This was to be what Neal called the "junction box," where the ecclesiastical (Quorum of the Twelve) and temporal (Presiding Bishopric) organizational lines came together under the First Presidency's direction. As initially announced in 1977, Neal was the executive secretary to the CPCC, and the Correlation Department was to function as staff to this coordinating group.

This approach was intended to "take correlation to its highest level," arranging a setting in which every Church organization ecclesiastical or temporal would be represented in a planning body. Neal's role reflected the First Presidency's confidence in him, but he soon felt uncomfortable in it. "It was an awkward position to be in," he noted, because the relationship between the First Presidency and the Twelve needed to be direct. Neal finally went to President Tanner to discuss the "administrative awkwardness," which in part arose because he was a General Authority rather than a staff person. Within a few months, Francis M. Gibbons, secretary to the First Presidency, replaced Neal as executive secretary to the CPCC as a natural extension of his duties with the First Presidency.

Over the next few years, the Brethren moved away from the CPCC as they probed various ways to establish the optimal planning and coordinating relationship among the Twelve, the Presiding Bishopric, and in their newly emerging role the Presidency of the Seventy. Eventually the Brethren settled on a "council system." In 1982, the First Presidency created three executive councils that mirrored the three-fold mission of the Church that they and the Twelve had just adopted a Missionary Executive Council (proclaiming the gospel), a Priesthood Executive Council (perfecting the Saints), and a Temple and Genealogy Executive Council (redeeming the dead). This approach brought together the governing quorums, offices, and Church departments in appropriate functional bodies, all under the direction of the First Presidency. The councils found a balance that has functioned well ever since. Each council includes members of the Twelve, the Presidency of the Seventy, and the Presiding Bishopric.

Neal thought the executive councils provided just the kind of headquarters correlation that President Tanner had been looking for when the CPCC was first proposed. Each council brings "together the three entities [the Twelve, the Presidency of the Seventy, and the Presiding Bishopric (PBO)] who, under the direction of the First Presidency, are responsible" for each phase of the Church's interests. As Elder Maxwell chaired the Temple and Family History Executive Council in the 1990s, for example, he saw how representatives from each of these groups contributed uniquely to the process of planning and building temples staff from "temporal" PBO departments concerned with building construction issues, a member of the Presidency of the Seventy from the Temple Department concerned with operating the temples, and members of the Twelve concerned with bringing the spiritual blessings of temple work through the ecclesiastical line to Church members.
