Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

The Apostolic Years 1981-

Forty-Three

The Holy Apostleship

By 1981 Presidents Spencer W. Kimball, N. Eldon Tanner, and Marion G. Romney were in their eighth year as the First Presidency. The channels of continuing revelation had been filled with light during those years, as the Lord seemed to "hasten [His] work in its time" (D&C 88:73), creating the structure and momentum to establish an international Zion. In April conference 1981, the First Presidency announced a new "three-fold mission of the Church," providing a strategic vision that unified their previous statements about worldwide missionary work, the First Quorum of Seventy, universal access to the priesthood, and other globalizing steps.

The mission of the Church is threefold:

To proclaim the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people;

To perfect the Saints by preparing them to receive the ordinances of the gospel and by instruction and discipline to gain exaltation;

To redeem the dead by performing vicarious ordinances of the gospel for those who have lived on the earth. All three are part of one work to assist our Father in Heaven and His Son, Jesus Christ, in Their grand and glorious mission, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39).

After this latest action in their full, even sometimes dramatic, years together, this First Presidency began slowing down. President Kimball had battled against one major health problem after another, and the health of Presidents Tanner and Romney was now seriously declining as well. By July, President Kimball had recovered just enough from recent surgery that he was feeling a restless urge to breathe needed vitality into the First Presidency.

He made up his mind to take the unusual step of calling a fourth member of the First Presidency, Gordon B. Hinckley. And, because of the Church President's key responsibility in choosing a new member of the Quorum of the Twelve, President Kimball decided to act while he could. Rather than wait until October conference, he would call Elder Neal A. Maxwell now to fill Elder Hinckley's place in the Twelve. President Kimball's secretary, Arthur Haycock, wrote of the two calls:

For some time prior to [these] calls, . . . the President had not been at all well. . . . He was very noticeably suffering the effects of . . . his last . . . operation. It seemed difficult for him to concentrate and make decisions. . . . Nevertheless, when he called me into his office to advise that he was naming Elder Hinckley as a member of the First Presidency and Elder Maxwell to the Twelve, his mind was clear and his actions as definite and controlled as [they] had been 30 or 40 years ago. Immediately following [these calls], President Kimball seemed to revert at once to his former condition of . . . general ill health. . . .

In my 46 years of close association with the last six presidents of the Church, . . . this is the greatest testimony of direct revelation I have ever witnessed. . . . There is no doubt in my mind that the Lord strengthened President Kimball in mind and body and . . . inspired him to call [President Hinckley and Elder Maxwell] to their high offices so that His work could continue on.

President Kimball extended the call to Elder Hinckley on Wednesday, July 15. Then he asked his counselors and the Twelve, who were away from their offices for the traditional July recess, to assemble for a special meeting in the Salt Lake Temple on Thursday, July 23.

On July 21, Neal Maxwell was in Salt Lake's Holy Cross Hospital, recovering from minor septal surgery on his nose. This was only the second time Neal had been a patient in Holy Cross Hospital; the first time was the day he was born there, almost exactly fifty-five years earlier. Arthur Haycock called the Maxwell home and then the hospital, where Neal was just out of surgery. After he asked Colleen how Neal was doing, President Kimball came on the line and said he was coming to the hospital. Moved by what she thought was his interest in Neal's health, Colleen thanked him but gently tried to dissuade him from making the effort. "It's not his heart, is it?" President Kimball asked, a little urgently. Colleen assured him it was nothing serious and suggested again that he need not feel he should come. But he was on his way.

Soon Arthur and President Kimball entered Neal's room with an unusual air of urgency, as hospital visits go. Neal, still a little groggy, tried gamely to be cheerful as he fought off the effects of the anesthetic. Brother Kimball bent over to kiss him on the cheek and inadvertently bumped his nose, "which was pretty hard not to do, because it was so swathed in bandages."

After they had exchanged a few kindly words about Neal's condition, President Kimball came quickly to the point. He explained what was happening with Elder Hinckley news that Neal welcomed with great enthusiasm. Then, with loving soberness, he called Elder Maxwell to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. Neal would need to obtain an early release from the hospital to attend the temple meeting two days later, without being able to tell his doctor why he must go.

That night, after Neal had phoned the news to his children, Cory visited the hospital. When he entered the room, Neal was asleep. Cory later wrote to him: "I stood there just looking at you for a minute. . . . It just dawned on me what a great man you are and how much I love you. Tears started welling up in my eyes as I looked at you and thought about all you mean to so many people (and to our Heavenly Father). Just then you stirred and opened your eyes."

When Neal arrived at the temple on Thursday morning, he was ushered into the historic fourth-floor meeting room, where the new, four-member First Presidency and eleven other Apostles awaited him. It wasn't until after he'd taken a seat that he realized he was, inadvertently, still wearing his plastic hospital wristband a little symbol of his dazed astonishment. President Kimball explained that President Hinckley had just been set apart and that Neal would fill the vacancy thus created. All of his Brethren then placed their hands on his head and, with President Tanner as voice, they ordained him an Apostle and set him apart as a member of the Twelve.

Fifteen years later, in this same room, the First Presidency and the Twelve would, again, all lay their hands on Elder Maxwell's head, this time to pronounce a blessing of health. His colleague from their remarkable 1981 experience, Gordon B. Hinckley, would again be there, this time as President of the Church.

Neal had promised his doctor that he'd go straight home from the temple meeting; however, he had to attend a press conference, where the new calls were announced. He was still running a fever, unsure how much of his anxious feelings were from the surgery and how much were from the events of the day. It helped him that the media's primary focus was on the health of the members of the First Presidency and on President Hinckley's new call. Within a week, President Kimball suffered another subdural hematoma, and Neal realized what a narrow window had opened, allowing the Lord's prophet to act with such confidence to strengthen the First Presidency.

In the days that followed, Neal and Colleen felt wave after wave of both human and heavenly interest. Friends called, and people wrote letters. Neal's granddaughter Emily wrote, "I'm glad you're my grampa. I'm glad that you're out of the hospital." The wife of one General Authority said she had recently had a dream that Neal would be called as an Apostle. Neal's colleagues from the Twelve reassured and bolstered him, telling him that the meaning of the call wouldn't sink in all at once and not to worry about taking time to "get himself together." He would be all right; he'd absorb it gradually, they said, repeating their love for him, affirming their confidence in him, and urging him to speak up in their meetings.

As for Neal, he felt a profound sense of inadequacy, worried that he wasn't ready to contribute what would be expected of him. "Even though I'd been around here in one role or another for a long time," he said, this was "just a different thing, totally different. . . . And it's not something that's over with in a day." He sensed that he now needed to be even more careful about everything he said. He was also deeply sobered by the "array of scriptures" he read about the importance of apostolic certitude as a witness of Christ and about the unique calling of the Twelve, who were the "repository of keys that lie nowhere else."

Then his thoughts turned to Harold B. Lee. How he hoped Brother Lee would approve of what had happened. That idea prompted a memory of Elder Lee's having told him of a spiritual experience he'd had as a young Apostle, when he learned that it was his duty to learn to love every person. He had found the message overwhelming the Lord now expected him to "press forward . . . having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men" (2 Nephi 31:20; italics added).

Neal, having long since undertaken his personal journey of discipleship, had now entered the realm of all-consuming Discipleship. And there was a difference, although not so much in the basic process or the place to which the path leads, for both are very similar for disciples and Disciples. In fact, the LDS Bible Dictionary defines disciple as "a pupil or learner; a name used to denote (1) the twelve, also called apostles, (2) all followers of Jesus Christ." In moving from the second category to the first, however, Neal found a difference in the depth of his witness, the degree of his responsibility, and the urgency of the expectations now placed upon him. It was one thing to try in his own private, sometimes halting, way to pattern his life after the Savior's. But now he had been "called" to the Twelve as a lifelong, special witness of Christ, acting under the same authority and with the same unconditional commitment that Peter knew, and Paul, and Joseph, Brigham, Harold, Spencer, and the others.

Behind Elder Lee's words about loving everyone was a broad hint that Neal must now lay a more sure claim to the gift of charity, the pure love that Christ has for every human being. That was His message to the original Twelve Disciples: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:35). Years earlier, Neal had perhaps unknowingly planted in his own mind the seeds of such a realization such a duty and such a blessing when he quoted Harold B. Lee at the very end of his first book, A More Excellent Way:

I came to a night, some years ago, when, on my bed, I realized that before I could be worthy of the high place to which I had been called, I must love and forgive every soul that walked the earth, and in that time I came to know . . . a peace and a direction, and a comfort . . . I knew were from a divine source.

In the midst of such reflections, Neal wrote to President Kimball on July 29, apologizing for his condition at the time of his call: "My fumbling response in the temple . . . was heartfelt if not articulate." Then he added the key insight he'd been feeling, the one that had been weighing on him with its deep blend of burden and privilege: "I realize, of course, that my real response [to the call] will come through the life that I live. That life . . . will be better not only because of the calling . . . but because of the [example] of your own life." A few months later, he would tell his Brethren of the Twelve, "My solemn obligation is to become more like Him step by step." And the core of becoming more "like Him" was to feel the same love He feels for others.

For Neal Maxwell, the injunction to seek charity resonated to the core of his soul. He had long nourished an inborn sense of empathy and compassion but now found this instinct everlastingly expanded by the call to the holy apostleship. He knew he was not called to this sacred service because of his intellectual or administrative gifts. Those things are helpful, but when the time comes to fill a vacancy among the Twelve, the inquiry is of a spiritual order to find the one who should be "ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection. . . . And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these . . . thou hast chosen, that he may take part of this ministry and apostleship" (Acts 1:22, 24-25).

There had been impressive flashes along the path of Neal's life. But more important was the fundamental direction the path had taken in the quiet shadows, turns, and forks in the road; in sunshine and in shade; with footsteps quick and slow. He was now prepared to offer God his heart and his life, that he might more fully "receive true charity," "this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ" (Moroni 7:48; italics added). In the years to come, the spiritual gift of charity would nourish the compassion Neal had already been learning, until President James E. Faust, without knowing how much Neal had tried to take Harold B. Lee's experience to heart, could one day say that Neal's most unique contribution to the Church was "his ability to love everyone. Whatever their circumstances, whatever their situation, their condition, he . . . carries with him the essence of the true love of the Savior."

Within a month, Neal and Colleen took their first international trip since the new call. They held meetings in Hawaii, Tokyo, Singapore, and Perth, Australia. In Perth, Neal was assigned to choose a new stake president for the Dianella stake, close to where the Perth Australia Temple now stands. They also met with the missionaries of the Perth mission, whose president was Daniel Ludlow, Neal's old friend from the Correlation Department days. Bruce Mitchell, an Australian regional representative who had assisted in the stake reorganization, said he was eager to hear what deep doctrine these two towering intellects, Neal Maxwell and Dan Ludlow, would preach to the missionaries, especially given Elder Maxwell's new role. To Brother Mitchell's delighted surprise, Neal and Dan introduced their doctrinal instruction with personal stories about how they learned to set goals and work hard when both had raised purebred pigs as young men a joint interest the two had rekindled that morning on their way to the meeting.

On the long airplane ride home from Australia, Neal began thinking and praying about October conference. This would be his first talk as a member of the Twelve. So much about the call was barely settling in. He honestly felt that in that circle, he would "be the least, long after being the last so ordained." Still, although many other things might take him years to master, he was very clear about one thing he felt an intimate, inexpressible gratitude for the Savior.

Not knowing quite where his feelings were leading, he pulled out a yellow legal pad and began to write down the ideas that flooded into his mind. As he wrote, high above the Pacific, he lost track of time and space. Soon tears were unself-consciously running down his cheeks. He brushed them away and kept writing. A flight attendant noticed him and asked if he was all right, if she could do anything. He assured her he was fine and kept on writing. Those notes became the basis for his talk.

Twenty years later, when asked which of his numerous publications had mattered the most to him, Neal said it would be this October 1981 general conference talk because his "life had been changed [so much] since the previous conference." He also received a greater outpouring of response from Church members to this talk than any he'd known, before or since. Arthur Henry King, a literature teacher at Brigham Young University whom Neal admired, once explained how the pinnacle of an author's creative form reveals what content matters most to that author he will exert his highest skill to express the ideas that mean the most to him. That natural confluence of form and substance seems to have occurred in this talk, which Neal titled "O, Divine Redeemer":

Can we, even in the depths of disease, tell Him anything at all about suffering? In ways we cannot comprehend, our sicknesses and infirmities were borne by Him even before these were borne by us. . . .

Can those who yearn for hearth or home instruct Him as to what it is like to be homeless or on the move? . . . And when we feel so alone, can we presume to teach Him who trod "the wine-press alone" anything at all about feeling forsaken? . . .

Can we teach Him about enduring irony? His remaining possession, a cloak, was gambled for even as He died. . . . Yet the very earth was His footstool! Jesus gave mankind living water so that we shall never thirst again, yet on the cross He was given vinegar! . . .

Or can we inform the Atoner about feeling the sting of ingratitude when one's service goes unappreciated or unnoticed? . . .

Should we seek to counsel Him in courage? Should we rush forth eagerly to show Him our mortal medals our scratches and bruises He who bears His five special wounds? . . .

Indeed, we cannot teach Him anything! But we can listen to Him. We can love Him, we can honor Him, we can worship Him. We can keep His commandments, and we can feast upon His scriptures! . . .

How dare some treat His ministry as if it were all beatitudes and no declaratives! How myopic it is to view His ministry as all crucifixion and no resurrection! How provincial to perceive it as all Calvary and no Palmyra! . . .

Soon, however, all flesh shall see Him together. All knees shall bow in His presence, and all tongues confess His name. . . . Tongues which have never before spoken His name except in gross profanity will do so then and worshipfully. . . .

All will then . . . see how human indifference to God not God's indifference to humanity accounts for so much suffering. Then we will see the true story of mankind . . . the mortal accounts of the human experience will be but graffiti on the walls of time. . . . Yes, Armageddon lies ahead. But so does Adam-ondi-Ahman! . . .

So as the shutters of human history begin to close as if before a gathering storm, and as events scurry across the human scene like so many leaves before a wild wind those who stand before the warm glow of the gospel fire can be permitted a shiver of the soul. Yet in our circle of certitude we know . . . that there will be no final frustration of God's purposes. . . .

Humbly, therefore, I promise to go whithersoever I am sent, . . . acknowledging in the tremblings of my soul that I cannot fully be His Special Witness unless my life is fully special. I close with pleadings from the hymn, "O, Divine Redeemer!" which . . . are my pleadings:

Ah! Turn me not away, Receive me, tho' unworthy, . . . Hear thou my cry . . . Shield me in danger . . . Grant me pardon, and remember not, Remember not, O Lord, my sins! . . . Help me, my Savior!

Neal was sensing by now what would become increasingly clear as each year passed everything else about his life except his family would be subsidiary in significance to his apostolic call. "This is the Lord's work," he would feel and he would say. "There is nothing else that even approaches it in significance." His calling was not more significant than that of any other Apostle; indeed, it is the calling that makes each Apostle significant. Over time, Neal would give all of himself to the call, letting it shape and mold him, until President Boyd K. Packer would say:

Neal is an Apostle, and it shows. It shows as much in our meetings, maybe more than it does outside our meetings. . . . The ordination and the office [are] the standard by which he makes his measurements. He's in the world but not of the world. . . . His call as "prophet, seer, and revelator" . . . isn't an idle designation or just a title. . . . The testimony of Christ is the spirit of prophecy. And he has that testimony and witness. [Against that standard,] you won't find him wanting. All these other things . . . personality, experience, capacity, efficiency [must] be measured against the more significant deeper things. If you're going to find Neal, you'll have to find him there.

The First Presidency and the Twelve have the unique right to bestow, when so prompted, an apostolic blessing not only upon individuals but also upon entire congregations. Elder Maxwell has experienced some sacred moments at the time he has given such blessings. They are not usually recorded in writing, but people have occasionally sent him letters that reflect what happened. Just a few examples will illustrate how Church members have responded to his influence.

Neal pronounced one of his early blessings on September 18, 1982, under unusual circumstances in the Chicago Heights stake. Just before the Saturday night session of a stake conference, a massive electrical power outage occurred in the area around the chapel. The meeting proceeded anyway, lit by a few lanterns and aided by a portable sound system. At the meeting's close, Neal pronounced an apostolic blessing on the group. Robert C. Nichols Jr., the former stake president, described in a letter what happened. As the blessing began, electric power was restored to the chapel, as "the bank of lights in the ceiling . . . stirred into an uncertain, brownish glow." The light increased as the blessing continued. When Neal concluded with his testimony of the Savior, "all the lights in the chapel . . . intensified to white, and bathed the awed assembly."

Stake president Robert Garff wrote Elder Maxwell after a stake conference in Bountiful, Utah, on May 18, 1987, that

the highlight [of the conference] was the Apostolic blessing. . . . many people have said to me that it was a spiritual feast. Some . . . said they noticed a change in your countenance and a unique tone in your voice. . . . The journals of our stake [members] are full of reflections from that weekend.

This observation echoed something Neal mentioned in his personal notes during the early 1980s. He said that in recent years, on perhaps a half dozen occasions, he had the experience of sensing that "the Spirit of our Heavenly Father was especially present" in a conference or other meeting where he had spoken. In each case, one or two people had "come up after the meeting and reported that there was an aura or glow about [him as he] spoke." He believed that what they saw indicated to them, probably more than to him, "that the Lord was with us and approved" what was happening "at least at that moment."

Later in 1987, Neal left a blessing with the Orem Utah South Stake at the conclusion of a stake reorganization. President Leland Howell, who had just been released, wrote that the blessing was "an incredibly touching experience. The Spirit was so very evident and the content was personal to the needs of our people. . . . We were deeply touched by the Christlike way you related with us. That aspect of your visit was the most 'special witness' you could have borne." Another person in that congregation was Carl S. Hawkins, former dean of the BYU Law School, a thoughtful man for whom writing this letter to Neal was an unusual step:

Your inspired and informative testimony of the Savior and your Apostolic blessing . . . added immeasurably. I observed and felt many members of the congregation moved as [my wife] and I were by the intimately personal import of the blessing, in ways that could only be explained as the influence of the Holy Spirit. I believe you know me well enough to know that I write this not to flatter you, but because I want to add my witness to the power of the Spirit that was operating through your holy Apostleship.
