Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Forty-Four

The Twelve as a Council

Sitting among the Twelve for two decades, Neal gradually saw his Quorum begin to function more as a body of generalists and less as a collection of specialists. More and more, they became the Council of the Twelve, a brotherhood in which his inclusive, empathetic personality came to feel very much at home. During these years, Neal and his Brethren also became ever more aligned with their central role as "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world" (D&C 107:23). One factor that contributed to this process was a Churchwide pattern of increased delegation of authority. Another was the way responsibilities were assigned for both the Church's programs and the Church's geographical areas. And another, at least in Neal's case, was attitudinal.

As the Church grew internationally, the First Presidency delegated an increasing load to the Twelve, and the Twelve delegated an increasing load to the Seventy and to stake presidents. When Neal was first called as an Assistant to the Twelve, for example, General Authorities ordained every bishop and one of the Apostles ordained every stake patriarch. Stake presidents now perform those ordinations.

A similar pattern prevails among the Church's governing quorums. President Kimball, for instance, had organized numerous area conferences, beginning in major international centers, and then, increasingly, in key cities of the United States. This was the First Presidency's way of bringing the feel of general conference to those who lived too far away ever to attend conference in Salt Lake City. Area conferences also let assigned members of the First Presidency, the Twelve, and the Seventy attend in small teams to draw closer to the Saints in a personalized setting, which was always presided over by a member of the First Presidency.

Then on October 16, 1983, Elders Boyd K. Packer and Neal A. Maxwell of the Twelve presided at the Church's first regional conference for four stakes in London and the surrounding area. Perhaps reflecting the unprecedented nature of the event, the Saturday afternoon priesthood leadership session in the Hyde Park chapel attracted nearly 100 percent of the leaders. Elders Packer and Maxwell both sensed the meeting's significance, knowing that the growth of the Church would make it ever more necessary for the Twelve to represent the First Presidency at such gatherings around the world gatherings in which each congregation was large enough to fill the Salt Lake Tabernacle.

In a signal that both visitors recognized the prophetic calling of each member of the First Presidency and the Twelve, Neal stood to conduct the meeting and began, "Brethren, we've come to you today in our true identity as apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ." Within a few years, each multistake region would periodically experience a regional conference with one member of the Twelve assigned to preside, thus building an increased personal rapport between the members of the Church and those they sustain as prophets.

At Church headquarters, the First Presidency delegated a key form of authority when they assigned one of the Twelve to preside over each of the three Executive Councils that had mirrored the three-fold mission of the Church since 1982 the councils for missionary work, priesthood and auxiliary organizations, and temples and family history. This decision was significant because it authorized members of the Twelve to preside in the key correlating bodies of the Church, which included members of both the ecclesiastical arm (the Twelve and the Seventy) and the temporal arm (the Presiding Bishopric). Neal presided over the Temple and Family History Executive Council from 1994 to 2000.

The increasing level of delegation from the Twelve to the Seventy may be seen in comparing some of the "firsts" that Neal experienced in his early service as an Apostle with the pattern that would prevail later. In the early 1980s, for instance, Neal felt it was "a big deal" to see the creation of a new stake or the selection of a new stake president. Since the Church's early days, new stake presidents had often been selected by two members of the Twelve, which was perhaps one reason why some stake presidents wondered if they were to be released when they learned that an Apostle was assigned to their stake conference.

At the time of Neal's call to the Twelve, it was typical for one Apostle to preside at stake reorganizations, assisted by a Seventy or a regional representative. In May 1982, for instance, Neal called a man in Idaho to be the new president of his stake. He was an older man who wore hearing aids in both ears. After Neal issued the call, the man said he had been awakened at 2:00 that morning by a prompting that he would be called to preside over the stake. Later that day, Neal called a new high councilor, who also said that he had been awakened the night before. He woke his wife and told her he'd had an impression about who the new stake president would be, that he himself would be called to the high council, and that he would decide to shave off his beard all of which occurred in that order.

By the early 1990s, however, it was not uncommon for the Twelve to approve several new stakes in a given week, and full-time General Authorities from the Seventy presided at most stake reorganizations. A few years later, part-time Area Authority Seventies were authorized to reorganize stakes when so assigned. These changes reflected the reality that in Neal's lifetime the number of Apostles hadn't increased but the number of Latter-day Saints had increased nearly twenty fold. So the number of Church members for each of the fifteen Apostles grew from about 40,000 to about 800,000.

Neal also found notable during his first year in the Twelve the calls he issued to several new regional representatives, something only the Twelve did then. Within two decades, however, members of the Seventy were typically authorized to extend similar calls on behalf of the First Presidency to new Area Authority Seventies. Neal also heard his first report from a returning mission president in 1982 again, something only the Twelve did then. In earlier years, the First Presidency had always received those reports. A decade later, returning mission presidents had their exit interviews with Seventies in the Area Presidency who supervised their respective missions.

Another set of events in the late 1990s brought the First Presidency and the Twelve increasingly together in their roles as the Church's prophets, seers, and revelators. These fifteen Apostles issued three significant prophetic statements to the Church and to the world. One of these was in 1995, The Family: A Proclamation to the World. Another was The Living Christ, a solemn declaration of apostolic witness to the divinity of Christ, signed by each member of the First Presidency and the Twelve in January 2000 in celebration of the new millennium. The third step was a widely broadcast video presentation called Witnesses of Christ, fifteen apostolic testimonies of Christ, shown first at the time of April 2000 general conference. Neal welcomed these events because "the members of the Church deserve to hear our witness and to experience us in a way that belongs to the whole congregation," not just the local leaders. "We're getting better at that."

These examples suggest a general pattern in the 1980s and 90s that increasingly identified the Twelve with the First Presidency's spiritual ministry to the Church as a whole while gradually shifting the "operations" of the Church to Seventies and to stake presidents.

Another factor that enhanced the role of the Twelve as a council was a gradual shift in the nature of assignments to oversee Church departments and geographic areas. By the year 2000, Elder Maxwell would say, "We're Apostles first and then we may have assignments, rather than having the assignments seem to dictate our role to us." He thought this let the Twelve be more strategic and less tactical in their orientation. When he first joined the quorum, however, his brethren had sometimes seemed identified primarily as specialists in missionary work, or family history, or some other programmatic or administrative role. A similar kind of specialization, which sometimes led to advocacy, could occur in geographic assignments. Sensing that members of the Twelve shouldn't become overly identified with one part of the world, Elder Bruce R. McConkie used to say that he wasn't "the Archbishop of South America" even when he was assigned to oversee the Church's affairs there.

The delegation of operational authority in the field took place primarily by increasing the responsibility of Area Presidencies, who were all Seventies. Delegation at Church headquarters occurred when members of the Presidency of the Seventy became the executive directors of most of the principal Church departments, aided by others from among the Seventy. These teams became the primary General Authority advisers to the departments, which in turn were made accountable to an executive council in which a member of the Twelve presided.

The movement of the Twelve toward being a council of generalists was further accelerated by a globalization process across many cultures that required more emphasis on the Church's general core values rather than on particular programs. Another factor was a conscious shift of attitude, as illustrated by the way Neal's own views became more general.

Before his call to the Twelve, Neal had been given a series of assignments to direct such specific operations as the Church Educational System or the Correlation Department. After his call to the Twelve in 1981, however, he began losing interest in being identified with any particular program or specialty, including education. He found himself wanting to focus on the "basics of the gospel," such as the scriptures, doctrine, temples, and families. He had always believed the Church's programs were to serve its people, rather than letting program needs dictate personal priorities. But more and more now, Neal would wonder which of the Church programs were really essential, especially in an international Church.

As part of this attitudinal change, Neal consciously worked on himself to repress his former instincts to advocate particular interests or solutions, not wanting his hobbies or passions to seek undue attention in quorum discussions. He came to prize the collegial relationship of the Twelve, in which "one gets a chance to see if his ideas will have a life of their own." And if those ideas don't fly with the group, then "maybe you'd better let them go." After all, "if my views are sound, why is it that my Brethren don't see it that way?"

At an earlier time in his life, he might have ground his teeth with impatience over a sometimes slow-moving group process that seeks unanimity before taking action. But now he not only could tolerate such a process but could increasingly see its wisdom. Drawing on his political science background, he saw in the deliberative process of the Twelve an analogy to James Reston's comment about the necessary role of both the "sail" and the "anchor" in comparing the executive to the legislative branches of government. The Twelve may seem "notoriously slow" at times, he said, but he could see that their need for unanimity ("And every decision made by [this quorum] must be by the unanimous voice of the same"; D&C 107:27) was not just a "procedural nicety." To have real agreement by "the next presidents of the Church sitting there in the Twelve" ensures "continuity of policy." So unanimity means not mere assent but a willingness to support. And if it takes time for that willingness to develop, someone may have to "wait a little longer."

As one who had a tendency toward impatience and "steadying the ark" in his younger days, Neal was speaking with introspective modesty when he told the General Authorities in their June 2001 temple meeting that when he senses an obstacle in their decision-making processes, he now tries to ask himself, "Lord, is it I?" There had been a few times during his service in the Twelve when, he now realized, he'd been "trying too hard to fix things," putting his "shoulder to the wheel," only to discover that he was pushing not a wheel but "a stationary hitching post." In a similar meeting a few years earlier, he had said "how delightful it is to hear the small talk of great men, such as the First Presidency, and how each of us . . . [depends] on each other to take the wheat in our respective lives and with the breath of kindness blow the chaff away."

Elder Maxwell's effort to improve his own commitment to the nature of the apostolic call and the spirit of congenial brotherhood in the quorum has helped some younger members of the group. Elder Holland, for instance, says that Neal has

grown into the office the way I want to grow into it. He thinks about the spiritual role of an Apostle, and [that role] has become infinitely more important to him than any managerial or administrative role.

In his younger days, he liked to be in the thick of things, and he always was. The senior Brethren drew him into it, often whether he wanted it or not. He was in on 'the action.' I don't think 'the action' intrigues him much now. . . .

Now he'd just like to be an Apostle, bear his testimony and quote from the Book of Mormon.

He has grown and blossomed into a larger apostolic ministry, mindful of what it means to be a disciple of the Lord. . . . He wants to be a disciple and he works at it.

Elder Holland finds that in Neal's relationships with other quorum members, this attitude has combined with his natural tendency to facilitate group interaction and "bring people together," making him a catalyst to help sustain the spirit of sweet counsel among his Brethren. He encourages harmony in discussions where opinions on important issues may differ. Always respectful of others' views, "regardless of how strongly he feels," Neal will "find a way to offer the conciliatory comment." He's always been a good moderator, but "this is more. He has grown." No matter what the issue, "he doesn't lose the spirit of his calling over it." And that lets him contribute to the spirit of the Quorum.

Of this same quality, Elder Eyring said that Elder Maxwell looks ahead enough to "bring forward aggressive ideas," telling his Brethren, "we really need to deal with this." Yet, at the same time, he "lifts the level of the conversation." He is able to "offer an alternative without inflaming anybody and yet getting it seriously considered. He's really good at that."

Neal has had his own mentors about brotherhood among the Twelve. In his early years in the group, he was on a trip to the Middle East with Elder Howard W. Hunter. One day in Egypt, Neal said, "When I awakened after a weary and dusty day together with him . . . [Elder Hunter] was quietly shining my shoes, a task he had hoped to complete unseen." Once President James E. Faust said his feeling for Neal is "akin to that that I have for my own blood brothers. We seem to be symbiotic, in terms of our approach to problems. . . . You're just at peace with him." A few years earlier while in Brazil, Elder Faust had written to Neal, "Conferences come and go and we have too little time [together]. I feel an emptiness and a loss in not having been able to spend at least a relaxed . . . half an hour with you."

When Elder Russell M. Nelson was called to the Twelve, he sent Neal a note expressing gratitude for "the privilege of sitting beside you, that your effective teaching and tutoring may continue infinitely." After they'd been assigned to a regional conference together, Elder Nelson thanked Neal for his efforts to keep growing, having noticed "how much you have learned and are thereby able to teach since our last assignment together. This . . . stimulates me to try to do better."

Elder David B. Haight, who has enjoyed savoring Neal's "fertile mind" since their days on the Leadership Committee in the 1960s, has empathized with Elder Maxwell's "gallant struggle with leukemia." As his "heaven-sent remission" has continued, Elder Haight now rejoices "as I'm able to squeeze his hand and look into his face and witness the improvement in his health."

Another of Neal's early role models and confidantes in the circle of the First Presidency and the Twelve was President N. Eldon Tanner, who served as a counselor to Presidents McKay, Smith, Lee, and Kimball. From their first association on the Utah Legislative Study Committee, Neal admired President Tanner's quiet competence. As they worked together through the CES and Correlation Department years, he discovered President Tanner's "remarkable ability" in organizational, financial, and spiritual matters. "Take him a seven-page document, and he'll find the one thing in it" that has some "softness or fuzziness," not only with numbers but ideas. Neal noticed that "President Tanner had the meekness which permitted him to advance an idea and then let it have a life of its own rather than oversponsor it with his immense personal prestige in order to give it some advantage in the arena of decision making." In his general assessment, Neal felt that President Tanner was one of the greatest counselors in the First Presidency "in this dispensation." And "when the history of the Church is written, it will be very kind to President Tanner."

So there was tender personal meaning for Neal in their occasional exchanges, like the little homemade birthday poem President Tanner sent him once, writing a phrase next to each letter of the name "Neal A. Maxwell," including "Needless to say, it is/ Easy to express our sincere appreciation/ And love to you . . ." When President Tanner passed away in November 1982, Neal was asked to dedicate his grave.

One way Neal nurtured this spirit of brotherhood was by trying to discipline himself about preserving confidences, following channels, and avoiding critical comments about other people even though he is sometimes passionate about his own views and is always communicating with other people, in and out of group settings. Most people who have worked closely with him during his years in the Twelve single out, with various adjectives, his peacemaker quality, which they say makes Neal a consummate team player, especially for a group desiring to function as a "council."

Elder Cecil Samuelson, for example, has noticed that no one at Church headquarters is more respectful of appropriate roles and relationships among the Brethren. Elder Monte Brough worked with Neal from 1993 to 1998, when Monte was executive director of the Family History Department and Neal was chairman of his governing council. He said nobody is more loyal than is Elder Maxwell to the people both above him and below him on the organizational chart, which gives him "enormous credibility" with his associates. Bud Scruggs said that for a person who is as open as Neal is, he is amazingly "circumspect about not criticizing the other Brethren," even if he may disagree, and he keeps confidences, even among friends and even on unimportant issues.

In the spirit of this commitment to one another, each member of the Council of the Twelve shares fully the scriptural mandate to "build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations" (D&C 107:33; italics added). Regardless of the rotating individual assignments in a given year, each Apostle in the worldwide Church has increasingly come to feel a worldwide ministry, embracing not only all Church programs but also all continents and all people. Consider, as an illustration, Elder Maxwell's official list of conference and special meeting assignments for 1993:

DateLocation Assignment January 30Manti, UtahStake Conference February 13Provo, UtahRegional Conference (BYU married stakes) February 20Salt Lake CityDedication of Cathedral of the Madeleine February 27El Paso, TexasStake Conference March 6Hermosillo, MexicoRegional Conference March 13Toronto, CanadaStake Conference April 9-19Mongolia and Beijing, ChinaDedicate Mongolia, visit Chinese officials April 25-26San Diego, CaliforniaSan Diego Temple Dedication May 1Ogden, UtahRegional Conference May 22Paris, FranceStake Conference June 12Twin Falls, IdahoRegional Conference June 19Springville, UtahStake Reorganization July 4Provo, UtahFreedom Festival August 22Salt Lake CityTraining new Utah North Area stake presidents August 28Nyssa, OregonStake Conference September 11Montreal, CanadaRegional Conference October 16Raleigh, North CarolinaRegional Conference October 23Hattiesburg, MississippiRegional Conference November 6Tokyo, JapanMission Presidents' Seminar, Area training November 13Seoul, KoreaArea training November 17Hong KongArea training November 20Manila, PhilippinesMission Presidents' Seminar, Area training December 4Chicago, IllinoisChicago Temple workers' meeting

This was quite an array of major assignments, all over the world in one year including mainland China and Mongolia. Yet it was typical of the pattern followed by all of the Twelve as the twentieth century came to a close. Within the span of Neal's own Church service years at the general level, he had personally witnessed the fulfillment of the Lord's words: the Quorum of the Twelve would not just hold meetings together in Salt Lake City. Rather, "The Twelve are a Traveling Presiding High Council, to officiate in the name of the Lord . . . in all nations" (D&C 107:33; italics added), traveling not just in the Western United States with a few international ties but everywhere. Indeed, as Neal was allowed to experience firsthand, the "Twelve hold the keys to open up the authority of my kingdom upon the four corners of the earth, and after that to send my word to every creature" (D&C 124:128).

At the same time, Elder Maxwell felt that the needs that inexorably sent the Twelve throughout the world must be balanced against the continuing need for them to counsel together as much as possible. Thus in a General Authority training meeting in October 2001, he quoted Joseph Smith's counsel to nourish the brotherhood and unity of the Twelve: "Let the Twelve Apostles keep together. You will do more good to keep together, not travel together all the time, but meet in conference from place to place, and associate together, and not be found long apart from each other."
