Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Forty-Five

Opening the Doors of the Nations

No theme in modern Church history is more dramatic than this one opening the doors of the nations. By 1974, the Church had become secure enough organizationally, financially, and, most of all, spiritually that President Kimball was prompted to ask the Saints to pray that the Lord would open the doors of all nations to the preaching of the restored gospel. The Saints prayed. In 1978, he received the revelation allowing universal access to the priesthood for every worthy male. The Saints wept.

In 1989, four years after President Kimball's death, the Berlin Wall fell, symbolizing with resounding clarity the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. As the Iron Curtain came down, the curtain in the next act of the Restoration's drama went up, as nation after nation opened doors long since closed to religion. To the people who lived through them, these events were so stunning that no ordinary Church member would have dared to predict what actually happened, even days before it occurred.

Yet the Lord had already announced as the Restoration began: "The voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days. And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them" (D&C 1:4-5). Moreover, He had made it clear that the Twelve Apostles have a special charge to "build up the church . . . in all nations." Thus they are "sent out, holding the keys, to open the door by the proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ" (D&C 107:33, 35; italics added).

Neal Maxwell, long curious about large-scale historical and political events, has felt deep personal gratitude at being given firsthand experience with this stirring apostolic charge:

Since President Kimball, this sunburst of opening up the nations of the world has come and, for those of us who got to see that firsthand, it's just been a great privilege. You know, who would have guessed a stake in West Africa? . . .

To have been in this niche of history has been a great blessing. . . . But it's happened so fast, when you think about it historically. . . .

When I first went to Germany . . . I used to say to priesthood leaders, "How long before that Berlin Wall will come down?". . . "Oh, Bruder Maxvell," they'd say, "seventy years." And they meant it. It looked that way to me too.

President Hinckley has described Neal's keen interest in the globalization of the Church as "characteristic . . . of the Twelve generally. Neal has an understanding of the apostolic calling to open the doors of all nations. That calling is well defined by the Lord, and Neal is trying to carry out that mandate."

For Neal, the issues surrounding the Church's rapid internationalization are, from one perspective, very complex and daunting. He has taken a lifelong interest in the world's history, its peoples, and its cultures. He is well-traveled and well-read, experienced in analyzing the financial and demographic detail of both the costs and the benefits of expanding the worldwide Church Educational System. His personal heritage in the Church carries both the convert's perspective of his father and the pioneer heritage of his mother. He has noticed how the strength of his parents' temple marriage and deep gospel roots has blessed their posterity across four very faithful generations. Then he has faced the apostolic charge to help open the doors of the nations in the days of the Church's most historic global moment. He has wanted not to "shrink in the face of such a charge but to be realistic about the effort, the risks, and the patience needed to establish the Church" for the long haul.

Elder Alexander Morrison, who is himself well informed and reflective about the broad topic of international development, believes Neal has a remarkable capacity "to look at the Church worldwide . . . to look for trends, to look for things happening outside of Utah." His background and his sense of history help him "understand that what we do today influences where we will be ten years from now."

In addition, Neal is able to "separate culture from doctrine" in trying to understand the Church in various cultures. As he looks at a multicultural Church, he will often understand when difficulties faced by Church members in a given country stem from "a behavioral problem, a cultural problem, not a doctrinal issue." Having worked closely with Neal on such matters, Brother Morrison thinks Neal clearly wants to help all of us have "a better understanding of our world position," to grasp the implications of being "a church for the whole world. That's been the big issue of his apostleship."

For such reasons Neal understood, in ways few people would, why President Tanner was looking so pensive that day in the mid-1970s, after President Kimball announced his prophetic call to take the gospel throughout the world. With his stewardship for Church finances, President Tanner felt obliged to wear the hat of practicality and honestly wondered what it would mean to establish the Church welfare program in India or Africa.

It was also President Tanner who first aroused Neal's curiosity about what today's Church calls the retention issue how well the Church is retaining its new converts and building its base of experienced lay leadership, especially in countries where the Church is relatively new. Within Neal's first year as a General Authority, he was assigned to visit an international area of the Church that was experiencing very rapid growth. While there, he remembered having heard President Tanner wonder aloud whether this growth was coming too fast. Was the Church running faster than it had strength? (see Mosiah 4:27). So he listened carefully, dismayed at the report of a stake president who said of many new converts, "Our bishops have never known them." Soon after he returned home, President Tanner asked him, referring to convert retention, "I'm right, am I not?" And with what Neal had found, he had to say yes.

Another Apostle who has also long emphasized the need for better convert retention, beginning when "he was the entire staff for the Missionary Department," is President Gordon B. Hinckley, who has made improved retention one of the signature themes of his presidency of the Church. From the early years of his ministry in the Twelve, then, Neal was one among others of his brethren who spoke up persistently about retention which he called "real growth." That is, when missionaries moved into new areas, when convert baptisms increased rapidly in certain missions, he would always ask whether the number of people attending sacrament meeting and paying tithing was growing at the same rate as the number of recorded baptisms. If only the baptismal numbers grew, there was little real growth.

Similarly, as the number of temples has multiplied in recent years, Neal has applied his concept of real growth to temple work, gently urging his fellow General Authorities to remember that "it will be easier to build these temples than to fill them" with temple patrons and ordinance workers. Elder Oaks says Elder Maxwell's concern and approach to real growth has been "a major contribution." He has kept "raising it and raising it" as a major issue in discussions about the stewardship of the Twelve "to build up the church and regulate all the affairs of the same" (D&C 107:33).

When he was first contact (the member of the Quorum of the Twelve assigned to oversee an area of the world in its relationship with Church headquarters) for the United Kingdom and Africa from 1987 to 1990, Neal asked Jeffrey R. Holland, then the Area President, to make a special examination of the U.K. files containing Church membership records with unknown addresses. Once enough records were identified, Neal urged a "lost sheep" project to locate and, where possible, reactivate those with whom the Church had lost contact. The project brought many back to the fold.

During his years as first contact for Asia, from 1990 to 1995, Neal had similar concerns about Church growth in Japan, where the number of less-active members had been growing at a faster rate than the number of active members. The Fukuoka Mission President was Cyril Figuerres, a former researcher for the Correlation Department, which Neal had helped create in 1976. With the combination of Cyril's background and his own interest in drawing on empirical data, Neal urged Cyril to identify and address the root problems in the mission's membership growth.

The result of these efforts was the "Ammon" pilot project, which drew on Elder Maxwell's long-term, multigenerational perspective to make significant adaptations in both member and missionary programs "without tampering with 'non-negotiables' such as doctrines and ordinances." The project recognized the unique needs of the Japanese people, who have stronger ties to group associations than is typical of Western culture, and only 2 percent of whom have a Christian background. Under Elder Maxwell's direction, with concurrence from the Area Presidency, President Figuerres designed the project to improve real growth on the individual level, the family level, and the "community of Saints" level.

Drawing on the research findings, the project implemented several interventions suited for Latter-day Saints in the Japanese culture. For example, the mission provided extended "greenhouse" nurturing for investigators and new converts, holding missionaries accountable for strengthening new converts every week for an entire year. The project also worked to "create a community of Saints where individuals and families could experience righteousness, joy, and social integration in a spiritually enriched, nurturing environment." Over time the number of convert baptisms nearly doubled, the proportion of converts who remained active increased significantly, and the number of newly reactivated members more than tripled.

For Cyril, working on the Ammon project with Elder Maxwell was "like a spiritual odyssey" that gave him "a glimpse of . . . the global leadership needed to develop a truly global Church." Elder Maxwell, he said, "never loses sight of the big picture and the grand 'why.' He is visionary, forward-looking, with an eye fixed just beyond the horizon." His "humble but serious involvement with the Japanese members" showed them "how much members of the Twelve care about their unique challenges and spiritual lives."

Elder Maxwell also invited Elder Alexander Morrison to help him study "real growth" issues during Neal's term as chairman of the Church's Boundary and Leadership Change Committee from 1982 to 1993. Their efforts to understand what happened to Latter-day Saint families in Britain over several generations led to the insight that "very clearly" the "key to having a multigenerational church" is to have "LDS marriages at the beginning." Converts who don't marry Latter-day Saints are far more likely to "drop off the radar scope" of Church activity. And when the marriage is in the temple, the likelihood of ensuring the continued Church activity of an entire family over the generations is extremely high. From an update of an earlier Correlation Department study on LDS youth, Neal learned that LDS children in international areas whose parents are married in the temple are nine times more likely to serve missions and marry in the temple than are LDS children whose parents were not married in the temple. In the United States and Canada, the rate is now four times higher when parents marry in the temple.

Neal drew on this background when he participated in a training session for General and Area Authorities in April 2001 on the need to strengthen families as the long-range key to establishing the Church. Elder Maxwell took his theme from Isaiah 58:12: "Raise up the foundations of many generations." He said, "We seek successive generations of grandparents, parents, and children who are 'grounded, rooted, settled,' (Eph. 3:17; Col. 1:23) and sealed in the holy temple."

Because the process of building successive generations in the Church takes so much time, and because that process can be threatened by so many obstacles in countries where all Church members are first-generation converts, it would have been both natural, even predictable, for Neal to drag his feet a little and ask for more data, playing the part of the anchor rather than the sail in opening the doors of the nations. Yet as realistic as he was, and as deep as were his concerns about "real growth," when Neal found himself face-to-face with the apostolic charge to take the gospel to every nation, his reverence for his calling and his charge would not let him shrink. In a striking example of the sheer faith he drew from the nature of his office, he refused to take counsel from his fears. Once more, Spencer W. Kimball was his role model.

During his own long years in the Twelve, President Kimball's reputation as a very thorough stake conference visitor was legendary among stake presidents. He would plow deep furrows of analysis, examining statistics and trends, insisting with loving persistence on better performance and leadership accountability. But when the Lord prompted him to move the Church and stir the nations to open their doors, President Kimball's visionary side took over always tempered with realistic demands, but the vision was clear. In the Ensign article Neal was asked to write in tribute after President Kimball's death, he described President Kimball's attitude toward the sometimes confounding uncertainties of really establishing the Church across the globe:

Yes, there would be logistical problems as the Church was extended to the people of the world. Yes, there would be challenges funding the growth. . . . Yes, there would be immense leadership training problems. . . . Yes, there would be unevenness and disappointments in connection with the expansion of the work.

He knew all those things, yet . . . he did not wait until everything was perfectly in order before acting. His trust included trust. If one tried to solve in advance all the problems which might occur later, he might never start! The capacity to trust the Lord for continuous revelation as to what would later need to be done was clearly a part of the makeup of this very special man.

Neal took this attitude as his guide, then, when he sometimes found himself asking how the Church would manage its growth in places where, for example, the people lacked the income necessary to pay enough tithing to fund their chapels and other costs of operating the Church. He felt the same spiritual urging that President Kimball had felt to just "do it" when an opportunity came to take the Church into a new country. "Partly it's the Spirit," he'd say, "the apostolic thrust, partly my feeling of increasing global awareness." Nevertheless, this didn't mean a helter-skelter process. Neal, joined by his Brethren of the Twelve, would constantly seek to "build the Church so that it's really established, and that we have [enough] active Melchizedek Priesthood holders, and people pay their tithing, and then the Lord will provide."

Elder Maxwell's experiences with the Area Presidencies, missionaries, and Church members in Africa and then in Asia illustrate his approach to globalization. The real beginning of missionary work in West Africa came with the revelation on priesthood in 1978. For twenty years before that time, however, a number of West Africans, mostly in Nigeria, had learned of the Restoration and the Book of Mormon and were asking for missionaries. In 1985, Neal dedicated West Africa's first Church-built meetinghouse at Cape Coast in the Ghana Accra Mission. There were 800 Church members in the Cape Coast District; 1,300 attended the dedication. Considering that Ghana is about the size of Oregon with a population of 13 million, of whom about 3,000 were by then Latter-day Saints, Neal could see immediately both the promise and the hurdles ahead for the Church there, but he was overcome by the promise.

Many Latter-day Saints in West Africa were educated and they spoke English well. Neal discovered for himself what he had heard from others that the members were "already very religious, wonderful people" who "know their Bibles very well," reflecting their strong Christian heritage from earlier missionary efforts by other churches. As Elder Robert E. Sackley of the Seventy said while on a trip with Neal, "The intellectual African is searching for God. . . . If Africa has any message for us, it is that education ought to bring us closer to God." Yet the people also lived amid great poverty. To Neal, that "deprivation has prepared them for the gospel," giving them a sense of gratitude and "extra gusto to do the work" of the Church. He was moved by the formal statement of welcome presented to him and Elder Russell C. Taylor of the Seventy by the Aba district presidency in Nigeria. They expressed gratitude to the Church for sending them missionaries, who

marvel us with their high sense of devotion. . . . Kindly bear with us where there are some lapses. We are quite new in the doctrines of the Church. . . . We are optimistic that as we now read books and attend meetings regularly, we shall grow like other countries where the Church has found its foothold.

Then they asked Neal to convey their gratitude to "Spencer W. Kimball, Prophet of God."

On one visit to Africa, Neal called Thomas Appiah to be the new Accra district president in Ghana. The mission president, Miles Cunningham, trusted Brother Appiah so much that he'd always give him cash to purchase from local businesses whatever the Church needed, because if a white person went into a store, the price would be ten times higher. When Neal found that Thomas didn't have suitable clothing for his new Sunday duties, Neal gave him one of his own suits. Three years later, President Cunningham wrote Neal that Brother Appiah still "wears your suit with pride and honor."

More than a decade later, Neal was assigned to meet with a large group of missionaries in New York City. Preparing for the meeting, mission president Ronald Rasband "felt to ponder and prayerfully select [a missionary] whom the Lord would have me ask" to open the meeting with prayer. As he looked over the roster of names, the name of Joseph Appiah from Ghana "boldly stood out" to him. When President Rasband asked Elder Appiah to pray, the missionary wept, telling his mission president that Elder Maxwell had called his father to be district president and had sealed his parents in the Salt Lake Temple. After he was called to the Seventy, Elder Rasband told this story in general conference, illustrating how the Lord "inspired a mission president on behalf of one missionary." Only later did Elder Rasband learn about the suit Elder Maxwell had given to the missionary's father.

In May 1988 Neal joined Elder Robert E. Sackley of the Seventy to create the first stake in West Africa in Aba, Nigeria. David Eka, whom Neal called to be stake president, was surprised at the call, even though he'd been the district president. He worried that he "wasn't from the right tribe." Neal didn't know much about the tribes, he said, but assured the new president that he was acceptable. In 2001 Elder Maxwell set Brother Eka apart as a mission president.

The date of the Aba stake conference was almost exactly ten years after President Kimball's revelation on the priesthood in 1978. Neal had "felt particularly close to President Kimball," who had died in 1985, when the First Presidency and the Twelve approved the creation of this stake. They all knew it was the first stake in any dispensation composed entirely of black Church members. Neal told the Aba members about the handkerchief he had saved from the 1978 temple meeting and then showed them another handkerchief he'd brought for this historic day. He knew he would shed tears, and he did. The handkerchief is tucked safely near the other one in the Maxwell home.

Two years later, in 1990, Elder Maxwell was assigned to dedicate Swaziland and Lesotho, two small mountain kingdoms primarily within South Africa, for the preaching of the gospel. Generally, only Apostles dedicate a country, a special priesthood act and blessing arising from their divine commission, "being sent out, holding the keys, to open the door" of a nation (D&C 107:35). The Church had been established among Europeans in South Africa for many years, but since the 1978 revelation, "the Church of the future there had to take account" of the complete racial spectrum. While he was in the Durban stake conference, Neal kept thinking about the Savior's words that the gospel net gathereth of every kind. A racially mixed Church after a history of apartheid in South Africa created a poignant opportunity and need. It was a good time for the special blessing the dedication of a country allows.

So, joined by Elder Alexander B. Morrison of the Seventy and mission president R. J. Snow, Elder Maxwell and about fifty other people gathered reverently on a beautiful hill overlooking Mbabane, the capital city of Swaziland. Neal was mildly concerned that the hill was part of a local scenic attraction, and he felt a need for privacy. Rain had fallen all morning, but as the appointed time arrived, "the rain stopped and the clouds parted." After brief talks by Swazi members about the Church's history in their land, Neal spoke. Then he offered the dedicatory prayer. As he did so, President Snow said, "the clouds closed in around the small group and enclosed all of us as if we were in a room by ourselves. There was no rain, but we were alone together in the cloud on top of the hill." Neal felt the cloud had seemed to separate them from the outside world.

When Neal dedicated Lesotho, a twelve-year-old boy spoke just before the prayer. As he recounted the story of his people and the blessing of their finding the gospel, the boy began to cry. When he "mopped up his tears with his tie," probably wearing the only white shirt and tie he owned, it was "a very tender, emotional time" for Elder Maxwell and Elder Morrison.

Neal also learned from experiences in Africa about dealing with the opposition that threatens to close the gospel door once it has been opened. Because they'd received misinformation, Ghana's government in 1989 briefly banned the Church from holding meetings or sending missionaries into the country, but local leaders and members adapted and endured impressively. Beverly Campbell, director of the Church's international affairs office in Washington, D.C., learned from Ghana's ambassador to the United States that his people didn't understand what the Church was about, with its "many young men" who "dashed about the villages" but never "told the Village Elders why" they were there.

Beverly and others worked with Neal to develop a response that Area President Jeffrey Holland considered a brilliant handling of a very delicate situation, especially with the follow-through by local leaders. On very short notice, they sent to Ghana two African-American Latter-day Saints Catherine Stokes from Chicago and Robert Stevenson from Alabama with no instructions other than to explain what the Church was and how they felt about it. Sister Stokes said Elder Maxwell's only counsel on the phone was that her trip was "very important to the Church." In a press conference sponsored by Ghana's minister for culture and religion, Cathy was asked about the role of women in the Church. She responded that women "are and should be involved" in education and public life but their "most important responsibility" from God is to "preserve what is of value in the society for the children." When asked if Church members wear "magic underwear that makes [them] successful," she "laughed and responded 'we wish,'" adding that "we wear an undergarment that keeps us mindful of our promises [and] covenants to our Heavenly Father." With additional "tours and talk shows," the trip was successful not only for the Church, but for its individual participants. Cathy "marveled" as she realized

how far the Lord has brought me to trust. That I, a black child of the south, weathered by segregation and the ravages of racial tensions that yet prevail in America, would experience complete trust through the Lord's messenger [Elder Maxwell], who happens to be a white man. Barriers had fallen for the saints in Ghana and for me.

In his apostolic role in Africa, Neal learned not only about opening the gospel door and keeping it open but also about keeping the door from blowing off its hinges. Elder Morrison and Elder Holland, who both served in the Area Presidency for the United Kingdom and Africa during Neal's years as first contact, said they all knew that the Church in West Africa "was being born in a day, and it had the potential to become too much too fast." It was a good time to apply Neal's instincts about real growth rather than to seek growth for its own sake. As one response, the Brethren divided the United Kingdom-Africa Area and gave Africa its own Area Presidency in 1990, with instructions to proceed with utmost caution, because, as Neal put it, "this is a continent that could swallow a church." The risk was and still is that the local culture could absorb the Church before its members are fully assimilated into the gospel culture. So the work has proceeded cautiously and steadily, following the guideline from the Twelve to build from "centers of strength."

After years of frustration and often failure among international social programs throughout Africa, Neal saw the Church there as "countercultural." "Our whole assumption is that we change the world by changing individuals. Ours is the original gospel of hope." This has required creative flexibility. In Nigeria, for example, unsafe conditions made it unwise for missionaries to be out of their apartments after dark. Yet activity among the local members was higher than many places in the United States. Neal saw it as a "wheat and tares" environment: it "will be very difficult, but they'll be okay" because the West African Saints are so faithful.

Asia was another part of the world where Elder Maxwell was called upon to exercise the apostolic keys to open new doors to the gospel. During his years as first contact there in the early 1990s, the Asia Area was divided, placing Korea and Japan in the Asia North Area and leaving the Asia Area Presidency with a little time on their hands along with huge populations in countries long inaccessible to the Church. So Neal told them, "Look, we've got half the world in your area; let's start opening doors." Soon the Area Presidency was knocking on the doors of Asian nations, reaching out to places the Church had never officially entered: Mongolia, Cambodia, Nepal, India, Pakistan, and Laos.

The Asia Area also included that mysterious giant, China, a vast sea of humanity that had taken hold of Neal's heart when he first visited there in 1982 with the Lamanite Generation, a performing group from Brigham Young University. As various BYU groups became widely known and appreciated in China through their tours and their wholesome performances on national television, Neal saw those groups as an "Educational Elias," preparing for the day when the Church itself may be granted entry. Over the next two decades, he returned to China three more times, and each visit showed him another step in the country's economic progress, tantalizing him as it has many other LDS leaders who long for the day when that door of doors will swing open.

So he hasn't been in a hurry, and he repeatedly says that the Church goes in only through the front door. He also says it's been good for him to learn patience in dealing with China, where so much is at stake. In his geographic assignments as well as his role with the Church's Public Affairs Committee, he has cultivated relationships with Chinese officials, "knowing that it might take a long time and that the Lord would just have to work it out in His way." Elder Monte Brough, who served in the Asia Area Presidency from 1990 to 1993, found that although no General Authority could claim much expertise on China, he's "never seen anybody who could grasp it faster or more completely" than Neal did.

Drawing on his background in CES, Elder Maxwell quietly nurtured for years the visits of retired BYU faculty and other LDS teachers who have gone to China to teach English under strict, and carefully observed, no-proselyting rules. For Neal, just having those Latter-day Saints there, making friends as teachers, was reason enough for their presence. He has also built relationships with Chinese officials, both in the United States and China, hosting the visit of Chinese ambassador Zhu Qizhen to Salt Lake City in 1991 and assisting with the Church's response to the interest of Chinese leaders in the Polynesian Cultural Center (PCC) near BYU-Hawaii. He helped arrange for the PCC's leaders to consult with Chinese officials who were planning their own large theme park.

After Vice Premier Li Lanqing visited the PCC in 1994, he invited Neal to visit China in 1995, along with Elder Russell M. Nelson, who had a long friendship with Chinese doctors after years of helping them to learn about heart surgery. Under normal Chinese protocol, Elders Maxwell and Nelson would not be allowed to enter the country as official representatives of the Church. Both had built such friendly relationships, however, that the government finally accepted the condition that the two could come to Beijing with the acknowledged understanding that "the purpose of the trip was apostolic." The Chinese ambassador to the United States later told Beverly Campbell that the good will of that trip had "positive and unparalleled results."

On a 1992 trip through Asia with Elder Nelson, Neal visited Bangkok, Thailand. The Church had struggled for respect and recognition by Thai authorities ever since two missionaries had been convicted years earlier of showing disrespect toward a statute of Buddha. In 1990, the Church was still unable to own property there in its own name, and missionaries needed to leave the country every ninety days to renew their visas. Assisted by Church Public Affairs personnel, Neal had developed a relationship with the Thai ambassador to the United States in Washington, D.C. That ambassador helped to persuade the Thai authorities to allow local visa renewals and more missionaries. The 1992 trip gave Neal a chance to visit the American ambassador to Thailand to thank him for the U.S. government's help in facilitating the Church's contacts in Washington.

On this same trip, Elder Maxwell had what turned out to be a remarkable, though unanticipated, experience with the Thai government. Thailand had just undergone a dangerous and contentious political upheaval that had displaced the existing government. Conditions were so unstable that for a time missionaries weren't allowed out of their apartments at night, and Bangkok had experienced three days of rioting in the streets. Mission president Larry White said the man widely expected to be named the new prime minister within a few days lacked the popular support needed to restore order. People feared that if he were appointed, rioting and civil unrest would resume with further bloodshed.

During the general session of the Bangkok district conference, where Elders Maxwell and Nelson presided, President White whispered to Neal his hope that Neal might somehow leave a special blessing on the country. Although he was generally aware of the unstable climate, Neal really didn't know enough to understand the complete context. Thailand still had a king, but he was a constitutional monarch with little authority to govern. Neal did know that an LDS woman in the congregation was a sister to a lady-in-waiting to the queen.

As the meeting drew to a close, Neal pronounced an apostolic blessing. According to President White's notes, he blessed

Thailand, the people, the king and leaders at this special hinge point in the history of this nation. I bless all, so there can be a spirit of reconciliation. I plead with Heavenly Father to ratify this blessing upon the king, the leaders, and the people . . . in the spirit of love, friendship, and most importantly as a special witness of Jesus Christ, [speaking for] myself and Elder Nelson.

President White was touched deeply, telling his missionaries at a conference with the two visitors the next day that many would benefit from this blessing.

Elders Maxwell and Nelson left Bangkok the next morning. Three days later, on June 10, the king in a surprise move exerted his moral influence to appoint a former prime minister, Anand Panyarachun, as interim prime minister and to call for general elections. This appointment came as a complete surprise, both to the general population and to the man who had expected to be appointed. Taxi cab drivers in Bangkok honked their horns in celebration. The tense situation was defused, and civil harmony returned as requested in the blessing.

David Phelps, an LDS lawyer who knew the local language and culture well enough to act as Neal's interpreter at the Bangkok meeting, wrote him three years later, describing "the peace I felt in combination with the overwhelming power of the Spirit as you exercised the keys of the holy apostleship on behalf of this land." What the king did was "expected by none yet embraced by all," starting a "healing process which continues to this day." Elder Monte J. Brough, who was present during the conference, said afterward, "I'll go to my grave believing the whole political system in Thailand changed because of the apostolic blessing of a Mormon elder." Any other explanation for what "happened was so unlikely."

During these same years, Elder Maxwell became directly involved in opening the doors of Mongolia to the gospel. This large, landlocked, isolated country of 2.3 million people is located between Siberia on the north and China on the south. It was a Russian satellite nation until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989. Once Mongolia adopted a democratic constitution in 1990, its leaders wanted to learn how to create a free-market economy. Elder Monte Brough of the Asia Area Presidency had visited Mongolia many years before his call as a General Authority, and in view of Elder Maxwell's charge to open up new countries, Monte decided to visit Mongolia again.

After sizing up the country's needs and learning that their ambassador to the United States had visited BYU, Elder Brough proposed inviting into Mongolia missionary couples who could help the government modernize its system of higher education and who would be allowed to teach the gospel to people who expressed an interest. As first contact for Asia, Elder Maxwell instinctively liked the link between education and missionary work. He quickly gained approval of the concept by the Twelve and the First Presidency and then went to work to find what he came to call "Green Beret" missionary couples who were experienced in education and also had the fortitude to live in a distant and difficult environment.

Elder John K. Carmack, another member of the Asia Area Presidency, called Elder Maxwell "the father of the Church in Mongolia," because from their location in Hong Kong, the Asia Area Presidency could not arrange for the people and equipment to mount such an innovative start-up operation. "We were sitting out there in a forgotten land [Mongolia], and we had to have somebody [in Salt Lake City] who cared." Neal "jumped right in and got his hands dirty."

With this need on his mind, Neal heard that Kenneth Beesley, his former colleague from CES, had retired and was considering serving a mission with his wife. So Neal invited Ken to lunch. The Brethren at first considered Mongolia too primitive and uncertain to warrant a formal missionary call, but if Ken and Donna were willing to volunteer, they seemed perfectly suited. They became the "lead couple" for what became a group of six humanitarian missionary couples, all of them having various education-based specialties, who "just laid aside their lives and went over to start the work in Mongolia."

The first couples began their service in 1992, subsisting under bleak, cold conditions. The only thing they really kept hot was their fax machine their primary link to the outside world, because mail service was unreliable and telephone calls prohibitively expensive. After concentrating seriously on their educational advisory task for the first several months, the Beesleys felt it was time to dedicate Mongolia for the preaching of the gospel. Elder Maxwell and Elder Kwok Yuen Tai of the Asia Area Presidency arrived in Ulaanbaatar on April 15, 1993. The visitors met first with about seventy-five government, media, and educational leaders, receiving the earnest thanks of this group for the Church's assistance. Then they repaired to a hilltop plaza overlooking the city, joined by the missionary couples, the country's first two converts, and thirty young investigators of the Church. There Neal turned the apostolic key, officially opening Mongolia to the gospel and the Church.

He prayed, "Some of us are far from home and far from our families, but we are comforted to know that no place is distant from Thee." He invoked a blessing on the new converts and asked the Lord to "raise up friends" in this "wind-swept land. May . . . the winds of freedom . . . never cease to blow in Mongolia." Then he dedicated the country, blessing "its leaders and people, its soil, and its sky all to the end that the nation may . . . respond to the Gospel message so that Thy work may be firmly established here. May Mongolia even be as a beacon light to other nations."

Since that day in 1993, the Church had grown to 3,000 members by 2001, with two districts, seventeen branches, and 130 returned missionaries. Many other Mongolian missionaries have now served in the United States and other missions. The Church is thus the largest organized religion in the country. To Neal, Mongolia was a miraculous "garden spot for the Church," illustrating the value of going to a country when it "still had economic humility" and showing the value of offering genuinely needed educational service. Neal had counseled the Asia Area Presidency all along that when the Church takes such a step of faith, "we go in right, in our full character as missionaries of the Church," with "the right to do missionary work. And if they don't like that, we won't come."

By the time he returned from Mongolia, Neal's experience in dedicating countries for the preaching of the gospel had so stirred him that he realized he had yet to dedicate the Maxwell's most recent home. So on June 23, 1993, exercising the right of any father who holds the Melchizedek Priesthood, Neal gathered Colleen and their family and blessed their home to be

a place of security, a temple of love, and a haven . . . from the difficulties of the world for all who come here. . . .

Help us to love in a world that is often full of hate. . . . [Bless the family members] who will preach the gospel in other nations [with] a contagion and a feeling of enthusiasm for the great gospel.

In his quest for discipleship, Neal had found once more that missionaries who are drawn to preach the gospel, opening doors in distant lands, return ready to open the doors of their own homes to more fully teaching and living the gospel.
