Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Forty-Six

Out of Obscurity

In the last third of the twentieth century, the Church witnessed significant changes in the way the message of the Restoration was both communicated and perceived in two different audiences the American media and the general membership of the Church. Many large-scale factors contributed to this transformation, but one influence, if only a modest one, was Elder Maxwell's presence in the Church leadership. His involvement was at once a cause and an effect. In some ways he helped shape the pattern, but on a scale much larger than any one person's role, his own ministry and public expressions also reflected and illustrated it. Thus, Neal's personal contribution and growth are best seen as part of the larger whole of the Church's history. This development partially fulfilled the Lord's promise that He would give His servants "power to lay the foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of obscurity" (D&C 1:30; italics added).

As the Church began to emerge more fully from obscurity, the needs of the times matched Neal's background and skills. From his boyhood onward, he had been a voracious consumer of newspapers, news magazines, political biographies, history books, and many informal sources of historical trends. His interest in journalism and the media had expressed itself when he helped edit his high school newspaper, wrote news stories for hometown papers during World War II, had his own radio interview show as a university student, saw the national political scene from the inside during his years on the Senate staff, interviewed public figures for ten years on educational television, and then engaged the world of public opinion for the University of Utah and as a citizen leader on Utah educational and governmental issues.

Then Neal learned from direct participation how the Church's external and internal communications fit into this world of public affairs. Senior Church leaders increasingly involved him in formulating and implementing such delicate matters as the Church's policy on civil rights, Utah liquor laws, the MX missile, the Equal Rights Amendment, and the Church's relationships with government leaders at all levels. From 1995 to 2000, he was chairman of the Church Public Affairs Committee, working under direction from President Gordon B. Hinckley and President James E. Faust of the First Presidency, both of whom had formerly chaired the Public Affairs Committee. And regarding communications within the Church, Neal's closeness to developments in the correlation movement under Harold B. Lee and later in the Correlation Department involved him over many years in the process of clarifying and communicating the Church's central priorities to its own leaders and members.

Against this background, President Gordon B. Hinckley, himself an astute master of public communications, said in 2000, "I don't know of anybody we have who keeps track of public issues, public figures, which way the wind's blowing, the way Neal Maxwell does." Neal's fundamental viewpoint is that the Church ought to take charge of telling its own story rather than letting others tell it first. President Hinckley agrees: "That's the purpose, of course, of a good public affairs program. . . . You chart the course, instead of letting outsiders chart it for you." President Boyd K. Packer of the Twelve concurs, noting Neal's "ability to view the Church as others see it. He's our number one public affairs man. . . . He's kind of masterminded this." And because of Neal's strategic commitment to having the Church speak for itself, rather than just waiting until events require the Church to respond, "We're really staying ahead of things, as compared to reacting all the time."

A recent change in media attitudes toward the Church, and Neal's view about that process, was illustrated in a cover story "The Mormon Moment" in U.S. News & World Report that appeared in November 2000. In his Public Affairs role, Neal was designated by the First Presidency to represent the Church in the interviews for this article. Some excerpts from it:

By almost any measure, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is one of the world's richest and fastest-growing religious movements. In the 170 years since its founding in upstate New York, the LDS Church has sustained the most rapid growth rate of any new faith group in American history. Since World War II, its ranks have expanded more than 10-fold, with a worldwide membership today of 11 million more than half outside the United States. In North America, Mormons already outnumber Presbyterians and Episcopalians combined. If current trends hold, experts say Latter-day Saints could number 265 million worldwide by 2080, second only to Roman Catholics among Christian bodies. Mormonism, says Rodney Stark, professor of sociology and religion at the University of Washington, "stands on the threshold of becoming the first major faith to appear on Earth since the prophet Mohammed rode out of the desert." . . .

[Since its beginning,] the church has continued to face almost unrelenting controversy over its origins. . . .

But today, religion experts note, the LDS church is widely respected for its devotion to faith and family, and its pioneer past is celebrated as an integral part of the American saga. Such a dramatic shift in public perception has not come easily or by accident. In 1995, leaders hired an international public-relations firm to combat what they saw as unfair characterizations of Mormons in the media. One of its first efforts was to encourage the redesign of the church's logo to emphasize the centrality of Jesus Christ in LDS theology. "We don't see it so much as PR," says [Elder Neal A.] Maxwell, "as trying to define ourselves, rather than . . . letting others define us."

This is not to say that every recent media story about the Church has been so positive. But especially in the 1990s, the willingness of major media sources to speak positively and visibly about the Church's strengths became more obvious than ever before. Some of the most widespread attention came in 1997, when the Church celebrated the anniversary of the pioneers' entry into the Salt Lake Valley in 1847. A picture of the Salt Lake Temple appeared, for instance, on the cover of Time magazine in August of that year, with the caption, "Mormons, Inc.: The secrets of America's most prosperous religion." As a summary of the cover story in that issue's table of contents, Time said,

A century and a half ago, Joseph Smith and his followers were reviled and forced into a march across the plains to found a new Zion in Utah. Now the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is making dramatic strides into the mainstream both as a faith and as a dynamic financial enterprise, a combination of virtues that may make it the religion of America's future.

Other favorable media events during these years included a three-page spread of stories in a 1997 issue of USA Today about the Church and its missionaries and a story in the Washington Post about the Church welfare program. Then there were President Gordon B. Hinckley's engaging interviews with CNN's Larry King and with Mike Wallace in the CBS television program 60 Minutes, along with his nationally recognized book, Standing for Something. In 2001, Newsweek magazine also featured the Church in a cover story. As Neal said, "those were things that were simply not thought of, really, in the 1980s at all." Under President Gordon B. Hinckley's direction, the Church's recent "accessibility, openness, and reaching out to the media . . . to define ourselves" is "unique in this dispensation."

The Wallace interview arose from President Hinckley's disarming remarks at a Harvard Club luncheon in New York City in late 1995. Elder Maxwell accompanied President Hinckley and introduced him at this event. Jan Shipps wrote that, in the 60 Minutes interview, Mike Wallace had become so friendly that he essentially "made the case for the Mormons' cultural acceptability," even though she thought Wallace should have emphasized more the significance of the Church's international dispersion in the past fifty years.

After the visit to the Harvard Club, Elder Maxwell reported to the First Presidency and the Twelve how well President Hinckley had handled the interchange that led to the Mike Wallace interview. He told them what he has long felt, that President Hinckley's administration will be defined in some significant measure by the able, fearless way he has dealt with the media, thereby informing the public better about the Church. "He is unafraid of the media, and they know it."

Jan Shipps has shown that the media also presented positive images of the Church in earlier years, especially in the 1950s and then again between the mid-1960s and 1970s, when "the dramatic discrepancy between clean-cut Mormons and scruffy hippies" seen in the electronic media "completed the [positive] transformation of the Mormon image" from the generally negative flavor of the nineteenth century. The mid-1980s cast some darker, temporary shadows, but that darkness only provided a sharper contrast for the warm light of the 1990s. Shipps believes the recent media glow may become less friendly, or at least more sophisticated, as the Church's continued growth alters its underdog status as a "model minority" religion.

Several long-term factors contributed to the media's increasingly positive portrayal of the Church in recent years. In a different but important way, similar factors also helped prompt the Church to clarify its core religious themes to its own membership. Elder Maxwell played a role in both dimensions of this change, if only because he emphasized so clearly his conviction that along all communications fronts, from the media to the scholarly community to the Church community, the Church should take the initiative to define itself in an anticipatory way.

First, the Church's own globalization has led it out of obscurity, clarifying and simplifying its central message and the essential themes of the Restoration. Neal welcomed this development, because he has long believed that such basic doctrinal concepts as the mission of Jesus Christ, the Book of Mormon, the family, and personal Christian discipleship are more significant than the more programmatic dimensions of Church membership. And some of the programmatic elements were, in fact, an historical reflection of U.S. culture. In 1998 the Church reached the point of having more members outside than inside the United States. As the Church has become more established in multiple cultures, it necessarily has given priority to its most essential doctrines, which are applied universally, clearly transcending cultural boundaries.

Neal sometimes has compared this process with the early Christian era, when the Lord revealed to Peter that the Apostles must take the gospel to the Gentiles. Just as Peter and Paul had to teach the early Church to avoid imposing the practices of traditional Jewish culture on new Gentile converts, Neal would say, today's Church leaders must avoid imposing the assumed but unnecessary traditions of U.S. culture on Church members in other lands.

Once after returning from a trip to Latin America, for instance, he noted that there is no hymn called "Guatemala the Beautiful" in the Church hymnbook, though at that time "America the Beautiful" was in the hymnbook as a reflection of the unique role of religious freedom in the U.S. Constitution, which made the Restoration possible. He has also expressed concerns about imposing the techniques of American management style on local Church leaders in every culture. And more than once he has said, "They didn't have a Church athletic program in Abraham's day." He was sobered in a stake priesthood leadership meeting in a faraway country when he learned that one leader who had no car was assigned the virtually impossible task of home teaching seventeen families. So he has advocated local flexibility as well as simplicity, encouraging greater programmatic discretion for Area Presidencies and other local leaders. At the same time, because the Church's maturity varies so much from one country to another, he has also been concerned about the risks inherent in imposing an oversimplified set of leadership expectations on fully developed stakes and wards.

The influence of the Church's international expansion on its public affairs efforts is reflected in the work of the Washington, D.C., international affairs office, a group of Church members who have in recent years, often under Neal's guidance, built lasting relationships with ambassadors to the U.S. from other countries. When these leaders have come to know the Church firsthand, they have often played an essential role in helping their home countries to understand the Church. Working with this committee for years, Neal has had a goal to identify individuals like "Colonel Kane" (a friend of the Church during Brigham Young's era who was not a Latter-day Saint) who could say, "Look, I know these people. You can trust them." Building these ties has been a conscious part of Neal's commitment that "we go in the front door or we don't go in at all" to other countries.

A second factor leading the Church to take the initiative in defining itself more clearly has been the influence of critics from outside as well as from within the Church. As the Church became more visible in recent years, for example, the long-standing critical, or sometimes innocent, outsider's question "Are Mormons Christians?" simply acquired more importance. Other areas of questioning that have long interested Neal included the Book of Mormon and Church history. Rather than waiting for more critical attacks, Neal has encouraged the Church, including Latter-day Saint scholars at Brigham Young University and elsewhere, to frame and address the issues on these topics before the questions arise. These efforts have helped bring the historical and doctrinal foundations of ancient and modern scripture ever more out of obscurity.

A third development, which initially had more visible effects within the Church than outside it, has been a gradual but clear increase in the use of the scriptures especially the Book of Mormon in LDS homes and classrooms. As this trend increased, it also influenced external perceptions by underscoring Church members' interest in, and appreciation for, the central role of Jesus Christ, both in the Book of Mormon and in general.

The greater use of scriptures in all Church classes, from Sunday School and Relief Society to seminary and institute, reflected the later stages of the correlation movement. When correlation began in the 1960s, it was concerned primarily with organizational issues, even though those issues had doctrinal roots. By the early 1970s, under President Harold B. Lee's continued guidance, the leaders of correlation took the natural next step of recommending the four standard works as the primary texts for adult Gospel Doctrine classes. This replaced a tradition of lesson manuals organized around selected gospel principles and illustrated by scriptural verses. This step made it clear that focusing "greater attention on the scriptural texts" was part of "the fundamental mission of correlation." As one Sunday School General Board member said, it was time to "rewrite manuals so they enhanced rather than replaced the scriptures." In addition, the scriptures were a more natural text for an international Church, as distinguished from manuals that had naturally tended to draw on topics and illustrations from U.S. culture.

A fourth factor nudging the Church to be less obscure has been the technological revolution of the past generation. Neal and the other Church leaders had plenty of reasons to avoid riding the Internet wave with its potential for delivering harmful influences into people's homes. But in the late 1990s, when Neal was chairman of the Temple and Family History Executive Council, he became persuaded from proposals designed and sponsored by others that the Church should take the initiative to place its family history records on the Internet. Rather than letting external events overtake the Church and diminish its established world leadership in family history, he believed "we can't lose our place in the world as the ones who really own genealogy."

As he had felt about other public communications issues, Neal thought the Church should set the standard and the example for Internet genealogy work, rather than letting others define the terrain and require the Church to react. For him, this attitude was strategic, connected to "what the Church ought to be doing as a leader in family history." So when Elder Monte Brough and others in the Family History Department proposed an Internet search service for family history in 1998, Elder Maxwell and Elder Russell M. Nelson encouraged the Brethren's approval of FamilySearchÂ Internet Genealogy Service, which has since recorded millions of hits each day. This paved the way for other Church-sponsored Internet sites for Church members and for other people who have an interest in the Church. Because of the influence of the Internet in the global electronic community, these steps heightened the Church's international visibility. They also increased accessibility to basic Church resources and literature among members in far-off lands.

A fifth factor bringing the Church from obscurity is the secularization of Western society, which especially since the 1960s has altered many public attitudes that previously supported religious and family values. In this climate, although the Church's teachings did not change, its values became more conspicuous when the Church grew stronger just as the surrounding society was growing more secular. Neal believed this development gave the Church the opportunity and the responsibility to carry the message of Christianity to the world. Thus, like President Ezra Taft Benson, he has worked to increase awareness of the Book of Mormon not only to show that the Restoration is true but that a Christian world reeling from rising secularism and higher criticism of the Bible needs the clear second witness of Christ's divinity which the Book of Mormon provides.

Also in a more secular society, Church support for family values in carefully selected causes has influenced the broader community. For example, the First Presidency adopted a statement in 1994 opposing same-gender marriage. The Public Affairs Committee, which Neal chaired, then helped the Church work with citizen groups to encourage public campaigns against same-sex marriage in Hawaii, Alaska, and California. The voters in each state adopted ballot initiatives prohibiting their state's recognition of such marriages. Neal said the Church's association with the "Coalition for the Protection of Marriage" on California's "Proposition 22" was the Church's "biggest ever" involvement in an issue of public morality.

Other specific factors came together around 1995 that added impetus to the Church's public visibility, just as Elder Maxwell became chairman of the Public Affairs Committee. For one thing, President Hinckley became President of the Church, and his unique background and talents immediately enhanced the Church's reputation with public groups of all kinds. As Neal said of him, "The Church can't move forward . . . if we are hidden under a bushel," and President Hinckley is both willing and able to remove the bushel. "He is a man of history and modernity at the same time, and he has marvelous gifts of expression that enable him to present our message in a way that appeals to people everywhere." President Hinckley's informed and gentle candor has signaled to journalists and others "a new openness" about the Church. Salt Lake City's role as host city for the 2002 Winter Olympics also attracted unusual media interest in the Church.

In addition, the First Presidency and the Twelve, assisted by such able staff people as Bruce Olsen and Beverly Campbell, developed several specific steps to enhance the Church's public communications messages. They engaged a consulting firm named Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, stepped up the effort of Church Public Affairs to build bridges with civic leaders at all levels, and launched the pioneer sesquicentennial plans for 1997.

Mike Deaver, who was deputy chief of staff to President Ronald Reagan, works for Edelman. When the Church was considering whether to engage that firm, Neal recalls that Deaver said, "Ronald Reagan knew who he was, and he didn't need anybody to remake him. The Church knows who it is, and they don't need anybody to remake them. They just need to be able to project their message." To this end, Deaver and his associates have been able to work with such media organizations as Time magazine in ways the Church "just can't do directly."

As a public affairs leader, Neal has involved himself personally in numerous "bridge-building" visits throughout the United States and elsewhere with governmental leaders, congressmen, ambassadors, and other public figures. Such individuals have found that Neal is "a very cosmopolitan person" who isn't "threatened by any issue or person." At the same time, "he treats everyone from religion writers to U.S. senators the same. He is well read and converses in what interests [other people] with ease. He is a master at telling the Church's story as vibrant and living rather than stuffy and constraining." He has felt especially at home with political leaders, where he has encouraged better recognition of the Church in many countries. His political neutrality has helped, "because he's got so many friends on both sides of the aisle," and "he just stays out of" extraneous political issues.

Neal's long-standing commitment to the two-party system of the United States has also led him to sponsor some initiatives to bring the Church and its members more into the public light. For instance, he encouraged Elder Marlin K. Jensen, a Seventy serving on the Public Affairs Committee, to be interviewed by the Utah media in 1998 about the value of a bipartisan system. To Neal, this proactive step was better than "to sit back passively and have people define us as an ultraconservative church that's made up solely of Republicans." He also suggested a portion of a First Presidency letter of January 15, 1998, which encouraged Church members to "be willing to serve" in elective or appointive political offices in the party of their choice. Neal is concerned about "the quality of men and women in public office," and he believes Latter-day Saints should "be doing more and having more of an influence," not simply to help the Church but to draw on their religious values to serve better their communities.

Elder Maxwell has reflected his attitudes in occasional breakfasts or lunches with LDS members of the U.S. Congress, who come from both major political parties. He has long worked to ensure that the Church doesn't ask "favors of our own people" in their elective roles, but he has still wanted them to feel closer to and better informed about developments within the Church. On one or two of these occasions, he left an apostolic blessing with the LDS Congressmen. Beverly Campbell in Washington said the Congressmen "valued these visits enormously," though Neal would "never tell them how to vote," whether they asked or not.

In his apostolic years, even when public affairs was the topic, Neal's interests were fundamentally spiritual ones. For example, he told a group of new mission presidents, "The image of the Church will improve in direct proportion to the degree to which we mirror the Master in our lives. No media effort can do as much good, over the sweep of time, as can believing, behaving and serving members of the Church."

In addition, his interaction with political leaders reflects how his personality has matured through the spiritual seasoning of his service. After watching him deal with legislators and ambassadors in Washington, D.C., Beverly Campbell knew that Neal was not

born with a natural tolerance for tedious or concealing rhetoric. [And although he could] dazzle everyone, he doesn't. [In our meetings, I found] I was watching someone who, by force of will, had subjugated himself that he might better serve [the Lord]. This humility and generosity of spirit carried with it such power . . . and total submission to his prophetic mission. His gentleness and dignity [enhanced one's] awareness that here was a true moral and intellectual force.

The Church's relationship with the Islamic community offers a final example of Neal's bridge-building, demonstrating the overlap between public affairs and his patient, long-range approach to opening the doors of nations. Chances are, Neal has said, thirty years ago nobody at Church headquarters was wondering how to reach out to the huge Muslim world.

During the late 1980s, Neal talked occasionally with Elders Dallin Oaks and Alexander Morrison about Islam. Aided by Elder Morrison's perspective from his prior experience with the World Health Organization when he was an official in the Canadian government, they all felt the time had come for the Church to open some kind of dialogue with the Islamic people. The Church has much in common with Islam both religions value family life, and both have an historical relationship with Judaism and the ancient Middle East. Neal had sensed Elder Howard W. Hunter's deep feelings for Muslims when they traveled together to Egypt a few years earlier. And since BYU students had first begun semester abroad programs in Israel in the 1970s, Neal, Dallin, and their successors in the Church Educational System have always nurtured an attitude of compassionate fairness among BYU students toward both Jews and Muslims.

Neal led the members of his Quorum, then, through some position papers on the Church's interface with Islam. He realized that the Church was "so unknown" to them "that we had to find some way of communicating to these wonderful people who we are" rather than "letting other people define us" to them. So Neal invited Daniel Peterson of the BYU Arabic language faculty to join with Elders Oaks, Morrison, and himself in some brainstorming sessions.

Traditional proselyting in Islamic countries was prohibited by law, and Church leaders respected that stance. Still, they wanted to "show Muslims our deep respect for Islam," especially because Muslims often "feel underrated by the West." Thus arose the idea of the Islamic translation project BYU and the Church, aided by private donations, would sponsor translations into English by the finest Arabic scholars of leading Arabic texts from the Middle Ages. Westerners are generally "unaware of the glorious civilization that Islam had a thousand years ago," in large measure because so many published fruits of Islam's intellectual flowering in that era have never been translated into English. Elder Morrison saw that Neal's desire to "showcase this wonderful civilization" came from his "world view . . . that all people [are] God's children and his deep respect for other cultures" an attitude that originated in Neal's "feeling heavily his responsibility as an Apostle" to love and reach out to all people.

So Dan Peterson organized a prestigious editorial board, raised funds, and arranged for able translators. Eventually, the first books came off the press English on one page and Arabic on the facing page. Encouraged by warm support from President Merrill J. Bateman, BYU hosted dinners in 1998 through 2000 in eastern U.S. cities, inviting Muslim leaders and scholars to receive copies distributed by the University of Chicago Press. Neal liked the comment of Parviz Morewedge, editor-in-chief of the series, who told his Muslim friends in Washington that the Mormons are different Christians, the ones with no history of colonialism. Neal hadn't thought of the Church's expansion in that way, but he knew it was true the LDS global outreach is not designed to create colonies of the U.S. or Europe.

Neal told the gathering in New York about the "many touching points" between "Mormons and Muslims," points he hoped would become bridges of understanding. Those topics include shared general beliefs that God is the source of light, the family is of great importance, we must resist the excesses of the secular world, and faith and knowledge "are not hostile but sequential." Hearing him at this gathering, historian Richard Bushman said Neal spoke "the words of a large soul with a cosmopolitan outlook." Part of that largeness of soul is that Neal, once so impatient to know the end from the beginning, is now content to reach out and then just watch, patiently, for whatever circumstance will allow the opening of another door, or perhaps only a window, to the Islamic world and China, India, and every other kindred, tongue, and people.
