Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Forty-Nine

Developing Discipleship

Elder Maxwell's writing reflects considerable development since his first book in 1967. "One can see an evolution in style," wrote Jerry Johnston in a book review thirty years later, "from the enchantment of language and poetry in the late 70s . . . to a startling directness an urgency in more recent times." Elder Maxwell's 1997 book is "obviously conceived in love. But I'm here to tell you, it's not for the faint of heart." Others have also noticed how his approach, both in form and in content, has led to more disciplined and reflective language, as his skill has increased and as experience has deepened his religious understanding.

Stylistically, he has gradually tamed the ornamentation that some of his friends once thought was simply too much. Tony Kimball, who has shared books with Neal since the 1960s, nearly regrets having introduced him to G. K. Chesterton, who "used alliteration almost to an excess." Acknowledging that Neal "loves to play with words," Alexander Morrison thought he sometimes "plays with words too much and loses people in the process." Elizabeth Haglund, who may have read more of his prepublication manuscripts than anyone else, says some of his books in the 1970s "weren't the books he was capable of" writing. He was "in love with words" and used language "that even erudite readers wouldn't get. . . . I faulted him sometimes for trivializing his subject." Too many of his books were "written too quickly," as if the publishers "needed a piece to take to market." Eventually, however, Liz thinks his "terrific bear-down" discipline "made him a fine writer. He was a fancy writer. He's now an elegant writer." To Oscar McConkie, Neal has become "much more what I call doctrinal than he used to be."

A similar ripening has occurred in the subject matter of his writing. For example, he said in the 1970s, "I mine the scriptures for those things in which I have a particular and current interest," looking for "insights that can be applied . . . to daily life whether the subject is time management, or delegation, or whatever." Reflecting such interests, his first book was largely a how-to work about leadership skills. That emphasis was natural, given his involvement in the late 1960s with the Church's leadership committee.

The second book, For the Power Is in Them (1970), was a sixty-three-page volume of "Mormon Musings," a brief and breezy collection of thought nuggets, though sometimes nuggets without ore. It consisted of short, rapid-fire paragraphs on a wide array of topics, without chapters, without context, and without thematic development. The next two books were also short ones, but they did have chapters, and they typically addressed issues related to youth, education, leadership, and secularism topics with which Neal dealt frequently as commissioner of education and as a regional representative.

Neal was just learning to glean whatever harvest he found in his previous year's speeches for his books. He was also experimenting with rhetorical devices that occasionally lacked the sharpness that would come later. For instance, consider this metaphor from around 1970: "Our growing asphalt wilderness [in modern Utah] may become, in many ways, more wild and more difficult to tame and to govern than was their [the Utah pioneers'] sagebrush circumstance." Compare it with this more polished one from 1990: "The cares and anxieties of the world occupy us as if we were children making dikes and castles on the beach, unaware that each day's incoming surf will erase sincere but temporal labors." The later metaphor is more disciplined, fusing the principle he's teaching with a sharper image to make his point more clearly.

Neal's early books also contain many doctrinal buds that blossom in his later work. Consider this sample of ideas barely mentioned in his second book in 1970 that would develop in his future writing: discipleship; Mosiah 3:19 ("For the natural man is an enemy to God . ."); the "man of Christ" in Helaman 3:29; things will be in commotion; the fellowship of His suffering; and feasting on the word of God.

Neal brought to his writing in the early 1970s the perspective and concerns of a religious political scientist, whose speeches and writing often tried to encourage Latter-day Saint university students and teachers to use religious insights in their academic and professional fields to help rescue a morally degenerating society. As late as 1980, he told a Church News interviewer that he thought secularism in society was the second largest challenge the Church faced, after the issue of international growth. He was concerned about "a despiritualized society with irreligion at its core," and he worried that eventually "misled majorities may sadly reach the conditions noted in Mosiah 29:27," when the majority are so unrighteous that they do not choose what is good. He worried about the threats of secularism to individual Latter-day Saints, but he also worried about the society itself and instinctively wanted to encourage social change.

That My Family Should Partake (1974), his first book as a General Authority, was his most substantial religious book to that point. It reflected his social concerns but also recognized that society must first "look homeward, angel," building on a line from John Milton, because society's best long-term solutions lie in individual families. As he said in one of his better metaphors from this period, "If we poison the headwaters of humanity the home it is exceedingly difficult to depollute downstream."

As time went on, and especially after his call to the Twelve in 1981, Neal's thinking and priorities took a gradual turn. After years of experimenting with writing styles laced with extensive quotations from other writers, he began more consistently to find his own voice. And the voice of scriptural passages wove itself increasingly into his voice. He was moving from the word to the word and, ultimately, to the Word.

He still worried about collisions between the sacred and the secular, but he became more pessimistic about, or perhaps just less interested in, social problems as such. Secularism has always interested him, but he moved in his writing and in his personal priorities increasingly toward the goal of coming to know the Savior, becoming like Him, and developing His attributes. With this perspective, the earlier social concerns were less compelling even though he has still urged Church members to care about society enough to be real participants in it.

In 1975, Neal published Of One Heart, the first of five books (two in 1975 and then one each in 1976, 1984, and 1992) that used dialogue from imaginary letters or conversations, a creative format quite different from his devotional essays. One challenge with using a dialogue format to present religious topics is that, according to literary theorists, a religious author "cannot produce a truly subversive question [even for a character in an imaginary dialogue] that would undermine his own faith." Of One Heart is clearly the best book of the five. Its words flow with a natural freshness through a series of letters written by Mahijah, who is converted by the preaching of Enoch and then joins his community and lives in the city called Zion. "Omner," he writes his friend, "you would not criticize a group of people who sought the same high ground in the midst of a flood; you would not see their presence in one place as an unintelligent act, for they came together in order to be saved. So it is here."

Among his other books, the best ones coincide with key experiences in Neal's own life. His readers, judging by the number of copies sold, and most of his friends agree that All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience (1979) is probably his best work. For one thing, says Jim Jardine, this book "starts with an issue and develops it" more fully than do the other books. This was his first attempt to write about adversity in a substantial way, an interest that arose from the poignant empathy he felt for the two cancer victims to whom he dedicated the book, Richard Sharp and David Silvester. What Neal felt and learned through staying very close to these two men during their final months expanded his heart, intensifying his private ministry to people stricken with illness.

The next work that carried a significant freshness and depth was Even As I Am (1982), a collection of essays that expressed Elder Maxwell's feelings about Jesus Christ in the months after his call to the Twelve, including his moving talk from the October 1981 general conference. Whatever his tasks now, he wrote, "there stands the Savior. . . . What He is presses in upon me in relentless reminder of what I should be." Now he could hardly sing of Him without tears coming to his eyes. Now he must "earnestly . . . strive to accept His generous but genuine invitation and direction to become, as He has said, 'Even as I am.'"

Another book that conveyed unusual spiritual vitality was But for a Small Moment (1986), which grew from the historical research Neal undertook during the Mark Hofmann era, when he rose so passionately to the defense of Joseph Smith. In so doing, Neal was especially drawn to Joseph's haunting experience in Liberty Jail, the place B. H. Roberts called the "prison temple" because of the profound religious inspiration the Prophet received there in the midst of his oppressive captivity. By immersing himself in Joseph's thought and feelings, Neal found himself looking at the Church, his life, and the lives of others during the stresses of the mid-1980s through the narrow grates of Joseph's windows in the thick walls of the ironically named "Liberty" Jail. But for a Small Moment includes, in a different form, most of the content from Neal's stirring 1986 talk in Washington, D.C., on Joseph Smith.

If Thou Endure It Well (1996) was significant especially for the almost eerie way it anticipated the leukemia that would strike him within months after the book was published. Here he wrote that "adversity must be part of the pattern rather than always an aberration." And, "how could our personal empathy be genuinely and lastingly established and enlarged without refining experiences in the furnace of affliction?" Its most striking anticipatory signal was the book's epilogue, which consisted of Neal's poem "Submission." He had actually expressed this poem's same line of thought in various prose versions in his earlier books indeed, it is one of his oldest nuggets, a theme he has mentioned in numerous places dating back more than twenty years. But these lines, his best effort at poetry, captured his thinking about Jonah and applied it to the reader and himself in a way his prose never quite could and with shuddering accuracy about what was waiting for him just around the corner:

When from Thy stern tutoring I would quickly flee, Turn me from my Tarshish To where is best for me. Help me in my Nineveh To serve with love and truth Not on a hillside posted Mid shade of gourd or booth. When my modest suffering seems So vexing, wrong, and sore, May I recall what freely flowed From each and every pore. Dear Lord of the Abba Cry, Help me in my duress To endure it well enough And to say, . . . "Nevertheless."

One More Strain of Praise (1999) should be mentioned because it is such sober evidence of what Elder Maxwell honestly believed in 1999 that he might not live more than a few months, barring divine intervention. The book is based on the hymn "Sing We Now at Parting," which is quoted fully in the introduction, its lines providing all of the chapter headings. There is a real sadness about the valedictory tone of this volume, but that heaviness would later be alleviated by the miraculous extension of Neal's life, which medical science really could not have predicted. In that sense, this book stands as evidence for the spiritual power that intervened in his life.

Consider a few other samples of the way doctrinal phrases that appeared early in his writing expanded in his later works.

Alma's phrase, for example, "I ought to be content with the things which the Lord hath allotted unto me," first came to Neal's attention decades before this idea became one of his most insightful conference talks in April 2000. In at least two different books (1978 and 1986), Neal noted the phrase briefly, without much comment. In 1978, he quoted a 1952 conference talk by Elder Henry D. Moyle, "We . . . might as well take to heart the admonition of Alma and be content with that which God hath allotted us." By 2000, Neal would put Alma's phrase into its nine-verse context, comparing his desire to speak, like an angel, "with the trump of God" (Alma 29:1) with his humble acceptance of being but "an instrument in the hands of God" (Alma 29:9) thereby content with his allotment. For Neal, his illness barely in remission, the once-brash young man full of limitless hopes had meekly come to accept the "allotted 'acreage'" of a probably shortened life with hope of a different kind.

Another seed Neal planted for future germination was a quotation from G. K. Chesterton, which he used in 1973: "We have to love our neighbor because he is there. . . . He is the sample of humanity which is actually given us. Precisely because he may be anybody he is everybody." Later Neal would draw on this idea for his larger concept that we should live the gospel most fully among family and friends because they are the "clinical material" God gave us for practicing our Christianity.

One more sample of many is that Neal was intrigued from a very early stage by the doctrine of the premortal existence. He mentioned this doctrine repeatedly, but usually only briefly, in his early books. As he explored the meaning of adversity, his treatment of premortality took on increased meaning as a perspective on adversity and God's omniscience (1979). This meaning expanded when he considered the doctrinal light that came to Joseph in Liberty Jail (1986) and even more when he explained premortality as one of the Restoration's most distinctive and powerful doctrines (1986, 1988, and 1990).

Neal's understanding of the Atonement of Jesus Christ and his feelings for it developed considerably over the course of his writing. He used the phrase "the Atonement with its awful arithmetic" in his second book, in 1970, the same sixty-three-page book in which he also mentioned "the awful arithmetic of alcoholism." The book's mention of the Atonement referred to Christ's loneliness as an example of not being appreciated. Neal used the "arithmetic of the Atonement" phrase again in his first talk at October conference in 1974, a statement of gratitude that this arithmetic included his own sins.

Along with other occasional brief references in the 70s, at the end of a 1977 book he wrote, "It is the Garden Tomb, not life, that is empty!" But in 1981, after his call to the Twelve, the doctrine and meaning of the Atonement really embraced him and expanded his understanding. In 1981 he described how the Atonement flowed from Christ's attributes. By 1982 he was especially drawn to Alma 7:11-12, which explains how Christ could succor us in all our "infirmities" because of what he learned "according to the flesh." After Allen Bergin first drew his attention to this verse, Neal returned to it again and again. In his 1982 book, he also observed that Joseph Smith couldn't have written with the loving forgiveness he expressed in an oft-quoted letter to W. W. Phelps had the occasion been ten years earlier because Joseph needed experience in order to understand, a point Neal applied to himself as well.

By 1988, Neal was increasingly consumed with his appreciation of the Atonement's meaning and reach, writing of "the infinite Atonement," with its triumph of mercy over justice, the healing reach for all mankind, the intensity of Christ's suffering, and the sheer breadth of the blessing: "In addition to bearing our sins the required essence of the Atonement," he said, "the full intensiveness of the Atonement involved bearing our pains, infirmities, and sicknesses as well as our sins." In 1994 and 1999 he wrote at length about the meaning of faith in the Atonement of Jesus and understanding Christ as our advocate with the Father.

Finally, the concept of "discipleship" moved from bud to blossom as its roots sank deeper into Neal Maxwell's heart. Neal talked about "disciples" at his first stake conference visit as a YMMIA board member in the mid-1960s, and he used the word often in his first books and talks as a general Church officer. But in those days, he used the term essentially as a synonym for "Church member." During the 1970s, he would say such things as "discipleship . . . involves citizenship," "the disciple of Christ is urged . . . to seek out the best books," "one who desires discipleship [should] 'give place' in his busy life for . . . gospel morality," and "the disciple does not disdain facts, for they are useful and helpful."

After reading all of Elder Maxwell's books and published talks, Eric d'Evegnee, a BYU graduate student, found that his "writing over the last thirty years is marked by a narrowing from a generalized idea of discipleship to a culminating emphasis on being fully consecrated to the Father's will." Eric saw that early in his life Neal talked in youth and leadership settings about being faithful disciples, sometimes to distinguish "how the disciple is different from 'the world.'" In the late 1970s, he began talking about the implications of the plan of salvation for a disciple. As the 1980s began, he focused on the Lord's plan for each person, which was designed to teach "certain virtues" that would create "true disciples," virtues demonstrated in Christlike attributes and in the life of Joseph Smith. Within a few years, these virtues emphasized meekness and submissiveness, until the 1990s, when his teaching focused more sharply on becoming "a celestial disciple, or one that is fully swallowed up in the will of the Father."

The major steps in Neal's increased understanding of discipleship were clearly marked by new insights that emerged in his key books. By about 1976, discipleship was becoming Neal's dominant theme, emphasizing the relationship between "disciple" and the "discipline" of forsaking the world and following Christ. But with All These Things in 1979, he began to see discipleship more as a process than a single choice, and the process got moving only after one began the journey of becoming Christ's true follower. Through watching his believing, cancer-stricken friends deal with their adversity, Neal saw the connection between faithfulness and suffering the theme of that book.

In that context, he explained that we may suffer because of our sins or because of life's adversities, but, in addition, God may "inflict" suffering on disciples "because [He] deliberately chooses to school us." That's why Neal wrote, in terms that would take on such autobiographical meaning by the mid-1990s, "the very act of choosing to be a disciple . . . can bring to us a certain special suffering." So the general relationship between adversity and discipleship was now becoming more clear, but the deeper connection to Christ His Atonement and developing His attributes was still to come.

With Elder Maxwell's call to the Twelve in 1981, he began to focus intently on discipleship as a personal relationship with Jesus Christ a master-apprentice tutorial in which the disciple has the duty to become more like the master. Even As I Am (1982) thus emphasized what Neal was feeling so deeply for his own ministry as he quoted, "The disciple is not above his master: but every one that is perfect shall be as his master" (Luke 6:40), noting that "to strive to be like Him means that we must be genuinely serious about developing" the qualities "in the Master's personality." And the Master would teach the apprentice: "The most advanced disciples far from being immune from further instruction experience even deeper and more constant tutorials." Discipleship was now definitely becoming an exercise in personal development.

Another insight came in But for a Small Moment in 1986, as Neal began to empathize with the experience of Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail. His reflections on the "prison temple" brought a fresh appreciation of how the Lord had used that frightful adversity to tutor Joseph and not just to test him in general but to teach him the Christlike attributes a disciple must have. Joseph's experience with "these things" (D&C 122:7, written in Liberty Jail) was "part of the essence of significant spiritual development, the end for which all serious disciples are to strive."

Now Neal could see, and teach, that the disciple, like his Master, must learn obedience "by the things which he suffered" (Hebrews 5:8; italics added). Suffering, when it is part of the divine tutorial, can be sanctifying in the sense of developing the very virtues the disciple needs to learn. By 1988 it was clear, then, that the only way to learn Christlike attributes the whole point of following after Christ was to accept and internalize whatever trial the Father "seeth fit to inflict" (Mosiah 3:19). By this means, as costly as it may be, the virtues reflected in Christ's nature "reflect the outcome of serious discipleship." As we "become His children," then, "a change begins in us. As we . . . strive to become one with Him, . . . we come to resemble Him."

During the late 1980s and into the 90s, Neal built upon this foundation to focus on the particular Christlike virtues His disciples need to develop by the tutorial process especially meekness. And, as with all else he'd written, the emphasis in Neal's talks and books reflected his own process: He wrote about being meek and lowly precisely because he now wanted to develop those qualities more fully within his own nature. He had come to see that meekness was the quality that would allow his total submission to the Lord's will not only to accept the commandments in general but to accept whatever "He seeth fit to inflict" for the disciple's uniquely personal growth toward being "as his Master": "Some suffering actually comes in striving to become like Christ as well as in obeying him." And "meekness makes sublime submissiveness possible, without which no real spiritual development would be possible."

One issue in this understanding of spiritual growth is how much the individual can, and should, develop spiritual attributes through sheer self-discipline. In Neal's younger days he made very conscious, focused efforts at self-improvement, a trait that continued into the spiritual realm of his maturity. But is meekness something we "do" because we think we should, or are we truly meek only when that's the way we are? Neal used to express admiration for President Kimball's meekness, saying that part of what made him special was that he wasn't conscious of how special he was. Similarly, Leo Tolstoy once wrote about a man who was trying to discipline himself to "sainthood." Tolstoy thought that one who "trains himself to attain sainthood by grand gestures and noticeable acts of self-sacrifice" will "fail, because no matter what he does to humble his pride, he is still proud of his very humility." So when Tolstoy's character "meets a true saint, he discovers that she is unaware of her exceptionality."

In 1998 PBS interviewer Hugh Hewitt asked Neal about this same theme of consciously acquired Christian virtues. Hewitt wondered, "Can you really put in what wasn't there to begin with?" Neal responded that personal effort develops character if one is meek enough, because "meekness [is] seeing ourselves in relationship to . . . what we have the power to become." He has tried consciously to develop more Christlike attributes, "even though the journey is long and mine is far from through." And "in that sense my story can be everybody's story who is serious about values."

Then he added that "all who are serious about being disciples" will begin to live better as "the unconscious result of a consciously chosen way of life." We're "conscious that we need to be better, and we choose to do this, but we're probably, and mercifully, not conscious of all that's happening." Also, conscious effort with the right intent carries "the tacit acknowledgment of imperfections." The result, through personal striving and the Lord's bestowal of spiritual gifts in "the gospel of hope," is that "incremental improvement can occur."

The true disciple develops, then, from accepting to appreciating, to adoring, and then to emulating Christ. Now Neal was seeing that emulating One who suffered as Jesus did also means the follower must somehow yield his own kind of full sacrifice. "If we are serious about our discipleship, Jesus will eventually request each of us to do those very things which are most difficult for us to do." Within that process, the Savior blesses us with the gifts of the Spirit including charity after all we can do (see 2 Nephi 25:23).

As the process of discipleship blossomed in his writing and in his experience, Elder Maxwell gave this subject his most complete pre-illness explanation in "Becoming a Disciple" in the June 1996 Ensign and then treated it in "The Pathway of Discipleship" in the September 1998 Ensign. The second version reflects but makes no attempt to describe his own recent encounter with becoming utterly submissive. He could only say that when the disciple is fully and ultimately tested, "not shrinking is more important than surviving, and Jesus is our exemplar." These themes continued in The Promise of Discipleship, published in 2001.

Neal's experience then, reflected in the totality of his writing, is that disengaging from the unclean things of the secular world is only the introductory course in the curriculum of discipleship. Then comes an incremental process not just a decision to accept Christ but also a willingness to follow Him, learning to become like Him against the grain of opposition. As one submits to the tests and growing pains that come next, the process finally becomes something one experiences more than something one can explain. Through dealing with his illness, Neal found that words and reasoning can take us only so far, as valuable as words and reasons often are. True disciples of Jesus, if they want the real fruits of their deepest desires, eventually move beyond reason into the realm of sanctification by sacrifice.
