Bruce C. Hafen, Disciple's Life (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 2002)

Fifty

An Understanding Heart

The story of Neal Maxwell's life has now found its way back to the time of his memorable appearance at April conference 1997. His leukemia was in remission, his energy and his hair were both in short supply, but the conference experience had rejuvenated his spirits after the debilitating weeks of chemotherapy in LDS Hospital. It was a time of great hope.

After conference, Neal and Colleen slipped quietly home for the long, slow months it would take to build up his blood supply. They received a few visitors, but most friends silently understood that these two, and their family, needed privacy and peace. The remission had officially begun in February 1997, but no one knew how long it would last.

The daily mail brought an outpouring of support, words of love from friends across the globe and from each era of their lives. Yet one of the more poignant letters came from a Latter-day Saint they had never met. The letter prompted Neal to call her. In that and subsequent phone visits, he found "an authenticity" in this mother, and no self-pity. Her attitude, the absence of drama, and her matter-of-fact good cheer were an inspiration to him. She wrote:

Thank you for your words of encouragement this conference. I am the single mother of five children. (One is serving in the Cebu Philippines Mission.)

I have experienced two brain tumors and have a son who is fourteen who now has leukemia. I have a place in my heart for you and all that you and your family have been through.

I have personal knowledge that it is our relationship with Christ that comforts us when needed. I know that the Holy Ghost fits in there somewhere but have much more to learn. My [missionary] son would love you to know of his concern.

Best wishes and may you be comforted continually.

Another letter came from former President George Bush, who had lost a child to leukemia. He wrote, "Leukemia is a tough disease. We learned that the hard way years ago. But . . . medicine is making dramatic strides in treating [it]. . . . Barbara and I just wanted to wish you the speediest possible recovery." In his reply, Neal told the Bushes that the leukemia survival rate for children had moved from 17 to 70 percent since the death of their child.

Within several weeks, Neal felt well enough that Colleen invited Dr. Clyde Ford and Dr. Larry Staker and their wives to the Maxwell home for a "thanksgiving" dinner. Then, reflecting Neal's growing strength, the Maxwells took the entire family to San Diego for a vacation in July. By August he was back in the office and soon resumed much of his normal schedule of meetings, trips, and appointments. Not long afterward, he even began playing tennis again, so vigorously that the following spring he fractured his elbow while diving to return a shot. These events troubled physician Cecil Samuelson, who knew that Neal's chemotherapy had thinned his bones enough to make tennis a little risky. But Cecil couldn't argue with the symbolism of seeing his friend "in the game." His determination to play was "a continuing affirmation that he's not giving up. . . . He's the old Neal Maxwell."

Weeks before returning to the office, Neal found himself drawn like a magnet to other cancer patients as well as to those with other afflictions. He and Colleen expanded what they called their "cancer network," which increased the number of phone calls they made almost nightly. Colleen and Neal had much earlier developed the practice of looking after people in their neighborhood and beyond. Their ward Relief Society president once told her husband that every time she went to see someone who was sick or in need, the Maxwells had already been there. Now that circle kept growing, as Neal began to drop other after-hours activities in favor of staying close to more people whose sorrows he now understood better than he ever could before.

Since the mid-1970s, when he had been so moved by the example of President Spencer W. Kimball, Neal's very personal ministry to "the sick and afflicted" had matured into a significant feature of his priorities and even his character. At the risk of diminishing that private realm of service by disclosing details, many people have expressed the hope that something could be said here, even in general terms, about what he has done to comfort so many who have been stricken with adversity and what he's learned from doing it.

Neal's personal ministry was learned behavior he didn't spend much time at it in his younger years. Later on, "the more he did it, the better he got at it." Perhaps he took counsel from a phrase in his patriarchal blessing, which blessed him with a gift of healing, giving him power "to rebuke the destroying agencies . . . that the sick may be healed." He was also influenced by the cancer patients he met in the late 1970s and by the thoughts that came to him during and after those years about the connections between adversity, divine tutorials, and learning to be true followers of Christ. That's one reason he began writing about those themes as much as he did.

Neal's "incredible pastoral outreach to people who have suffered" is "a major development in his discipleship in the last decade," says Elder Dallin H. Oaks. This is, indeed "an important part of Neal's personality, analogous to that of Spencer Kimball, who did so much work with individuals." "The Lord has twelve Apostles; they're not all stamped out of the same mold, and that has been a deliberate choice on His part." Neither Neal nor his Brethren, each of whom has his own private ministry of some kind, can do all that they wish were possible, but Latter-day Saints generally understand that the gifts of healing and blessing are not confined to Church leaders; they are gifts and priesthood privileges spread among all true disciples.

Neal has learned from experience about constructive ways to help people. Especially with the terminally ill, he is careful to avoid raising unrealistic expectations, even while acknowledging that at times a miracle does come. Each blessing and moment of counsel varies, but he sometimes invites the sick person and his or her family to read several scriptures aloud and then talk about each one. One verse he likes to read with them is this: "I know that he loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things" (1 Nephi 11:17). Neal discusses with the family the meaning of both principles from that passage. Especially since his own recent illness, he may also share with them what they will probably learn about the Atonement.

Elder Maxwell converses with a tone of sensitive realism, listening attentively and sharing experiences, keeping a steady rein on emotion. With the terminally ill, he will also talk matter-of-factly about ways the patient and the family can make the most of whatever time they have such as giving father's blessings, tape-recording a personal testimony or history, writing letters of particular advice and counsel, and planning special experiences together.

Neal doesn't wait to be invited to make a visit. The stories are legion about his calling or just showing up in some unexpected place to express support. And he shows great interest in people who are not Latter-day Saints, along with people who are less active or otherwise estranged from the Church. Some of the most touching stories involve people among his old friends from the University of Utah who were once chilly toward the Church but who have now returned, some to be baptized, some for temple ordinances, all with Neal's presence and support.

He will also often make multiple calls and visits, staying close, remembering details, and giving encouragement sometimes for months, sometimes for years. Neal has also paid particular attention to the "secondary sufferers," the spouses and family members of the stricken ones. Colleen, who knows something of this perspective, often joins him in these visits.

Among the children in these families, nine-year-old Melissa Howes sent Neal a large paper doll that still hangs on his office wall. When her young father was dying of cancer in 1998, Melissa said in her family prayer, "Heavenly Father, bless my daddy, and if you need . . . him more than us, you can have him. We want him, but Thy will be done. And please help us not to be mad at you."

Elder Maxwell's experience with the family of Shirley Scruggs (the wife of his friend Bud) illustrates his pattern. Shirley's sister Lisa developed cancer not long after Neal returned home from his own chemotherapy. When Neal gave Lisa a blessing, he surprised her by blessing her not only with comfort but with increased empathy. She had long felt an intuitive empathy for others, but the blessing answered her unspoken specific need she'd been troubled by not knowing how to act toward people who knew she had cancer. Neal's own empathy let him see that she needed to let people minister to her, and she needed to know how imperfect some of that ministering would be. Then she could give more in her receiving.

When Lisa passed away, Neal groaned at the news. Now he was asking the "why not me" question. He was puzzled, even troubled, each time he learned that much younger patients whom he had met during his own therapy had not survived. He would gladly have traded places with any of them, for their families' sakes.

He had developed enough of a relationship with Lisa that he wondered aloud how he could help. Shirley told him she was to speak at the funeral in California and didn't know what to say. How could an energetic young mother be taken when her children had such needs? Neal thought about her question and called her back the next day. Don't try to explain, he said. We don't understand why God takes people. The key points are from Nephi I don't understand everything, but I do know that God loves each one of us. Then he shared the content of letters Lisa had written him. Her story corresponded almost perfectly with the course of his own illness except for the conclusion.

After the funeral, when Lisa's husband and children visited Salt Lake, Neal invited them to his office. He gave the father a blessing but was otherwise "remarkably unsentimental." He told the children they had great parents and then said, "Let me tell you what your mother is doing right now in the spirit world." He seemed to understand what they were feeling and how to offer specific encouragement.

By May 1998, Neal's remission had lasted fifteen months. Admittedly not eager to line up for another turn at the chemo ward, he was thankful for his unexpected return to near-normal activity. Dr. Ford continued to monitor his monthly blood samples with close scrutiny and Sphinx-like reactions. He didn't want to let on that he fully expected the leukemia to return.

On Friday, May 29, a new painting of Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail was delivered to Elder Maxwell's office. While he was away that afternoon, his secretary Susan had the painting hung in the place prepared for it. As she stood back to see how it looked, she was drawn to Joseph's blue eyes, which seemed to carry a mellow kind of sadness. Something about the pleading eyes remained with her, creating a kind of quiet, heavy feeling.

Neal had the splint removed from his fractured tennis elbow the next Monday. Later that morning he met with Dr. Ford, who reported the results of the latest tests, which had included a bone marrow biopsy. The news was not good. The leukemia had returned. The remission was over. That which they most feared had come to pass.

Neal and Colleen decided to tell only their children that night. He would find a way to tell his Brethren, but he wasn't ready to talk to others. It felt like a time for silence. When his secretary first saw Neal on Tuesday, he didn't tell her the bad news, but he didn't need to. He couldn't have hidden the diagnosis. She thought his eyes were like Joseph's eyes in the painting, reflecting that same feeling of pleading sadness.

The new round of chemotherapy would begin on Wednesday, June 10. When Neal told President Faust on June 8 what was happening, his long-time friend said, "Neal, you're needed here." He suggested a blessing the next day before Neal checked into the hospital. At the appointed hour, President Faust brought five members of the Quorum of the Twelve to Neal's office, where they gave him a priesthood blessing, with President Faust as voice. As each one embraced him, once more a sure spirit of peace remained behind the same spirit Neal had felt in the temple with them nearly two years before.

After several days of new chemotherapy, Neal returned home. He had beat the odds again: The cancer was once more in remission. On June 29, President Packer visited his home to give him another blessing. Neal returned to the hospital with a high fever during early July. By mid-August, he was back in his office, his hair gone once more. Of this period, President Packer said, "He doesn't take himself very seriously. He hasn't hidden the illness . . . but you can't get him to complain about it. When he's about to take [another] treatment, he tells his brethren he's 'going down under now.'"

Meanwhile, Dr. Clyde Ford was deeply unsettled about how to proceed. He knew that the odds of Neal's staying long in the second remission were slim. So he plunged into the medical literature, determined, especially for this patient, to find something in the reports of new medical experiments. He found a brief description of new work by some Swedish doctors; however, the treatment regime hadn't yet been tested in sufficient numbers of patients to justify predictable effects. So Dr. Ford told Neal and Colleen that it was completely experimental, but it looked like their best option. This wasn't the first time Neal had found himself on the cutting edge of experience, and he wasn't afraid to be there again. "Let's go," he said.

The "Swedish protocol" is, according to Neal, "not as exotic as it sounds." The medications alternate between suppressing the cells and building up the white count, Dr. Ford explains. Neal takes two injections of Interleukin-2 daily for three weeks and then goes without medication for two weeks. Next he takes oral and injectable chemotherapy for three weeks, takes another week off, and goes back to the Interleukin-2. He has followed this regimen for nearly four years, and despite usually being somewhat "washed out" by the injection periods, he has resumed most of his normal activities. To Dr. Ford, a believing Church member, "Elder Maxwell's very long second remission is miraculous. It seems more than chance to me."

Neal has developed two names for this otherwise undefined season of experience. Sometimes he calls it his "delay en route," reflecting his early use of military jargon. At other times it is his "pincushion period." For example, flying back from meetings in Spain in November 1999, he had to give himself injections en route. This prompted him to share with Colleen the remark from columnist Erma Bombeck that airplane lavatories are so small you have to stand on the toilet seat to shut the door.

Asked if the experimental process actually kills leukemic cells the way conventional chemotherapy does, Dr. Ford answers that he doesn't know. He only knows that, for Neal, it has worked so far. "If I could explain in detail why it works, I'd be world famous." So how long will Neal follow this pattern? Indefinitely? We'll have to see. Medically, this is "way out on a statistical fringe of what you expect to happen. Spiritually, it's a miracle."

President Gordon B. Hinckley observed that Elder Maxwell, after two remissions, is "constantly expressing appreciation and gratitude. He's grateful for the gift of life, but I think he has lost all fear of death. I think he's adjusted his feelings so that death holds no terror for him. He has come to recognize that his life under these circumstances is a bonus from the Lord, and he wants to make the most of it."

At the same time, Neal has been cautious about drawing "hasty conclusions to his own advantage." Rather than feeling this extension of life was his to claim, he prefers to quote C. S. Lewis: "If we were stronger, we might be less tenderly treated. If we were braver, we might be sent, with far less help, to defend far more desperate posts in the great battle."

Neal's attitude is grounded in the doctrine of his October 1998 conference talk, titled "Hope through the Atonement of Jesus Christ." This was his first conference talk after his second complete immersion in chemotherapy. He again began with an understatement "I am very grateful to be with you today" and then added that his medical treatments "are encouraging in spite of my alternating conference hairstyles."

The central point of his talk distinguished between "proximate hope," which can easily be dashed by life's disappointments, and "ultimate hope," which, through the power of the Atonement, can consecrate our afflictions to our spiritual gain. In direct reflection of his daily experience, he said that ultimate hope keeps us engaged in "good causes, even if these appear to be losing causes on the mortal scoreboard." It is "with us at funerals," and it "inspires quiet Christian service, not flashy public fanaticism." Disciples blessed with this special hope reach out to those who have "moved away from the hope of the gospel," entreating them "by the patience of hope and the labor of love," until at last they hear the words, "well and faithfully done, enter into my joy, sit down on my throne."

During the time since the second remission began, Neal and Colleen have tried to do what they have long counseled other cancer survivors to do. Often patients with a terminal illness delay "bringing things to closure," thinking, almost subconsciously, that if they "don't have that final discussion with the kids, don't call that person they're estranged from," they can somehow delay the inevitable. But there was none of that for the Maxwells, whose priorities clearly included resolving the most important issues. These ranged from rethinking the most spiritual dimensions of his public ministry to very personal matters, such as deciding to give each grandchild an apostolic blessing.

Elder Maxwell's family members and closest friends have noticed that, as fully mature as he was in 1996, his experience has somehow altered him. They say such things as, he's not quite the same person since coming out of the hospital. He reflects a new depth of feeling, as well as new levels of understanding, about the Atonement. He was always tender, but there is a new tenderness, more emotion. He is simply different from the younger Neal Maxwell, good as he was.

As Elder Russell M. Nelson has watched at close range, he has seen Neal's empathy "augmented because of his own illness," reminding Elder Nelson of the way multiple illnesses increased President Spencer W. Kimball's awareness of other people's feelings and needs. Neal has also developed "an objectivity . . . that most patients don't have" in looking at his own circumstances. Most people focus more subjectively on "I'm miserable, I'm hurting. . . . But Brother Maxwell sees himself going through this period of testing and trying," never losing "sight of his place in the work of the Lord." Not imprisoned by his own misery, Neal is free to reflect on what his new understanding can teach him and how it helps him teach others.

Elder John K. Carmack, who worked closely with Neal for years, joined him for area training meetings in Spain in 1999. He saw "a new dimension in him" there, and "it was obvious to everybody. It was like he transported everybody there into a more eternal, spiritual realm. His manner contained all of the talented rhetorical abilities he always had, but we all felt something different . . . a greater empathy for people, a greater sense of what life is about." In private he talked with great interest about all of his favorite subjects politics, history, and current events. But one could sense that his ultimate interests "were definitely turned toward eternity."

Nolan Archibald, a stake president in Washington, D.C., found the same thing at Area training there, among a chapel full of stake presidents and other leaders in the fall of 2000. He had heard Elder Maxwell many times before, but found this meeting one of the spiritual feasts of his life, taught by a timeless Apostle who somehow left the group feeling what it would be like for Paul or Alma to teach them. Brother Archibald had always found Neal to be a gifted teacher, but this time he felt a new spiritual dimension as the group talked together of scriptural doctrines, with tangible two-way feelings of affection, gentleness, humility, and tears frequently in the eyes of his brethren.

Elder Maxwell views whatever has happened as a gift, not an achievement. He knows that something about the experience has brought him more compassion. The Lord, he said,

gives us a "new heart" (Ezek. 18:31). Our heart has to be broken, in a way, so that it can be re-made. By that I mean more spiritual sensitivity, more empathy, and more capacity to be responsive to people. The natural man['s] . . . heart . . . is pretty self-centered and hard. If we can put off the natural man [see Mosiah 3:19], we can be given a new heart, and it will be enlarged . . . without hypocrisy (see D&C 121:42). Adversity can squeeze out of us the hypocrisy that's there.

[So, for me,] it's been a great spiritual adventure, one I would not want to have missed. I feel a little about it the way I do about Okinawa. If I'd waited my turn to be drafted, I would never have seen any action. It wasn't that I was anything special as a soldier. Even though it cost me some hearing, I'm glad I saw that action. And even though this has cost, it's been a great blessing. I know people may think I'm just being patriotic to say that, but it's true.

Understanding the nature of Elder Maxwell's experience is enhanced by comparing it with that of another person whose lifelong quest for discipleship was strikingly similar to Neal's.

In 1963, B. West Belnap was dean of the College of Religious Instruction at BYU and was, like Neal, a close associate of Elder Harold B. Lee in the correlation committees. One semester he taught a small class called "Your Religious Problems." In the first class, Brother Belnap demonstrated his intended class format by sharing the religious question that had the greatest personal meaning to him: How can I obtain the gift of charity? With endearing candor, he told the students how his religious faith had developed over his lifetime.

As a child with very bad eyesight, he once prayed anxiously to find a lost pair of glasses. He was awestruck when the Lord answered his prayer by guiding his footsteps. Over time, his soul came to delight increasingly in the scriptures. His yearning to understand and live the deep things of God influenced his daily life, his family, his career. At the time he taught this class, West was just past forty years old and the father of seven children. He was a thoughtful, well-balanced man of sound judgment who had enjoyed an unusually high degree of Church experience for one his age.

After telling his students about his more recent spiritual experiences, he told them how puzzled he was that he didn't feel he had been able to obtain charity the pure love that Christ has for all people. He read from the scriptures what charity was, that it reflected the Lord's very nature, and that God has promised it to "all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ" (Moroni 7:48). A poignancy accompanied his earnest reflection that, despite years of trying to live as pure a daily life as he knew how, the gift had eluded him.

A few years later, by then only in his mid-forties, West Belnap died from a terribly painful brain tumor. At his funeral, Elder Harold B. Lee spoke of his close friendship with West. He said that when the cancer persisted after two surgeries, West asked for counsel about additional treatments. The pain was so unbearable and the prognosis so dim that he wondered if he shouldn't forgo further efforts and let himself go quickly. Elder Lee had told him,

West, you and I . . . know that life is a very precious thing and . . . has a very important meaning. Every minute of it, even the suffering of it. . . . How do you and I know but what the suffering you're going through is a refining process by which obedience necessary to exaltation is made up? . . .

Live it out to the last day, West. . . . Who knows but what the experience you are having now will pay dividends greater than all the rest of your life. Live it true to the end, and we'll bless you and pray to God that pains beyond your endurance will not be permitted by a merciful God.

West followed that counsel, accepting an unknowable degree of suffering before finally being released in death.

West had developed in his early life an earnest desire to follow the Savior as far as it is possible to follow Him. He couldn't have known where this desire might take him or what it might cost, but he, like Neal Maxwell in his own way, pursued his desire a step at a time, disciplining himself, learning, accepting correction, and making clear to the Lord his commitment to full discipleship, regardless of the cost.

Perhaps his excruciating illness somehow gave him access to his heart's desire charity. He had wanted to possess what the Savior felt in His love for every human being. To attain that charity, West was willing to give the Lord anything that was his to give, although he knew that, finally, charity is a spiritual gift "bestowed" by the grace of the Atonement "upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ . . . that when he shall appear we shall be like him" (Moroni 7:48; italics added). Could West have sensed how dear the price might be that, perhaps, to assimilate attributes of divinity from the core of the Savior's love might require some hauntingly tangible contact with the core of his afflictions? "All those who will not endure chastening . . . cannot be sanctified" (D&C 101:5; italics added).

Truman and Ann Madsen have known the Maxwells since their college days together. Truman said that the people with whom he has counseled about the hardest of life's problems tend to have two concerns about those who try to help them. One is, "You don't know what I'm talking about, how hard this is; you've never been there, never faced real adversity." The other concern is, "You don't really care about me. You're listening, but you want to go home and have dinner." Elder Maxwell has taught that we'll never be able to level either of those charges at Christ. And now, says Truman after watching Elder Maxwell's experience with his illness, "You'll never be able to say any of those things to Neal Maxwell, either."

Perhaps the experiences of such people as Neal Maxwell and West Belnap teach us that those who seek apprenticeship with the Master of mankind must emulate his sacrificial experience to the fullest extent of their personal capacity. Then they might taste His empathy and His charity. For only then are they like him enough to feel his love for others the way he feels it to love others "as I have loved you" (John 13:34). That is a deeper, different love from "love thy neighbour as thyself" (Matthew 19:19). Perhaps it isn't possible to have Christ's charity without submitting to some form of His affliction not only through physical pain but in many other ways because they are two sides of the same, single reality.

The Savior's love for all mankind is fully bound up in his exquisite pain. "How sore you know not . . . how hard to bear you know not" (D&C 19:15). Perhaps we cannot know his love without knowing his pain. If so, the personal suffering we confront in the sanctification process "the fellowship of His suffering" could move the pure love of Christ from a concept in one's head to a substance in one's heart. And once in the heart, charity will circulate all through the body, because it is being moved by "a new heart."

In March 2000, when he was in a pondering mood about his illness, with its implications both dreadful and miraculous, Neal had a sacred experience that he could only compare with what happened that night in 1945 on Okinawa. The soul voice of the Spirit came into his mind to whisper, "I have given you leukemia that you might teach my people with authenticity." The words sank in deeply, confirming his belief that the Lord had authored his tutorial and his recovery. What did this mean about the length of his ministry? That part remained unclear. He wondered if the statement meant future teaching only. Yet whatever the future holds, his recent experience also bears a personal witness that reaffirms and enriches his previous attempts to teach people about meekness, adversity, discipleship, not shrinking, and finding charity in the midst of affliction.

In that personal witness, the way Neal Maxwell has lived is more vital than what he has taught. For him to receive more empathy, which in its fulness is charity, fulfills a desire he has long nourished. And even though he may be best known among Church members for his distinctive use of language, a closer search of his life reveals dimensions of that desire that have much deeper substance.

His talks to less active members and converts carry between their lines an empathy for the less included that is both kind and disarming. He understands them. His talks to the women of the Church reflect an honest sensitivity to their questions and priorities. He understands them. His messages to college students and teachers have let them feel his openness, his awareness, and his serenity about their hardest questions. He understands them. His relationships with political communities, whether close at hand or far away, have built bridges of trust that make it natural for opinion leaders in and out of the Church to sense that in him they have a friendly ear. He understands.

The Saints in Africa, Asia, and other remote places of new beginning for the Church have felt he somehow understands intuitively where the gospel fits into their personal cultural context. Those afflicted with illness or the death of family members sense that he has unusual, personal reasons for understanding what they are feeling. All of this is why those who know Elder Maxwell best say, "There are many people in the Church who feel he understands them," and they have therefore felt "understood by the general leadership of the Church." "His greatest qualities are not those of his head but of his heart."

The educated may think he is approachable because he was an educator. Converts to the Church, those interested in social issues, or those wounded with adversity may sense in him a special interest in their concerns. Political and media leaders may feel he understands their world because of his background in it. His family knows him as an unusually devoted father. And in a way, they are all correct. But cutting through all the dimensions of Neal Maxwell's broad interests is a core quality of empathy that has increasingly manifested itself in every context. In recent years, especially since his illness, that empathy has expanded more and more toward charity.

This may well be the charity Neal sensed at the time of his call as an Apostle that he must somehow come to claim, the charity of which his mentor Harold B. Lee spoke when he said he realized that he must learn to "love and forgive every soul that walked the earth." Because charity is a gift of the Spirit, the knowing tenderness Elder Maxwell now feels is larger than anything he could possess of himself alone.

The source of that tenderness looks this way to Elder Henry B. Eyring:

Some of the people who love his wonderful insights and his gorgeous language underestimate how close he is to the Savior. [I would tell them,] you don't know him. You don't know that as brilliant as he is, as gifted as he is in language . . . there's no one as brave and as determined to do only what the Savior wants . . . For some reason [his writing style] results in many people seeing him as the intellectual. . . . But he's way closer to Peter than he is to C. S. Lewis. . . . And when it comes time to say, "The world be hanged, we'll go the Lord's way," no one is braver.

At the time an endowed chair was created in Neal's name at the University of Utah, President Hinckley said that whoever occupies the chair "will find a hand resting on his shoulder" from "one who loved mercy, one who practiced charity, one who had a great love for learning, one who had a mind to think objectively, one who made a contribution in whatever he did."

Neal Maxwell, said Elder Alexander Morrison, is "a man of the last half of the twentieth century, when secularism" is rampant, and "Christianity is dying around the world." His "defense of Christianity, and his reconciliation of faith and the intellect" are a great legacy. But more important than all of that is what he has learned, and lived, about "the struggle to be pure . . . to put away the natural man." He has shown that, with the Savior's help, "it is possible to purify yourself, to change." So "the transformation . . . in his own life . . . is the great miracle of his apostleship, because it holds out hope for ordinary people [showing them that they] can be better . . . less competitive and more loving. That's the great theme of Neal's life . . . that if you take your discipleship seriously, you really can change."

This kind of change is a process that is available to all. Ultimately it is a gift given, paradoxically, only to those who pay its full price. Its source is the grace given to faithful followers of Jesus. As they expend all of their own strength and all of their own will, the gift comes: "Lo, I have given thee . . . an understanding heart" (1 Kings 3:11). It comes through the Savior's mercy "mercy cometh because of the Atonement" (Alma 42:23) to those who put off the natural man enough to be forgiven and then press beyond forgiveness toward becoming "a saint through the Atonement of Christ the Lord, . . . full of love [charity], willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict" (Mosiah 3:19).

The same gift also comes to disciple-leaders not just to enrich them, but to validate their teaching and to bless God's people: "And the priests were not to depend upon the people for their support; but for their labor they were to receive the grace of God, that they might wax strong in the Spirit, having the knowledge of God, that they might teach with power and authority" (Mosiah 18:26).

And that they might teach His people with authenticity.

It is the way of a Disciple's life and a disciple's life.
