Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

The Bible and the Book of Mormon: The Finger of God

The story of the Book of Mormon is a true one. Its origin, its teachings, and its message, together, proclaim, "Jesus is the Son of God."

It opens the way for this generation to learn of the millions of God's children who lived upon the Western Continents hundreds of years ago; it is their history. It contains many biographies and autobiographies combined into one which is interwoven with the proofs of Providential care.

It is America's contribution to Holy Writ.

It is the Bible of the New World. Not that it supersedes the Bible, or in any way interferes with it, any more than the history of Peru interferes with or supersedes the history of Greece; but, on the other hand, in many places it confirms Bible history, demonstrates Bible truths, sustains Bible doctrines, and fulfills Bible prophecy.

In the hearts of many, the Book of Mormon has established itself among the finest books of literature, and has taken its place at the side of the Bible as the inspired and revealed Word of God.

When the magicians of Pharaoh's Court could not do what they saw Moses and Aaron do, they said, "This is the finger of God." That expression is used throughout the Scriptures, and means the presence, or the power, or the purpose of God.

In contemplating the Book of Mormon, all the evidence that is presented and all the witnesses bound, join with us in repeating the words the magicians said to Pharaoh in Ancient Egypt: "This is the finger of God."

The authors of the Book of Mormon lived in the Land of America hundreds of years ago. Their writings have been preserved by the finger of God to come forth in these Last Days.

To a doubting world they proclaim that God lives. To the honest in heart, throughout the world, they reaffirm the glad tidings that His Son, Jesus Christ, is the Savior and the Redeemer of the world. They also testify as trustworthy deponents that the records kept by the Jews-that is the Bible-are true. Again and again, their words establish them to be the "other sheep," of which the Good Shepherd spoke to His flock gathered in Old Jerusalem: "Other sheep I have which are not of this fold, them also must I bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold and one Shepherd." (Matthew 19:20; III Nephi 15:17)

The Book of Mormon has a message for all, for Jew and for Gentile. Every nation under heaven; every kindred, tongue, and people who dwell upon the face of the Earth, shall see in it the Salvation of the Lord and shall hear its voice; and they shall know "that I am He that doth speak." (Ibid., 20:39) This glorious information is given with the added assurance that: "For because of My Spirit he shall know that these things are true." (Ether 4:11)

To the Jew, it says:

"And as surely as the Lord liveth, will he gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth.

"And as he hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob, even so shall the covenant wherewith he hath covenanted with the house of Jacob be fulfilled in his own due time, unto the restoring all the house of Jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant wherewith he hath covenanted with them.

"And then shall they know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they have been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be. Amen. (Mormon, III Nephi 5:24-26)

The promises of the Book of Mormon are great unto the Gentiles. To them it says that they shall be blessed upon this Land, that is Zion; the Land of the Lord, our King; America:

"This land shall be a Land of Liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon this land...for I the Lord, the King of Heaven, will be their King, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear My words." (II Nephi 11:14)

To you and to me, who, when the storms of life descend, begin to say, "The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me," it says in the words of Isaiah, God's holy Prophet, "But He will show that He hath not." (I Nephi 21:14)

To all men, everywhere, it says: "The Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto Him, or they cannot be saved." (I Nephi 13:40)

The Book of Mormon answers, formally, the questions we have so often heard debated: "Who are the American Indians? and Whence did they come?" It is a history of their ancestors. In his own beautiful, but simple words, William W. Phelps, the inspired writer of many of the songs of Zion, both asks and answers these questions:

O, stop and tell me, Redman, Who are you? Why you roam? And how you get your living; Have you no God, no home? With stature straight and portly, And decked in native pride, With feathers, paints, and brooches, He willingly replied. I once was pleasant Ephraim, When Jacob for me prayed, But O, how blessings vanish, When man from God has strayed.

Some people are under the impression that the Latter-day Saints do not believe in the Bible, and that they have discarded that sacred volume for the Book of Mormon. That is not true. They have not! To the Latter-day Saints, the Bible is God's Book. It contains the Word of God, and they believe it all the more because they have been almost untouched by the destructive criticism, which under the name "Higher," aims at the abrogation of all channels of divine revelation. The Bible is a book of God. It has been called, "The god of books." It was written by inspired men-men whom the Apostle Peter says, "Were moved upon to speak by the Holy Ghost." (II Peter 1:21)

The Book of Mormon is a translation of the originals. The Bible is a translation of other translations. Each, however, is subjected to the same bitter criticism of faultfinding skeptics who love to point to the errors they have found in both volumes of sacred literature. They point frequently, and sometimes carelessly "to the lack of grammatical correctness, to the wrongful use of language, and to the absence, in places, of the propriety of speech."

They let this be a reason to reject the Bible, to deride the Book of Mormon, and to deny that both are the Word of God.

When the ages that have passed since the books of the Bible were written, the many translations that have been made of them, the vicissitudes through which they have passed in their transmission to the present generation, the wonder is, not that there are errors and parts left out, but that there is a Bible at all.

The diluting influences that accompany each translation, has surrounded the Bible with a mist, which like an imperfect glass, distorts and confuses the vision of those who desire to know the mind and will of God.

In turning the pages of the Bible-that dear and precious Book-many fail to see the Plan of Life and Salvation unfold before them. They refuse to listen to the greatest story ever told,

The Resurrection of Jesus Christ. They sit in darkness although the Sun shines brightly. From their position they cannot see the mountain because of the molehills. In rejecting the Bible "they cast away the cup and lose the precious wine that is in that cup." The wine is God's holy word.

We admit that there are errors in the Bible, but we deny they are errors of belief or doctrine. The text of the Bible may be faulty, but it is full of Life and Salvation.

This is also true of the Book of Mormon. In places its grammar may be incorrect, its story appear to be weak, its narrative unended, but Moroni writes of his difficulty in placing his words, his lack of adequate means of expression, and that, because of weakness in writing he is unable to give his thoughts their full meaning.

Moroni was the last to write in the Book of Mormon; Nephi was the first. About a thousand years separated their times. Moroni was commanded by the Lord to include in the record he was making that the Gospel would come unto his brethren, the Lamanites, through the Gentiles.

Moroni did as he was commanded, but, nevertheless, he felt incapable of fully fulfilling the Lord's requirements. He sought the help of the Lord, and of his prayer to the Almighty, he said:

"And I said unto him: Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our weakness in writing; for Lord thou hast made us mighty in word by faith, but thou hast not made us mighty in writing; for thou hast made all this people that they could speak much, because of the Holy Ghost which thou hast given them.

"And thou hast made us that we could write but little, because of the awkwardness of our hands. Behold, thou hast not made us mighty in writing like unto the brother of Jared, for thou madest him that the things which he wrote were mighty even as thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them.

"Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words." (Ether 12:23-25)

The thoughtful reader of the Book of Mormon will remember the conversation in which Moroni apologized to the Lord for not being great in writing. He said.:

"Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our weakness in writing; for Lord Thou hast made us mighty in word by faith, but Thou hast not made us mighty in writing."

In finishing the abridgment of the Larger Plates of Nephi which his father, Mormon, had made, Moroni also said: "Behold, I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for I know that ye shall hear my words. Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that He hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been." (Mormon 9:30-31) "And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these." (Ibid., 8:12)

Skeptics and students of sacred literature may point to the errors they allege to have found in the Book of Mormon, to the wrongful use of words, to improper forms of speech, but in doing this they fail to point out, "If there are faults they are the mistakes of men," (Inspired Preface) and not the inspirations of God. They do not say, "This is the finger of man, and not the Finger of God."

"Wherefore, condemn not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the Judgment-Seat of Christ." (Ibid)

Thanks be to God, the Book of Mormon is written. It is, however, not a romance. It is not a tale of fiction written for our entertainment. It is not a mixture of folklore and tradition, nor is it, as some allege, "a pious fraud." But holy men of God, great prophets and teachers, recorded their prophecies and their wisdom upon metal plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Also, Heaven-inspired historians and leaders engraved thereon the important events of their times. Thus, together, they preserved for over a thousand years, the annals of the Nephite people in spirit and in truth.

The Nephites were a branch of the House of Israel. They believed in God Who was the Father of all men. They believed that His Son, Jesus Christ, was the Savior and the Redeemer of mankind. Also, they believed that He was the Messiah of Whose coming all the prophets had spoken. In their possession was a copy of the Law of Moses, and of it their practice was complete. They had revelations from Heaven to guide them; angels ministered unto them; they prospered in material things, and those who were zealous in keeping the commandments of the Lord were benefited and blessed.

Again, thanks be to God, these beliefs and the incidents surrounding their observance are written. They were not left to treacherous memory; they were not left to the diluting influence of oral transmission; they were not bequeathed to hearts, diseased and depraved, who might corrupt them, but they are written, and written at the very command of Him Who said: "Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also must I bring, and they shall hear My voice; and there shall be one fold and one Shepherd." (John 10:16)

In meditating upon the scenes presented by the Sacred Records, the Bible and the Book of Mormon, and the doctrines therein proclaimed, we are constantly reminded of King David's 23rd Psalm: "Yea, though I walk through the valley in; Matthew 4:16; II Nephi 19:2)

In this Psalm, David sings of man's journey through life which he calls a valley. He pictures man therein as always being overshadowed by death. Death has a shadow. But there can be no shadow unless there is sunshine. And that sunshine is the word of thruth."I will fear no evil," says King David, "for Thou art with me." Amid much that is painful to the heart and perplexing to the mind, surrounded by storms that at times would overwhelm us, the Word of the Lord, whether it comes to us through Judah or Joseph, the Bible or the Book of Mormon, the prophets of old, or the seers of our own times, we will remember that "Thou hidest not Thy face from any generation of Thy children who seek after Thee."1 the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort me."

Thy rod and Thy staff means the Word of God.

The Book of Mormon and the Bible are His rod and His staff. They bring comfort to every heart. They raise up the heart that is bowed down. They regenerate a bad heart and sanctify a sinful, one. They quicken one that is dead in trespass and in sin..They help the helpless, and those who have no Helper but the Lord. They give succor according to the power and the hour of one's need. And when at last the shadows of night gather about us, and we know that our day's pilgrimage upon earth is near an end, the Word of the Lord spreads over us a canopy of peace and fills our hearts with a joyous hope of Life Everlasting.

Heeding the words of God's Nephite servants, and following the path to which they point, we marvel at the beauties along the way. Our guide, the Book of Mormon, which we have identified as the Word of the Lord, leads us neither to the right nor to the left, but along that Way which is straight and narrow unto the Eternal City of God.

Our backs may be bent with the weight of years and our feet unsteady, but our souls are gladdened and our steps made firm as a voice-a pleasant voice, "as if it were a whisper"-reaches our ears and pierces to our inmost parts, causing our hearts to burn. (See Helaman 5:46; III Nephi 11:3) Yea, the voice of One from On High. Whose voice is unto the ends of the Earth, to all mankind, even the voice of Jesus Christ: "Come unto Me." (See Ether 4:13-14.)

Enraptured, we proclaim God's holy Name, and in ecstasy shout to those about us who also journey to the Holy City: "O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name together." (Psalm 34:3)

In wonderment we pause in our footsteps and listen. Not a sound disturbs the solemn air. But hearken! Again we hear the voice of the Savior. Not a voice like rushing mighty waters, nor like thunder upon the distant mountain tops; but a voice like the calm of eventide with healing in its wings; a still voice of perfect mildness. Not in these exact terms but with a meaning all may understand, it says: The words you heed are the words of My servants "whom I have sent unto you to declare good tidings," (Helaman 5:29) Their words are My words, "For I am He Who speaketh." (Ether 4:8-14)

As we walk farther and farther along that path which the Nephites themselves trod, and in our imagination partake with them the sweet fruits of righteousness of which they had a joyous harvest, we feel more and more constrained to join with them, not to say, but to "Shout praises unto the Holy One of Israel." (II Nephi 31:13)

The Book of Mormon contains the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness (the Angel Moroni said to the Prophet Joseph Smith). It publishes anew the Glad Tidings of man's Redemption, and makes plain the precious truths of his Salvation. Like the Bible, the Book of Mormon is the Word of God. It reveals His holy mind and will.

And now, let us urge all to study prayerfully and carefully the pages of these Sacred Records, and receive through them the priceless truths of Life and Salvation. "Now, behold, I say unto you that if ye will do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of Him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true." (King Benjamin, Mosiah 4:12)

Moroni, who was the last to write in the Book of Mormon, makes this glorious promise to all men who have a desire to know the mind and will of God: "And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the Name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, He will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moroni 10:4)

In conclusion, may we suggest the admonition of Solomon, the wise old Hebrew King: it is the sum and substance of all the lessons carried to us by both the Sacred Records, the Book of Mormon and its companion in holiness, the Bible: "Fear God, and keep His commandments: for this is the whole duty of man." (Ecclesiastes 12:13) "Fear God, and keep His commandments." To what end?

To the end "That ye may remember, and do all My commandments, and be holy unto your God. I am the Lord your God." (See, Numbers 15:40-41 )-PHILLIP C. REYNOLDS
