Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

The Third Book of Nephi

The Son of Nephi, who was the Son of Helaman

Chapter 1

SC3 Ne 1 13 Ne 1 23 Ne 1 3Verses 1-3

SC3 Ne 1 13 Ne 1 23 Ne 1 3Nephi, the son of Helaman, departed out of the land. The story of Lehi's descendants as it is recorded by Nephi, the grandson of Helaman who in turn was the grandson of Alma, who organized the Church of God in the Land of Nephi, and who led the faithful from there down to Zarahemla, begins at the end of the Ninety-first year of the Reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi. Sometime in this year, he transferred the Plates of Brass and other records to his own son, Nephi, gave him charge concerning them, and departed from the Land of Zarahemla. Whither he went, or what became of him, is hidden from the knowledge of mankind. That he did not return to his usual place of abode, or to any of the known places of humanity is testified to by his son some ten years afterwards.

SC3 Ne 1 13 Ne 1 23 Ne 1 3Lachoneus, the elder, was then Chief Judge and the Governor of the Land. His reign was long and troublesome. It was one of continued warfare with the Gadianton Robbers, who, year by year, grew in numbers and audacity.

SC3 Ne 1 13 Ne 1 23 Ne 1 3Six hundred years had now passed since Lehi and his companions left Jerusalem. The time had arrived of which Samuel, the Lamanite, and other prophets had borne testimony as to when the phenomena should appear bearing witness of the birth of the Son of God: "Yea, even six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem, a prophet would the Lord God raise up among the Jews- even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the world." (I Nephi 10:4) "And behold He cometh according to the words of the angel, in six hundred years from the time my father left Jerusalem." (I Nephi 19:8) "For according to the words of the prophets, the Messiah cometh in six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem; and according to the words of the prophets, and also the word of the angel of God, His Name shall be Jesus Christ, the Son of God." (II Nephi 25:19) Listen again to the words of Samuel, "And behold, he said unto them: Behold, I give unto you a sign; for five years cometh, and behold, then cometh the Son of God to redeem all those who shall believe on His Name." (Helaman 14:2. About B.C. 6)

SC3 Ne 1 43 Ne 1 53 Ne 1 63 Ne 1 73 Ne 1 83 Ne 1 9Verses 4-9

SC3 Ne 1 43 Ne 1 53 Ne 1 63 Ne 1 73 Ne 1 83 Ne 1 9The prophecies began to be fulfilled more fully. As the day by prophets long foretold drew near, signs and miracles increased among the people. But the hardened in heart, who were ever on the watch to entrap those who believed in the prophet's words, began to circulate the idea that the time had passed and the prophecies had failed. Not content with mocking and reviling those who were anxiously looking for the promised two days and a night when there should be no darkness, they went as far as to appoint a day when all who believed in the coming of the Savior should be slain, except the sign be first given.

SC3 Ne 1 103 Ne 1 113 Ne 1 123 Ne 1 133 Ne 1 143 Ne 1 153 Ne 1 16Verses 10-16

SC3 Ne 1 103 Ne 1 113 Ne 1 123 Ne 1 133 Ne 1 143 Ne 1 153 Ne 1 16When Nephi saw this great wickedness, his heart was exceedingly sorrowful. This great wickedness caused Nephi great sorrow; his only recourse was to Heaven. Before God, in mighty prayer, he bowed in behalf of his imperiled people. All the day long he continued his earnest supplications. At last the word of the Anointed One came unto him, saying: "Lift up your head and be of good cheer, for behold the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfill all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of My holy prophets." As was thus declared, so was it fulfilled, for at the going down of the Sun, it was light as day and so continued until the morning when the Sun arose again in its usual course. A new star also appeared in the skies. Then the faithful rejoiced, their hearts were filled to overflowing, they knew that their Redeemer was born, and that the great Plan of Salvation had entered its most glorious phase; God, the great Jehovah, was tabernacled in the flesh. But the wicked quaked with awful dread: they realized the extent of their iniquity, they sensed that they were murderers at heart, for they had plotted to take the lives of the righteous, and in the terror that this overwhelming sense of their piteous condition wrought, they sank to the earth as though they were dead.

SC3 Ne 1 173 Ne 1 183 Ne 1 193 Ne 1 203 Ne 1 213 Ne 1 223 Ne 1 233 Ne 1 243 Ne 1 253 Ne 1 26Verses 17-26

SC3 Ne 1 173 Ne 1 183 Ne 1 193 Ne 1 203 Ne 1 213 Ne 1 223 Ne 1 233 Ne 1 243 Ne 1 253 Ne 1 26They began to know that the Son of God must shortly appear. Many now believed who previously had scorned the divine messages that the prophets bore; but others inspired of Satan, as soon as they recovered from the fright which the appearance of the promised signs had produced, began to explain them away, and, by various lying rumors, endeavored to nullify the good that had been done in the hearts of many. Others began to teach that it was no longer expedient to observe the Law of Moses, drawing their conclusions from a false interpretation of the Scriptures. Notwithstanding these efforts of the evil one, Nephi and others went forth among the people preaching, baptizing many, and bringing a short period of peace to the land. Thus did the Ninety-second year pass away.

SC3 Ne 1 273 Ne 1 283 Ne 1 293 Ne 1 30Verses 27-30

SC3 Ne 1 273 Ne 1 283 Ne 1 293 Ne 1 30The Ninety and third year also passed away in peace save for the Gadianton Robbers. Those of the Nephites who believed that the wonderful signs and miracles which they had seen heralded the coming of the promised Messiah, experienced during the Ninety-third year of the Judges a peace that was rounded upon their righteous lives. However those who were righteous were not strong enough to overcome the vast hosts of Gadianton Robbers, who, time and time again, swarmed from their mountain retreats and carried carnage, rapine, and desolation to the homes of both Nephites and Lamanites.

SC3 Ne 1 273 Ne 1 283 Ne 1 293 Ne 1 30In the Ninety-fourth year many Nephites dissented from the regularly constituted authority of the Commonwealth, and took refuge among the robber group, which defection caused "much sorrow unto those Nephites who did remain in the land," while at the same time it increased greatly the number of Gadiantons with whom the loyal citizens of the Republic were compelled to contend.

SC3 Ne 1 273 Ne 1 283 Ne 1 293 Ne 1 30The rising generation of Lamanites brought sore affliction upon their fathers and mothers by their listening to some apostate Zoramites, who, "by their lyings and their flattering words," caused them to join the Robber Bands. In this manner the Lamanites, who had become even more righteous than were the Nephites, were themselves deprived of much spiritual strength "because of the wickedness of the rising generation."

Nephi, the Disciple

Nephi, like his illustrious father, was the leading spirit of the age. Previous to the visit of the risen Redeemer to the Nephites he was their High Priest and prophet. When the Messiah came to them and chose twelve Disciples to be special ministers of His Name and glory, Nephi was the first that He called. To him, on various occasions, the Savior immediately directed His conversation and instructions.

Shortly before the birth of our Savior, Nephi received the Sacred Plates with their appendages from his father with strict instructions as to their care. From that time the elder Nephi was no more seen by mortals and his son took his place as the representative of Jehovah to the inhabitants of the western world.

When 600 years had passed since Lehi left Jerusalem, the wicked and perverse raised a great outcry that the prophecies had failed and the believers were deluded, that the delusion was a danger to the State and those who adhered to it should be slain. They even appointed a day on which to carry out their sanguinary threats should the promised signs not be first given. These were days of anxiety and dread to Nephi. For consolation he sought the Lord in long and fervent prayers. And his prayers received a full and joyous answer. The word of the Lord came to him that night the looked-for sign should be given and on the morrow Jesus would come into the world. And so it came to pass. The new star appeared in the heavens, there were two days and a night of undiminished light and all the people, both the righteous and the evildoers, recognized the sign and accepted its signification, the Lord of Life and Glory was clothed with humanity.

For about thirty years we have no direct statement of the work done by Nephi as a minister of God's word. Those thirty years were a period marked with many vicissitudes in the national and spiritual history of the Nephites. For seventeen years from the time of the birth of our Savior they gradually increased in wickedness; war and desolation afflicted them until, in their extremity, they were brought to repentance. But their repentance did not bring immediate deliverance from earthly troubles-the Gadianton Robbers held the upper hand and it was not until 21 A.D. that, by a signal victory, they freed themselves from their oppressors and invaders. Then followed a short period of peace and prosperity with its usual train of consequences-riches, pride, inequality, oppression and varied iniquities and year by year they grew worse until 29 A.D. But even then they had not descended to their lowest; the next year we read of them unjustly and unlawfully condemning to death the prophets who were sent to them. They overrode the laws, filled the country with sedition and sought to establish a monarchy in the place of the Republic.

The royalists, however, did not effect their purpose but they succeeded in breaking up the government. The people then split up and divided into numerous factions, each governed by its peculiar laws and regulations and having its own chief. (31 A.D.)

At this time Nephi is again brought to our notice. He comes forth as a servant of the Most High God, administering the words of Eternal Life with such power and great authority that none could disbelieve his testimony, for angels ministered to him daily. His cry was faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance and baptism for the remission of sins. Many were the mighty works he performed; he cast out devils and unclean spirits; he healed the sick and even raised the dead. But the wicked were actually angered at these manifestations of God's goodness and but few were converted. Still, Nephi continued his labors and at the end of three years he rejoiced in the re-establishment of the Church among the righteous, the organization of the Priesthood and the development of the purposes of God. For all this, the greater portion of the people continued to delight in sin; the day of their destruction had come.

Thus passed away thirty and three years. The time had now come for the fulfillment of the prophecy of Samuel, the Lamanite, when there should be darkness over the face of the land for the space of three days. On the fourth day of the first month of the thirty-fourth year a great and terrible tempest arose, the honors of which exceeded all others since the deluge. Huge tidal waves swept the coasts, swift cyclones and irresistible hurricanes mowed down forest, wilderness, city and tower, leaving blank desolation in their train; the earth trembled to its foundations, belched forth fire, uprose in giant peaks or sank in deep abysses. The whole face of the land was changed by these indescribable commotions. Some cities were burned, some sank in the depths of the sea, some were entombed in the earth, while mountains covered the place where others had before stood. It is not our intention here to detail the horrors of the three days of mental and physical darkness that followed the hurricane and the earthquake nor to dilate upon the great and terrible mourning of the people for their kindred slain, their cities destroyed and their treasures lost. The mental honor of these black days was intensified by the fear that they had sinned away their day of grace, as they realized the tens of thousands of the dead had done. Then was heard a voice from Heaven, crying, "Wo, wo, unto this people, except they shall repent." That voice was the voice of the Redeemer and He recounted to them the destructions, the tribulations, the sorrow that had come upon them because of their abominations but added the pleasing news that they who survived had been spared because they were more righteous than those who had fallen victims to the fury of the storm. He had given His life as a ransom for the sins of the world-and many words of counsel and instruction He added to His testimony for their future guidance. When the voice ceased there was silence throughout the land for the space of many hours. Afterwards the voice of the Savior was again heard, repeating to the humbled Nephites how often he would have gathered and spared His people Israel, but they would not. Thus did the three days of terror pass away. At its close the darkness dispersed and wailing of the people stopped for their mourning was turned into praise and thankfulness unto the Lord Jesus, their Redeemer.

The horrors of the desolation past was succeeded by the most glorious age in Nephite history. The extreme of misery was followed by a fullness of joy. The crucified Redeemer Himself appeared and ministered among the people; with His own voice He explained the beauties and harmonies of Salvation's wondrous plan. The simple, heart-reaching truths of the Everlasting Gospel He repeated in the same plain and gentle terms in which He had taught His disciples at Jerusalem and even greater truths' did He announce and greater works perform because of the more abundant faith of the Nephites. He also organized His Church in their midst and called twelve Disciples, who became His special representatives and the presiding authorities of His Church. These are to sit in the great Day of Judgment as the judges of the seed of Nephi and be themselves judged by the Twelve Apostles whom He had called from among the Jews.

First of these Nephite Twelve stood Nephi, who, by virtue of his seniority, his previous position, or his goodness, or, perhaps, all combined, was recognized by the Savior on various occasions as the foremost of his race. Nephi, at this time, was most probably advanced beyond the middle age of man, as he had held the records more than thirty-three years after his father's departure from this earth and as that event occurred when the elder Nephi was quite aged and Nephi was his eldest son, it is presumable that, if he were one of those who died when he was seventy-two years old, his day on the earth was not a long one after the departure of his Divine Master.

Though Nephi had himself been baptized, and had in times past baptized many yet a new dispensation being now opened Jesus commanded the Twelve whom He had chosen to baptize all the people. He afterwards gave them power and authority to confer the Holy Ghost. Nephi was the first who was baptized among all the people, he then baptized the remaining eleven of his quorum, which, having been done, they were filled with the Holy Ghost and with fire; indeed they were encircled around with fire which came down from Heaven, while holy angels ministered to them the unspeakable things of the Kingdom.

After the final departure of the Savior we are told but little of Nephi's personal life. His son, Nephi, appears to have taken charge of the records almost immediately after these events, while another son, Jonas, was a member of the quorum of the Twelve.
