Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 5

SC3 Ne 5 13 Ne 5 23 Ne 5 3Verses 1-3

SC3 Ne 5 13 Ne 5 23 Ne 5 3The Nephites believed all the words of the holy prophets. The rejoicing among the Nephites as recorded in Chapter 4, was, indeed, sincere. Together, they magnified the Lord and exalted His Holy Name. Their joy and gladness was not occasioned by a showing of material strength, in and of themselves, but they rejoiced in the Lord, they joyed in the God of their salvation because He, seeing their repentance and their humility, had, in His mercy and His righteousness, delivered them from "an everlasting destruction." Their thoughts, undoubtedly, were like those of the Psalmist, only King David spoke for the individual, they for the multitude: Create in us clean hearts, O God, and renew in us steadfast spirits. Cast us not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from us. Restore unto us the joy of Thy salvation, and hereafter let willing hearts uphold us. (See, Psalm 51:11-12)

SC3 Ne 5 13 Ne 5 23 Ne 5 3The abridger of the Larger Plates of Nephi, Mormon, had many other records from which to draw his studied comments, because the Nephites kept many rather complete accounts of the happenings among their people. We refer particularly to Mormon's own words that are recorded in Helaman 3:13-16: "And now there are many records kept of the proceedings of this people, by many of this people, which are particular and very large, concerning them. But behold, a hundredth part of the proceedings of this people, yea, the account of the Lamanites and of the Nephites, and their wars, and contentions, and dissensions, and their preaching, and their prophecies, and their shipping and their building of ships, and their building of temples, and of synagogues and their sanctuaries, and their righteousness, and their wickedness, and their murders, and their robbings, and their plunderings, and all manner of abominations and whoredoms, cannot be contained in this work.

SC3 Ne 5 13 Ne 5 23 Ne 5 3But behold, there are many books and many records of every kind, and they have been kept chiefly by the Nephites. And they have been handed down from one generation to another by the Nephites" (See, verses 8-9)

SC3 Ne 5 13 Ne 5 23 Ne 5 3Among the many other things of which records had been kept, Mormon notes were the preaching and the prophecies of the Nephites. A knowledge of things to come was had by all the people, and none of them doubted in the least that the words of "all the holy prophets" must be fulfilled. In making this important deduction, the Spirit of the Lord was with them and upon them. Many things contributed to the firmness of their belief. With their own eyes they had seen the deliverance of the Lord. Their own strength, they knew to be absolute weakness when compared to God's, their wisdom but foolishness. Together, all things presaged for them a glorious future, and unitedly, as with one voice, they proclaimed: "The Lord is God, and besides Him, there is none other." Only recently, Samuel the Lamanite, one of God's holy prophets, had foretold the coming of Jesus Christ, their Lord and God Who was actually the Son of the Eternal Father, to redeem all mankind. Of His coming, Samuel gave certain signs that would witness His birth. The Nephites had beheld these signs, so why not, they joyously pondered, should not all the words of the prophets likewise be fulfilled.

SC3 Ne 5 13 Ne 5 23 Ne 5 3The faith of the Nephites in the words of the prophets, telling them of Jesus Christ, His birth, death, and resurrection, together with many blessings which God had vouchsafed them including His deliverance of them from destruction by the Gadianton Robbers, so melted their hard hearts, that they, as one, bowed before the Majesty on High, and, the Sacred Record says: "They did forsake all their sins, and their abominations, and their whoredoms, and did serve God with all diligence day and night."

SC3 Ne 5 43 Ne 5 53 Ne 5 6Verses 4-6

SC3 Ne 5 43 Ne 5 53 Ne 5 6They did put an end to all those...abominable combinations. After Gidgiddoni's strategy had won, and righteousness had triumphed over wickedness, the good over evil, and the right over wrong, the Nephites took as prisoners all the robbers who were not slain. They cast them into prison, and there they preached the Word of God. Many repented of the course they had pursued, of the evil they had done, and expressed a determination to do them no more; these the Nephites set free upon them covenanting with their captors that they would "murder and rob no more."

SC3 Ne 5 43 Ne 5 53 Ne 5 6But there were still some of the captives who, although beaten, cherished the thought of continuing their evil practices, perhaps when peace had again softened the hearts of the Nephites against iniquity, and when pride had once more robbed them of their faith in God. Any of the captives who expressed such a desire, and who, in addition, refused to enter into the prescribed covenant that they would rob and murder no more, and threatened their brethren with harm, "were condemned and punished according to the law." This entirely broke up these bands of murderers and robbers, and peace and righteousness again prevailed (21 A.D.), but it was not until five years later that the Nephites returned to and possessed their old homes.

SC3 Ne 5 73 Ne 5 83 Ne 5 93 Ne 5 103 Ne 5 11Verses 7-11

SC3 Ne 5 73 Ne 5 83 Ne 5 93 Ne 5 103 Ne 5 11I have made my record according to the records of Nephi. Twenty-five years had now gone by since the signs given by Samuel that were to tell of Christ's birth were beheld by the Nephites both in the heavens and upon the earth. During that time many other great and marvelous things transpired which to many were wonderful to witness. But in the record Mormon was making, only a small part of them could be told. He noted, almost in the same words, certainly with the same intent, what he said about the Nephites who lived seventy-five years previously and which we quoted near the beginning of this chapter, 4, (Helaman 3:13-16). Many records were made of the events of this period, but Mormon informs us that all the knowledge from which his record is made, comes from the incidents recorded by the historians who wrote upon the Plates of Nephi. Their account of such occurrences is short and true, which fact he verifies. Therefore, he makes plain to all who read his abridgment that the information contained therein is engraven upon plates which he made with his own hands. Said information was material which was engraved upon the Plates of Nephi.

SC3 Ne 5 123 Ne 5 133 Ne 5 143 Ne 5 153 Ne 5 16Verses 12-16

SC3 Ne 5 123 Ne 5 133 Ne 5 143 Ne 5 153 Ne 5 16I am called Mormon. The abridger of the Larger Plates of Nephi, Mormon, in these verses, gives a brief account of his calling, and testifies that it came of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, Whose disciple he was. The main purpose of this calling was, he declares, to preach Salvation and Eternal Life among his people, who were the people of the Lord God.

SC3 Ne 5 123 Ne 5 133 Ne 5 143 Ne 5 153 Ne 5 16First, Mormon reveals the origin of his name, he being so called "after the Land of Mormon," the land in which Alma did establish the Church among the people. (Mosiah 18) His father's name was also Mormon. (Mormon 1:5) Very little is known concerning where the name, Mormon, came from, except the Sacred Record says it was the name given to a certain place near the City of Lehi-Nephi by the king; Zeniff, we presume.

Mormon

The Prophet Joseph Smith, in a letter published in the Times and Seasons, Nauvoo, May 15, 1843, furnished the following explanation concerning the meaning of this word:

"It has been stated that this word was derived from the Greek word mormo. This is not the case. There was no Greek or Latin upon the plates from which I, through the grace of the Lord, translated the Book of Mormon."

Then he quotes from the Book of Mormon (Mormon 9:32-34), where we are told that the characters used were the "reformed Egyptian." He continues:

"Here, then the subject is put to silence, for 'none other people knoweth our language'; therefore, the Lord, and not man, had to interpret, after the people were all dead. And as Paul said, 'The world by wisdom knew not God'; so the world by speculation are destitute of revelation; and as God, in his superior wisdom, has always given his Saints, whenever he had any on the earth, the same spirit, and that spirit, as John says, is the true spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I may safely say that the word Mormon stands independent of the learning and wisdom of this generation.

"Before I give a definition, however, of the word, let me say that the Bible, in its widest sense, means good; for the Savior says, according to the Gospel of John, "I am the Good Shepherd"; and it will not be beyond the common use of terms to say that Good is among the most important in use, and, though known by various names in different languages, still its meaning is the same, and is ever in opposition to bad."

The prophet further says:

"We say, from the Saxon, good; from the Dane, god; the Goth, goda, the German, gut; the Dutch, goed; the Latin, bonus; the Greek, kalos; the Hebrew, tob, and the Egyptian, mon. Hence, with the addition of more, or the contraction, mor, we have the word Mormon, which means literally, more good."

Here we have the interesting information that the first part of the word is an abbreviation of the English adverb "more," and that the second part is the Egyptian adjective "mon." In other words, the prophet found, on the plates, as a proper noun, a compound word meaning, literally, "better," and, under the influence of the Holy Spirit, he solved the problem of transliterating it, by translating the first part into English and copying the second part, and making of the two, one word, half English and half Egyptian. This, I admit, is an unusual literary procedure, but we have an instance of it in our Bible, where a place called Maaleh-acrabbim (Joshua 15:3) is also called, "The Ascent of Akrabbim," (Numbers 34:4). Here half of the name is translated into English and the other half is a foreign word. See also, Genesis 23:2 and 35:27, where Hebron is called, in the first passage, Kirjath-Arba, and in the second, "The City of Arbah," the first half of the name being translated into English and the second being left untranslated. This, then, is how the word Mormon originated.

And it means "more good"; that is, "better."

The reference of the prophet, in this connection, to the Bible would indicate that the good expressed in the word is the same as that which we call "good news," or "gospel," and that "Mormon," therefore, means one who is the bearer of "good tidings."

It is probable that the mon in "Mormon" is akin to the mon or men in the Egyptian Amon or Amen. Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge, (The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. 2, p. 2) says that Amen is from a root men "to abide, to be permanent, eternal." Mon or men (the vowel is indifferent) would, then, mean "good" in the sense of permanency, just as nefer means "good" in the sense of physical beauty. We gather this from what Champollin (Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique des Anciens Egyptiens, p. 91) on the authority of Eusebius says, viz., that the divinity which takes the name Amen and Kneph or Noub, alternatively, was by the Greeks called Agathodaimon, and that Nero, when assuming a divine title, called himself Neo-agathodaimon. Agathos is, of course, the Greek word for "good," and it must have been suggested by the Egyptian men or mon.

It is a very interesting fact that many American languages, perhaps most of them, form their comparatives and superlatives by the use of the adverbs "more" and "most." In the Aztec, "better" is ocachiqualli, which means, literally, "more good." In the Otomi language "better" is nra nho, which means "more good." In the Maya, the comparative is formed by affixing the last vowel of the adjective with an "l" added or by simply affixing the particle il.

For instance, from tibil, a good thing, utibil-il, a better thing, is formed.

May we not ask, "What is the explanation of the singular fact that the Prophet Joseph Smith seems to have had a knowledge of how comparatives are formed in some of the principal American languages?"

Mormon was the last great Prophet-General of the Nephite race, but is better known to us as the custodian and compiler of the records of his people and the writer of the greater portion of the work named after him and known as the Book of Mormon. The father of Mormon, who was a descendant of Nephi, the son of the Patriarch Lehi, was born on the Northern Continent (311 A.D.), and when the younger Mormon was but eleven years of age, took him south to Zarahemla. Before his departure, he formed the acquaintance of Ammaron, the keeper of the Sacred Record, which, because of the iniquity of the people, he had hidden up in a hill called Antum. Ammaron informed Mormon, then a child ten years old, of what he had done, and placed the buried treasure in his charge. He instructed Mormon to go, when he was about twenty-four years old, to the hill where they were hidden and take the Plates of Nephi and to record thereon what he had observed concerning the people. The remainder of the records, etc., he was to leave where they were. Mormon was as great a religious teacher as he was a soldier. His annotations throughout his compilation of the sacred records show this, as do also his instructions and epistles to his son, Moroni. Shortly before the great, final struggle near Cumorah, Mormon hid all the records that had been entrusted to his care in that hill, save the abridged records which he gave to his son.

To fulfill the promises of the Lord to the righteous of his brethren, Mormon noted that a record must be made available to the descendants of, or the seed of Joseph who shall live in times to come. For this reason, he found it necessary to make a small, yet a truly correct record of "these things which have been done." "Yea," he says, "a small record of that which hath taken place from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem, even down until the present time." Therefore, Mormon knowing that the things others before him had engraved upon the Plates of Nephi were true, and that in them was recorded the Gospel of Jesus Christ, he condensed their accounts and made them the principal component of his own work.

The promises of the Lord to the righteous Nephites of every generation that a knowledge of their forefathers should come to the remnants of the House of Israel who should dwell upon this continent was a covenant the Lord made with them, and its fulfillment was a treasure in which they rejoiced. We hereby refer the reader to such promises that the Lord made, and quote Enos' testimony as it was engraven upon the Smaller Plates of Nephi: "And after I, Enos, had heard these words, my faith began to be unshaken in the Lord; and I prayed unto Him with many long strugglings for my brethren, the Lamanites. And it came to pass that after I had prayed and labored with all diligence, the Lord said unto me: I will grant unto thee according to thy desires, because of thy faith. And now behold, this was the desire which I desired of Him-that if it should be, that my people, the Nephites, should fall into transgression, and by any means be destroyed, and the Lamanites should not be destroyed, that the Lord God would preserve a record of my people, the Nephites; even if it so be by the power of His holy arm, that it might be brought forth at some future day unto the Lamanites, that, perhaps, they might be brought unto salvation-For at the present our strugglings were vain in restoring them to the true faith. And they swore in their wrath that, if it were possible, they would destroy our records and us, and also all the traditions of our fathers. Therefore, I knowing that the Lord God was able to preserve our records, I cried unto Him continually, for He said unto me: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask in faith, believing that ye shall receive in the name of Christ, ye shall receive it. And I had faith, and I did cry unto God that He would preserve the records; and He covenanted with me that He would bring them forth unto the Lamanites in His own due time. And I, Enos, knew it would be according to the covenant which He had made; wherefore my heart did rest. And the Lord said unto me: Thy fathers have also required of Me this thing; and it shall be done unto them according to their faith; for their faith was like unto thine." (Enos 11-18; also See, I Nephi 13: 34ff; II Nephi 3:6-23; 26:16-17; 29:11; Mormon 5:12-13; 8:14-16; 8:25-32)

Mormon makes it plain that the source of all the accounts which he has incorporated into his work are the sacred historians who lived and wrote contemporaneous with each event they recorded. That they, he says, "were [lived] before me, until the coming of my day."

SC3 Ne 5 173 Ne 5 183 Ne 5 19Verses 17-19

SC3 Ne 5 173 Ne 5 183 Ne 5 19And then I make a record of the things which I have seen with mine own eyes. After completing his abridgment of the accounts rendered by the historians of each period which were engraved on the Plates of Nephi, leaving them relatively with no part lacking and still retaining their proper sense, Mormon proposes to add thereto a record "of the things which I have seen with mine own eyes." Mormon, being an honorable and just man, the record of those things or happenings would be as he, honorable and just. But, he makes one apology, many things that happened among his people, because of a deficiency in their language, or because it lacked some quality necessary for completeness, he says, "We are not able to write." A fuller and freer conception of this defect in their writing, is made manifest to us by Mormon's son, Moroni, who was commanded of the Lord to include in the record he was making somewhat concerning the promises the righteous leaders of the Nephites had obtained from the Lord: that a knowledge of Christ should come unto his brethren, the Lamanites, a remnant of whom would still live for many generations upon the land which the Lord, Himself, had given them. Moroni did as he was commanded, but, nevertheless, he felt incapable of fully fulfilling the Lord's requirements. He sought the help of the Lord, and of his prayer to the Almighty, Moroni wrote: "And I said unto Him: Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our weakness in writing; for Lord Thou hast made us mighty in word by faith, but Thou hast not made us mighty in writing; for Thou hast made all this people that they could speak much, because of the Holy Ghost which Thou hast given them. And Thou hast made us that we could write but little, because of the awkwardness of our hands. Behold, Thou hast not made us mighty in writing like unto the Brother of Jared, for Thou madest him that the things which he wrote were mighty even as Thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them. Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words." (Ether 12:23-25) In finishing the work which his father, Mormon, had commenced, Moroni also said: "Behold, I speak unto you as though I speak from the dead; for I know ye shall hear my words. Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father for his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that He hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been. (Mormon 9:30-31) "And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these." (Ibid., 8:12)

SC3 Ne 5 203 Ne 5 213 Ne 5 223 Ne 5 23Verses 20-23

SC3 Ne 5 203 Ne 5 213 Ne 5 223 Ne 5 23Surely He hath blessed the House of Jacob. Mormon, in ecstasy, contemplated his descent from Father Lehi, and, in doing so, blessed Him Who rules the lives of all men. A glorious paean in praise to God and His Son, Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, rose from Mormon's heart, and lifted him to unprecedented heights of thanksgiving for Their divine goodness and mercies which They had bestowed upon his people. The promise the Lord had given the Patriarch Lehi, was that if his descendants would keep the commandments of God, they should be blessed upon the land unto which he, Lehi, should be led. That promise was fulfilled "according to His word." Not only did this promise extend to material things, but in Mormon's own words: "He hath given my people so much knowledge unto the Salvation of our souls." "Surely," he says, "He hath blessed the House of Jacob, and hath been merciful unto the seed of Joseph," a remnant of which He will bring to a "knowledge of the Lord their God." (This was written by Mormon about 326 years after Christ.)

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26Verses 24-26

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26And shall they know their Redeemer. The Book of Mormon has a message for all; for Jew and for Gentile. Every nation under heaven; every kindred, tongue, and people who dwell upon the face of the Earth will hear its voice, and "They shall know that I am He that doth speak." (Jesus Christ, III Nephi 20:39)

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26The promises of the Book of Mormon to the Gentiles are indeed great. To them, it says that they shall be blessed upon this land, that is, Zion, the Land of America; literally, the Land of the King, or the Land of the Lord, our King. "This land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no king upon this land...for I the Lord, the King of Heaven, will be their King, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear My words." (II Nephi 11:14)

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26To the Jew, its message and promise is contained in the verses we now have under consideration. It is one of the greatest prophecies ever uttered, and its fulfillment is being accomplished with an ever increasing rate of speed by some of the most powerful forces on the Earth.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26The Holy Land or Palestine, The Land of Jerusalem. "This is the land ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their portion, saith the Lord God." (Ezekiel 47:13 to 48:29)

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26In connection with the prophecy of Ezekiel it is well to keep in mind the last three verses of Chapter five, above noted.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26The Holy Land would, some have estimated, extend from about 30 to 34 degrees north latitude, and from 34 to 37 degrees east longitude. It would be about 280 miles in length and 150 in width. It would be divided into twelve provinces, each named for one of the sons of Jacob and contain a strip of land 20 by 150 miles. Between Judah and Benjamin there would be a holy oblation. This reservation dedicated to the public service, would be about 50 by 150 miles, and the City of Jerusalem, with its suburbs would occupy an area in it 10 miles square.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26The entire area of the Palestine of Ezekiel's vision is small, but it is only a beginning of a "Greater Palestine" which will, in all probability, extend from the River Euphrates in the north to the Red Sea, and from the Mediterranean to the Euphrates in the east. For the deserts will be made to blossom as the rose, just as has come to pass, by the power of God, where Israel has gathered on the American Continent. The country which the Lord promised to give to Abraham and his seed after him is, according to the divine Covenant, bounded by the River of Egypt and the Euphrates (Genesis 15:18), and Abraham's descendants will sometime come into possession of their inheritance.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26Palestine will once more become the gathering place of the scattered Children of Judah, through the power of the Mighty One of Jacob, but He always accomplishes His purposes in human history through the instrumentality of His children. When Israel was to be brought out of Egyptian bondage, Moses was raised up and made the instrument through which their deliverance was made a reality. At the end of the Babylonian Captivity, Cyrus, the mighty prince of Persia, was moved upon to set the captives free and his successors continued to extend to them their protection while they were restoring their Temple and repairing the ruined walls of their city. In the same way, it is to be expected that, when the time comes for the last gathering and final restoration, the promises of the Lord will be fulfilled by means of natural agencies.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26Cyrus was entrusted with power for the very purpose of enabling Israel to return to Palestine. For, about two hundred years before his birth, the Prophet Isaiah foretold his mission in these words: "Thus saith the Lord...that saith of Cyrus, He is My shepherd, and shall perform all My pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid." (Isaiah 44:24-28) Possibly this remarkable prediction was placed on record, by divine inspiration, for the effect it would naturally have on the Persian Ruler when his attention was called to it. He, himself, acknowledged his obligation to God and issued his famous decree as an expression of his gratitude for the success he had achieved. He says: "The Lord God of Heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the Earth; and He hath charged me to build Him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all His people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem." (Ezra 1:2-3) That was a graceful act of acknowledgment of divine providence in the military and diplomatic achievements through which Cyrus had risen to eminence and power.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26Is there, we may ask, a prophetic word by which we who live today may know by what human instrumentality the restoration of Palestine will be effected?

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26There is!

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26For the same prophet who indicated Cyrus as the deliverer from captivity, directed us to look to the real sovereign of Egypt for the final restoration and deliverance of the Holy Land, when he placed on record the following word of the Lord: "For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom." (Isaiah 43:3)

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26Has not God in our own day literally entrusted Egypt to the care of the great world powers? This is true notwithstanding the present turmoil which seems to confuse the vision of all who hope to see the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26Let us acknowledge the hand of the Lord in this, as in all further developments. He has given Egypt to them and, as He says through His prophet, as a ransom for Israel. It rests with these great powers, having accepted the price, to restore the property to the Lord.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26There are indications that the thoughts of men are now being directed, as never before, toward the political necessity of restoring Palestine to its native glory, and the establishment there, in the City of David, of a kind of international court that will solve the problems that now divide and array nation against nation. Such an action would be due recognition of the interest all enlightened nations naturally have in the place where the cradle of their civilization stood.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26The establishment of the independent state of Israel is an auspicious beginning that will yet grow until all the kingdoms of the Earth shall become the Kingdom of our Lord.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26"Israel, youngest true democracy in the world, enters its seventh year amidst austerity, sacrifice, and violence. These elements are not new, historically, to young states nor to the indomitable people who carved their homeland out of the hostile desert. Achievements have been noteworthy since Israel was born in 1948. Not the least of these was the rounding of a nation in an unproductive, ferment-ridden area. Thousands of persons, persecuted and discriminated against in other countries, hailed Israel as their own free country and flocked there in a historic migration. They set up, truck farms and factories where jackals once roamed and nomads grazed their sheep. They made the desert blossom; they conquered disease where pestilence had made it unsafe for humans. They established compulsory education; they gave women the right to vote and other rights. They created a symbol of man's faith in himself and his great potentialities."

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26"Six years ago the United States was the first nation to recognize the Israeli Republic. Without this action and other friendly acts the state would not have survived its fight for life against the superior armies of its neighbors. Irrespective of what else we may consider necessary to compromise the thorny issues of the Middle East, the United States should make it abundantly clear to the Arabs and the world that we are resolved that Israel has come to stay. Recognition of Israel as an entity is the prerequisite to any formula for peace in this part of the globe." (Salt Lake Tribune, May 10, 1954)

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26The gathering of the Children of Israel and the rehabilitation of Palestine must be considered from the widest possible panoramic view. It is, by no means, a matter of sentiment. That measure would be the beginning of a regenerative movement affecting the entire world. Paul, in his letter to the Romans, takes this view, when he says: "For if the casting away of them (the Jews) be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?" If, in the dispersed condition, they were an influence for good in the world, how much greater will that influence be when they are reunited and can take a place in the family of nations? That will be to the entire world, as "life from the dead."

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26There is no other salvation for the world than the establishment of that Kingdom of which the prophets have spoken from the beginning. All merely human governments have proved inadequate to the moral, spiritual, and physical needs of the children of men. No matter how well the machinery has worked to begin with, after a while it has become deranged, and, in many instances, unfit for the service for which it was intended. Therefore, God, Himself, will give to the world a form of government, perfect and adequate to all its needs. And this form of government will come from Zion and Jerusalem.

SC3 Ne 5 243 Ne 5 253 Ne 5 26The race that has given to mankind such lawgivers and leaders as Moses and Ezra; such philosophers as Solomon and poets as David; and, in later years, such teachers as Miamonides and Mendelssohn, will yet bring forth the genius, the religious force, and the statesmanship necessary for the true solution of the moral, social, and political problems that cause trouble in the world today, and with this, the establishment of the Universal Brotherhood of Man. For that is the next stage to which our civilization must advance.
