Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 6

SC3 Ne 6 13 Ne 6 23 Ne 6 33 Ne 6 4Verses 4

SC3 Ne 6 13 Ne 6 23 Ne 6 33 Ne 6 4And they began to prosper and to wax great. As we have already noted, the soldiers of Gidgiddoni succeeded in taking as prisoners all the robbers who were not killed. The Word of God was preached to them, and those who repented and covenanted to cease their evil practices were set at liberty. In their magnanimity the Nephites gave them lands according to their numbers "that they might have, with their labors, wherewith to subsist upon." The remainder were condemned for their crimes, and punished according to the law. This entirely broke up the Gadianton bands of robbers and murderers, and peace and righteousness again prevailed. (21 A.D.)

SC3 Ne 6 13 Ne 6 23 Ne 6 33 Ne 6 4However, it was not until five years later that the Nephites returned to their old homes, each man and his family taking with them their belongings, for there was much which they had gathered and not used during the years of their refuge into which they had gone for mutual protection against the repeated raids of the Gadiantons. Besides food which they had not eaten, their silver and gold and also other precious things, they returned with their flocks and herds, their cattle and horses; it seems reasonable to suppose that many of their livestock and beasts of burden had increased both in number and in fine condition during their sojourn in the Lands of Zarahemla and Bountiful, whereto their leaders had called them. Nevertheless and in spite of their dwelling in a place as temporary residents, they amassed while there a great store of worldly goods, and soon "they began again to prosper and to wax great." (verse 4)

SC3 Ne 6 13 Ne 6 23 Ne 6 33 Ne 6 4The next year after the return of the Nephites to their own possessions the laws of the Republic were revised according to justice and equity. They had, doubtless, been violently tampered with during the times that the Gadianton Robbers held control of the administration and elected the officers to conduct its affairs. Good order now prevailed throughout the whole land. Soon new cities were rounded, old ones repaired, roads and other means of communication were built, and here the Sacred Record notes "now there was nothing in all the land to hinder the people from prospering continually, except they should fall into transgression." (verse 5)

SC3 Ne 6 13 Ne 6 23 Ne 6 33 Ne 6 4Mormon, in his abridgment of the Larger Plates of Nephi, gives full credit for the "great peace" that was then established in the land to its two appointed leaders, Lachoneus, the Governor of the Land and also its Chief Judge, and Gidgiddoni, the righteous military Commander of its armed forces. Mormon meant to imply that it was by obedience to constituted authority that the people were blessed through God's grace, and that peace, His most precious gift, once again brought joy and happiness to the Nephite homes.

SC3 Ne 6 13 Ne 6 23 Ne 6 33 Ne 6 4To acquaint the reader more fully with the leadership afforded the Nephite people, we quote Mormon's words concerning these two masterful guides: "And so great and marvelous were the words and prophecies of Lachoneus that they did cause fear to come upon all the people; and they did exert themselves in their might to do according to the words of Lachoneus. And it came to pass that Lachoneus did appoint chief captains over all the armies of the Nephites, to command them at the time that the robbers should come down out of the wilderness against them. Now the chiefest among all the captains and the great commander of the armies of the Nephites was appointed, and his name was Gidgiddoni. Now it was the custom among all the Nephites to appoint for their chief captains, (save it were in times of wickedness) some one that had the spirit of revelation and also prophecy; therefore, this Gidgiddoni was a great prophet among them, as also was the Chief Judge." (III Nephi 3:16-19)

3 Ne 6 10Verse 10

3 Ne 6 10Some were lifted up unto pride and boastings. Yet in spite of God's deliverance of them from their enemies, and the peace that imbued them all, enabling them to see those things which brought them happiness and prosperity-which in the land wherein they lived abounded most plentifully-some of the people "were lifted up unto pride and boastings because of their exceeding great riches, yea, even unto great persecutions." We may not be surprised that peace was shortlived. Iniquity and dissension soon began again to raise their hideous heads, and the prophets and servants of God were persecuted and some illegally condemned to death.

3 Ne 6 10As among all prosperous people where wealth and a desire for more worldly goods motivate their way of life, both material things and station therein, these things became common merchandise among the Nephites. There were many merchants going from place to place hawking their wares and exchanging anything that appealed to their customers' fancy or satisfied their whims. We may imagine that many made all the trouble they could because there were also many lawyers among them seeking fees. Officers in search of authority over their fellow men added a luster to the rapidly growing sense of superiority one had over the other. "And the people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning...."

3 Ne 6 13Verse 13

3 Ne 6 13Some were humble and penitent before God. Notwithstanding the blessings vouchsafed to them by the Lord, pride and angry passions molded the pattern offered in the lives of many Nephites of this period. Yet, there were others who because of deep spiritual understanding "were exceedingly humble." They refused to rail while others railed at them; neither did they revile the reviler, nor smite the smiter; they bore all manner of affliction remembering that God claims the righteous man as His own. To them He was The Majesty On High, and before Him, they were humble and penitent.

3 Ne 6 14Verse 14

3 Ne 6 14There became a great inequality in all the land, insomuch that the Church began to be broken up. According to Nephite reckoning it was thirty years after the birth of Christ in faraway Judea that the events recorded of this period took place. Only a few years of peace had passed since the Gadianton Robbers were exterminated, yet in that short time many Nephites proved that their memories were still shorter. They entirely forgot the Power that had delivered them from the hands of wicked men, and abandoned themselves to their own strength, which, when compared to God's was absolute weakness. Their wisdom was likewise foolishness, and by it they knew not God. Their learning, which some received because it was the kind that could be bought (verse 12), led them down to depths they could not fathom, and to heights they could not grasp. It was not long until the Church of God, its members enmeshed in the fabric of apostasy, ceased to exist except among a few worthy Lamanites "who were converted to the true faith; and they would not depart from it, for they were firm, and steadfast, and immovable, willing with all diligence to keep the commandments of the Lord." (verse 14)

SC3 Ne 6 153 Ne 6 163 Ne 6 173 Ne 6 18Verses 15-18

SC3 Ne 6 153 Ne 6 163 Ne 6 173 Ne 6 18Satan had great power, unto the stirring up of the people to do all manner of iniquity. It is true, Satan has power over us only as we do his bidding. Little by little, in doing his will, we grant him sovereignty of our lives, and more and more he asserts dominion over us. In obeying him, honoring him, and sustaining him by our actions, we enter his kingdom and become servants of evil. At first our willingness to serve him may be evidenced by small matters, but in the end the final test is-small matters become large, and soon we excuse our actions, offer pretexts to assuage our remorse, and only apologize when we should wear sackcloth. Pride, we may conceive, is at first a small matter, but as it increases within us, our hearts are hardened, our efforts in establishing God's Kingdom upon the Earth are enfeebled, and our desires for the higher things of life are dulled. Only as we are firm, and steadfast, and immovable, and seek with all diligence to keep the Lord's commandments, can we thwart the plans of the evil one. Satan often begins his campaign of moral and mental, not forgetting physical, destruction by puffing up a people "with pride, tempting them to seek for power, and authority, and riches, and the vain things of the world." And thus, with the Nephites of this period, all thoughts of God were crowded from their hearts, and thus, "Satan did lead away the hearts of the people to do all manner of iniquity..." (verse 16) Mormon comments that "therefore they had enjoyed peace but a few years."

3 Ne 6 18Verse 18

3 Ne 6 18They did not sin ignorantly. To rebel knowingly against the will of the Lord is an awful thing. The Nephites had been taught by holy men, men of God, all things concerning His will towards them, and in rejecting His Word, whether it came to them through the prophets of old, or the seers of their own time, and listening to the sophistry of the devil, they sinned knowingly, and not ignorantly. In fine, "They did wilfully rebel against God." (verse 18)

3 Ne 6 20Verse 20

3 Ne 6 20Men, inspired from Heaven, stood among the people, preaching and testifying boldly of the sins and iniquities of the people. Notwithstanding that the hearts and minds of the Nephite people had become diseased and depraved, the bounties of the earth continued to pour in upon them like a river of plenitude, making them rich in worldly goods and arrogant when dealing with their fellows. Pride ruled their hearts. The accumulation of material things imbued many with a false sense of security and safety against any enemy. Their chattels gave others a feeling of superiority over brother and sister. They were fast ripening for destruction. Their flocks and herds, their fields of yellow corn, their gold and silver, were gods that filled their hearts and to whom they paid homage. Day by day, they went their way unmindful of the God of their Fathers who had given them all these things. We repeat: All thoughts of God were crowded from their hearts.

3 Ne 6 20At this crucial period in their history, which, too, was a turning point in their lives, Lachoneus, the son of the previous Chief Judge by the same name, "did fill the seat of his father and did govern the people that year," (verse 19) which was the thirtieth year of Nephite reckoning.

3 Ne 6 20The Nephites, blessed as they were with a surplus of good things, which, as we have noted, were abundant in the land wherein they lived, nevertheless grew weary of well-doing; they forgot that "riches and honour are with Me; yea, durable riches and righteousness." (Proverbs 8:18) They "loved evil more than good; and lying rather than to speak righteousness." (Psalm 52:3) We think of the faithful Priests of God's Church as they officiated in the rituals of the Law of Moses, and who took special heed to the words of King David which were written upon the Brass Plates of Laban: "Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord." (Psalm 4:5)

3 Ne 6 20Although the Nephites of Lachoneus' time were apostate and openly rebelled against Him, the Lord's long-suffering and merciful kindness towards them endured yet another season.

3 Ne 6 20The end to which all God's provinces are consecrated is the Salvation of His children. It seems to us that the poet's words are true: Out of evil He still educes good; God sends His children trials and tribulations that by overcoming them they become stronger, and also that they might remember Him. History shows in the experience of four thousand years that without occasions of distress and suffering to remind them of Him, men know not God. Distress! and suffering! Why? To what end? To the end, "That ye may remember, and do all My commandments, and be holy unto your God...." (Numbers 15:40-41)

3 Ne 6 20God knows men's weaknesses; He will not forsake them, nor leave them in their grief. He did not forsake the Nephites. And remember what is more, He does not desire the death of the transgressor, but that the sinner live and return unto Him. Therefore, and because the Nephites were of the House of Israel, men holding the Holy Priesthood-the Sacred Record says, "by Heaven inspired"-were sent forth to once again proclaim the grandeur that awaits the faithful and true. Throughout all the Lands of the Nephites they stood among the people and boldly testified as to their sins and iniquities; at the same time they preached repentance and "the Redemption the Lord would make for His people." (verse 20) The Resurrection of Christ was their message, and without any restraint except that offered by the people to whom they spoke, told of "His death and sufferings."

3 Ne 6 21Verse 21

3 Ne 6 21And those who were angry were chiefly the chief Judges....The efforts of these evangelists and teachers to turn the people from their iniquitous ways did not result in the peace of righteous living to the strife-torn populace, but incited anger and resentment from the chief judges and apostate high priests against whom they had testified. While some scattered few were convinced of their evil practices and sought to make amends, the majority of the people became more bitter and malignant. Many lawyers, always ready for unrest, stirred them up to hatred and angry passions, even that some of the preachers of righteousness who came among them were put to death.

SC3 Ne 6 223 Ne 6 23Verses 22-23

SC3 Ne 6 223 Ne 6 23Many of those who testified...were secretly put to death. No officer, according to Nephite law, had power to condemn a person to death without the authority of the governor, but many of the prophets were put to death secretly by the judges. The knowledge of such action was withheld from the proper authority until after the prophet's death.

SC3 Ne 6 243 Ne 6 253 Ne 6 263 Ne 6 273 Ne 6 283 Ne 6 293 Ne 6 30Verses 24-30

SC3 Ne 6 243 Ne 6 253 Ne 6 263 Ne 6 273 Ne 6 283 Ne 6 293 Ne 6 30A complaint came up to the governor. A complaint against the lower judges for permitting such actions was made to the Chief Judge of the whole land at Zarahemla, and the offenders were tried according to the law. The wicked were strong because they were united in evil. But unity in evil is conspiracy, and that is just what happened among them. The kindred and friends of the offenders, with certain lawyers and high priests, entered into a secret agreement, or covenant to destroy the people who were in favor of law and order. This wicked covenant in turn destroyed justice; its aim was to save the guilty judges from the just penalty of their misdeeds. This was, in fact, the re-establishment of the order of Gadianton. They proposed to assassinate the governor, set up a king to rule the country, and destroy its liberties.

Lachoneus, the Younger

The last of the Nephite judges, the son of the preceding judge, who bore the same name. He was assassinated in the year 30 A.D.

It is not entirely certain from the Sacred Record when Lachoneus, the assumed the reins of government, but the idea seems to be conveyed that it was in the year 30 A.D. His dominion fell in perilous times. The people had ripened in iniquity and were ready for destruction. The prophets of God who raised their warning voices were slain by unjust judges and unscrupulous officers and the laws were perverted and trampled under foot. When these corrupt rulers were called to account by the supreme authority at the capital, they set the laws at defiance, refused to answer, broke out in open rebellion, endeavored to establish a monarchy and assassinated the Chief Judge.
