Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 7

3 Ne 7 1Verse 1

3 Ne 7 1They did not establish a king over the land. In spite of the fact that the rebellious overthrew the government, and caused that the Chief Judge be murdered while he sat upon the Judgment-Seat, they were unable, as they desired, to establish a kingship to rule over the land. In the spasmodic attempts by Nephite Royalists to place a king at the head of their government, they never succeeded to permanently change the form of its administrative powers. Although the Heaven-inspired laws of the Republic were sometimes perverted to meet the criminal tendencies of the wicked or feed their greed, they were not made subject to the despotic rule of a king. This was especially true at times when the Gadianton Robbers elected men to governmental offices, and forthwith proceeded to fulfil their unrighteous purposes.

SC3 Ne 7 23 Ne 7 33 Ne 7 43 Ne 7 53 Ne 7 63 Ne 7 73 Ne 7 8Verses 2-8

SC3 Ne 7 23 Ne 7 33 Ne 7 43 Ne 7 53 Ne 7 63 Ne 7 73 Ne 7 8The people were divided one against another. The result of their uprising was not what the conspirators anticipated. More dissension and turmoil among the people caused even the wicked to retract their commitment given to support a king. Instead of a united front which alone could accomplish their designs, they divided into groups-the Sacred Record calls them tribes-every man with his family uniting with their kindred and friends. This completely disorganized the government, and also deranged the plans of the conspirators. Some men had large families and many friends and kindred, and their tribes were correspondingly large. Each tribe appointed its chief or leader, and it was his special duty to see that the laws they should thereafter adopt were properly carried out. (30 A.D.)

SC3 Ne 7 23 Ne 7 33 Ne 7 43 Ne 7 53 Ne 7 63 Ne 7 73 Ne 7 8This really calamitous condition of the people came not upon them as the event of a day, or by sudden impact, but by their gradual apostasy from the Lord, and by yielding "themselves unto the power of Satan." Little by little they were consumed with pride; little by little the temptations of the devil carried them farther and farther towards destruction, and soon "the more righteous part of the people had nearly all become wicked; yea, there were but few righteous men among them."

SC3 Ne 7 23 Ne 7 33 Ne 7 43 Ne 7 53 Ne 7 63 Ne 7 73 Ne 7 8While these terrible social overturnings were taking place on the American Continent, how different were the events that were occurring in the midst of the House of Israel on the Eastern Continent! For it was in the year that Jesus, the Redeemer of the world, was baptized by John in the River Jordan, as Lehi, Nephi, and others of the ancient Nephite prophets had long before foretold. It was in this same year that Jesus commenced His public ministry and began to teach men the Law of His Gospel.

SC3 Ne 7 93 Ne 7 103 Ne 7 113 Ne 7 123 Ne 7 133 Ne 7 14Verses 9-14

SC3 Ne 7 93 Ne 7 103 Ne 7 113 Ne 7 123 Ne 7 133 Ne 7 14This secret combination placed Jacob at its head.

SC3 Ne 7 93 Ne 7 103 Ne 7 113 Ne 7 123 Ne 7 133 Ne 7 14We can easily see in the experience of the Nephites of this period why secret societies and clandestine combinations are not compatible with the ways of righteousness. If anything is good, it should be to the benefit of all. If it is not good, it is of evil and is of the devil. Unity in evil is conspiracy; unity without permanency of purpose is merely coalition; but unity that is lasting and real, comes from the Lord, and only that which is good endures to the end. Therefore, when men combine to foist upon others the will of the few; when they aggregate to themselves the power to live and let live; when they submerge all else to selfish and wanton practices, they open the floodgates of iniquity, and in spite of right, make might the criterion, or test by which a thing is tried, or judged. It was just this sort of combination that brought misery to the Nephites. It was a secret society that destroyed them as a nation, and a hidden motive in their actions that brought down upon them the retribution of the lie. It was "the secret combination of the friends and kindreds of those who murdered the prophets" that was the cause of the Nephites' surrender to evil.

SC3 Ne 7 93 Ne 7 103 Ne 7 113 Ne 7 123 Ne 7 133 Ne 7 14Now this combination which promised secrecy to its followers concerning each other's criminal acts, had a hidden purpose by which its adherents hoped to usurp both religious and political power. A combination of religious and political authority reposing in the hands of one, or a few men, would leave none to whom they need answer. With this end in view, the members of this diabolical organization assembled together and chose one of their number as their leader whom they called King, and "he was one of the chiefest who had given his voice against the prophets who testified of Jesus."

SC3 Ne 7 113 Ne 7 123 Ne 7 133 Ne 7 14Verses 11-14

SC3 Ne 7 113 Ne 7 123 Ne 7 133 Ne 7 14Jacob commanded his people that they should take up their flight into the northernmost parts of the land. Though the people comprising the different Nephite tribes were an aggregation of nondescripts, who in no particular way served the Lord, "yet, they were united in the hatred of those who had entered into a covenant to destroy the government." We observe that there was little else to unite them except their fear of the followers of Jacob, who were indeed the Gadianton Robbers. This appears to have led to a confederacy for purposes of defense. They agreed to keep the peace with one another, and to establish laws to prevent one tribe trespassing upon the rights of the others. The result was a multiplicity of laws; each tribe adopting measures which the leaders thereof thought would in the end inure to its own benefit.

SC3 Ne 7 113 Ne 7 123 Ne 7 133 Ne 7 14Nevertheless, and in spite of their many laws to secure what they mistook for mutual concord, there hovered over them an uneasy peace. They wanted peace. That was the reason for their separation into tribes; to rid themselves of the tyranny of the few. There is one, and only one, real and lasting peace; that is the peace of righteousness. Of that they knew little. Any peace in opposition to righteousness, is all Peace! Peace! when there is no peace. (Jeremiah 6:14) "There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isaiah 57:21) "And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance forever." (Ibid., 32:17) We imagine that peace to them was as it is to us-the manner of our lives. We want peace as we have noted they did, but not every and any peace. We do not want the peace that is woven into treaties in the distant capitals of the world, nor the peace that is purchased on the field of battle. We do not want the peace that is made in the committee room, or the peace of mere conventionalism; but what we do want is peace established on truth, upheld and sustained by the righteousness of God's children everywhere. Let us always remember, "Great peace have they which love Thy law" (Psalm 119:165); and in that day when all Israel shall be gathered into His fold and there shall be no more wickedness; then will the words of God's servant be fulfilled: "...all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children." (Isaiah 54:13; also quoted by Jesus Christ in a sermon to the Nephites, III Nephi 22:13)

SC3 Ne 7 113 Ne 7 123 Ne 7 133 Ne 7 14An approximate count of the tribesmen, and the men of the secret combination, showed that the tribesmen were a majority. This, we may presume, angered Jacob, who had dreamed of power and great authority over all the people. In his impetuosity Jacob commanded his people to flee into the most northerly parts of the land where they could build up a kingdom to themselves. They carried out this plan, and their flight was too speedy to be intercepted. In the north they built a large city which they named Jacobugath.)1

SC3 Ne 7 153 Ne 7 16Verses 15-16

SC3 Ne 7 153 Ne 7 16Nephi went forth boldly and did testify repentance and remission of sins through faith on the Lord Jesus Christ. At this time of catastrophic happenings in the Nephite Commonwealth, Nephi, who afterwards became the chiefest of Christ's Disciples, was called by the voice of the Lord and the visitation of angels to labor diligently in Christ's ministry among the wicked people whose government had become so disarranged that it no longer functioned either religiously nor politically.

SC3 Ne 7 153 Ne 7 16Being an eyewitness to their many follies, Nephi quickly sensed how quick the people were to forget God's goodness to them and to return "unto their wickedness and abominations." To sit idly by and lament their ways was not his part in the drama that was being enacted. Grieved unmeasurably because the great majority of his people, by their actions, denied the Law of Moses which pointed to Christ, and which they had observed, he with courage and fortitude went forth and with boldness began to declare "repentance and remission of sins through faith on the Lord Jesus Christ." (verse 16)

3 Ne 7 17Verse 17

3 Ne 7 17Nephi did minister with power and great authority. Going about every day doing good to his unfortunate people, and ministering to their wants, Nephi, however, performed his greatest service, as did all the prophets before him, in crying repentance and Salvation by reason of faith in Christ, and remission of sins.

3 Ne 7 17We may conceive that Nephi not only preached the Gospel of Christ by word of mouth, but by alleviating his people's burdens and in ameliorating their sufferings. In many ways he administered aid in their wants. He brought succor to the oppressed and help to the helpless. He mourned with those who mourned, and rejoiced with them that saw in him the purposes of the Lord being accomplished. In many ways the power of God was manifest in his labors, but it must be remembered that an evil person often rejects divine intercession and refuses to accept God's providences. Thus the day of their affliction is prolonged. That is just what the Nephite tribesmen did; they spurned Nephi's ministrations because the Spirit of the Lord had left them; their hearts were hardened, and their minds, Mormon noted, were blinded by the craftiness of men. Nevertheless, Nephi was diligent in his divine commitment, and for three years "he did preach repentance and remission of sins."

3 Ne 7 17On the plates Mormon had made, and on which he was attempting to engrave, in an abridged form, a full account of that which he found written upon other plates, there was not space to record his findings. He makes the comment that the many things in which Nephi ministered to his people therefore cannot be contained in the record he was making, "and a part of them would not suffice," (v. 17) but he adds this interesting observation: "And Nephi did minister with power and with great authority."and Mark 1:22) Speaking of Jesus' ministry, Luke makes this significant observation, "Then He called His twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases. And he sent them to preach the Kingdom of God, and to heal the sick." (Luke 9:1-2) The importance of authority is seen in Paul's charge to Titus, first Bishop of the Church of Cretians: "These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee." (Titus 2:15)2

3 Ne 7 17Nephi's ministrations were attended with such showings of God's power that even the hard-hearted and stiff-necked were astonished at his words and could not disbelieve them. He spoke, convincing many of their wicked ways, yet they grew more and more angry with him because he was able to show them their need of repentance. In common parlance, he hit where it hurt them most. As a witness to them whereof he spoke, "In the Name of Jesus did he cast out devils and unclean spirits; and even his brother did he raise from the dead, after he had been stoned and suffered death by the people." (v. 19))3

SC3 Ne 7 183 Ne 7 193 Ne 7 20Verses 18-20

SC3 Ne 7 183 Ne 7 193 Ne 7 20And the people saw it, and did witness it, and were angry with him because of his power. Of all the passions, we already have noted, that occupy the human heart, the hatred of apostates for their former brethren is the most bitter and malignant. It is not a far step from anger to hatred; hatred for all that is good, anger for him that does good. With the apostate from God's holy Church the righteous man is berated because of his righteousness, and the evil one is held in repute. Well may we say with King David: "O ye that love the Lord, hate evil," (Psalm 97:10) and how often has history proved his former words to be true: "They that hate the righteous shall be desolate." (Ibid., 34:21) The history of the Nephite tribesmen was one of desolation and destruction.

SC3 Ne 7 213 Ne 7 22Verses 21-22

SC3 Ne 7 213 Ne 7 22The thirty and first year did pass away, and there were but few who were converted unto the Lord. Despite the untiring labors of Nephi in this part of the Lord's Vineyard, and his continuous ministry among its people, the thirty and first year of Nephite time-keeping passed away but only a few of the disgruntled Nephites were "converted unto the Lord." However, what few there were joined Nephi in the attempt to bring others to an understanding of Christ's mission. They bore testimony to the dissident of the Messiah Whose coming was foretold by Samuel, the Lamanite; and signified "unto the people that they had been visited by the power and Spirit of God, which was in Jesus Christ, in Whom they believed." (v. 21)

SC3 Ne 7 213 Ne 7 22Not only did they mingle their cries with those of Nephi, but all who had been healed of any infirmities whatsoever unitedly praised the Lord, and as a witness to God's power that was in them, "did show forth signs also and did do some miracles among the people." (v. 22)

SC3 Ne 7 233 Ne 7 243 Ne 7 253 Ne 7 26Verses 23-26

SC3 Ne 7 233 Ne 7 243 Ne 7 253 Ne 7 26He did preach unto them repentance and remission of sins. The thirty-second passed away as did the former year, but nevertheless Nephi and the faithful ones did not cease their entreaties in the hope that some few at least might forsake their sins and unite themselves with the Saints of God. Their labors were rewarded, for near the beginning of the thirty-third year many were baptized unto repentance.

SC3 Ne 7 233 Ne 7 243 Ne 7 253 Ne 7 26Mormon makes it clear that remission of sins is an important and integral part of the Gospel Plan, and that all men who did repent thereof, and did forswear evil, were baptized with water. Men need repent of their sins, and then follows as logical and reasonable, a remission of their sins. He wants the reader to always keep in mind that none save those who had been baptized with water were admitted into communion with the Saints and numbered among the people of God's Church.))

SC3 Ne 7 233 Ne 7 243 Ne 7 253 Ne 7 26Speaking of the errant one, listen to the words of Jesus Christ: "Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out from among you, but ye shall minister unto him and pray for him unto the Father in My Name; and if it so be that he repenteth and is baptized in My Name, then shall ye receive him, and shall minister unto him of My flesh and blood. And if he repent not he shall not be numbered among My people, for behold I know My sheep, and they are numbered. Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out of your synagogues, or your places of worship, for unto such shall ye continue to minister; for ye know not but what they will return and repent, and come unto Me with full purpose of heart, and I shall heal them; and ye shall be the means of bringing Salvation unto them." (III Nephi 30-32)

SC3 Ne 7 233 Ne 7 243 Ne 7 253 Ne 7 26To the end that the terms of the prayer many years later expressed by Moroni (See, footnote 4) be fulfilled, and that as a testimony to God and His children with whom they in the future should be in communion, Nephi ordained; Alma, the elder, ordained one priest to every fifty members, Mosiah 18:18; Priests and Elders ordained by Alma, Alma 6:1; Manner in which the Disciples ordained priests and teachers, Moroni, Chapter 3.5 male members of the Church to perform the sacred ordinance of baptism unto all who had repented of their sins, and who resolved to do them no more, their baptism being a witness to all that "they had repented and received a remission of their sins." (v. 25)
