Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 9

SC3 Ne 9 13 Ne 9 23 Ne 9 33 Ne 9 43 Ne 9 53 Ne 9 63 Ne 9 73 Ne 9 83 Ne 9 93 Ne 9 103 Ne 9 113 Ne 9 12Verses 1-12

SC3 Ne 9 13 Ne 9 23 Ne 9 33 Ne 9 43 Ne 9 53 Ne 9 63 Ne 9 73 Ne 9 83 Ne 9 93 Ne 9 103 Ne 9 113 Ne 9 12There was a voice heard among all the inhabitants of...this land. Out of the darkness, whence no one knew, the Voice of the Lord was heard by the affrighted people, proclaiming in their terrified ears the destruction that had taken place.

SC3 Ne 9 13 Ne 9 23 Ne 9 33 Ne 9 43 Ne 9 53 Ne 9 63 Ne 9 73 Ne 9 83 Ne 9 93 Ne 9 103 Ne 9 113 Ne 9 12It was not a harsh Voice, although it was a Voice of Warning; it sounded repentance, and admonished righteousness. "The devil laugheth," said the Voice, "and his angels rejoice," because of their joyous satisfaction in seeing their faithful, but misguided, followers perish. The Nephites were a branch of the House of Israel, and the iniquity of its fair sons and daughters was a triumph of evil. To save them from the errors of their way they were destroyed. Wherefore, were these things done.

SC3 Ne 9 13 Ne 9 23 Ne 9 33 Ne 9 43 Ne 9 53 Ne 9 63 Ne 9 73 Ne 9 83 Ne 9 93 Ne 9 103 Ne 9 113 Ne 9 12In pronouncing Wo, wo, wo, unto all the inhabitants of the earth who do wickedly, and not repent thereof, the Voice foretold that a miserable and sorrowful state awaits all them who will not heed the words of the prophets; Their words are My words, we conceive the Voice of the Lord saying, "For I am He Who speaketh." (Ether 4:8)

SC3 Ne 9 13 Ne 9 23 Ne 9 33 Ne 9 43 Ne 9 53 Ne 9 63 Ne 9 73 Ne 9 83 Ne 9 93 Ne 9 103 Ne 9 113 Ne 9 12Terrible was the catalogue of woes that this Heavenly Voice rehearsed. The great City of Zarahemla and its inhabitants, God had caused to be burned with fire. Moroni was sunken in the depths of the sea and her iniquitous children had been drowned. Gilgal had been swallowed up in an earthquake, and her people were entombed in the bowels of the earth. Onihah, Mocum, and Jerusalem had disappeared, and waters overflowed the places where they so lately stood. Gadiandi, Gadiomnah, Jacob, and Gimgimno, were all overthrown, and desolation where new hills and valleys occupied their places, while their inhabitants were buried deep in the earth. Jacobugath, Laman, Josh, Gad, and Kishkumen, had all been burned, most likely by lightnings from heaven. The desolation was almost complete; the face of the earth was changed, and tens of thousands, probably more, of souls had been suddenly called to meet the reward of their sinful lives. For their destruction came upon them so that their wickedness and abominations might be hid from Heaven, and that the blood of the prophets and the Saints whom the wicked had slain might not come up any more in appeal unto God against them.

3 Ne 9 12Verse 12

3 Ne 9 12And many great destructions have I caused to come upon this land, and upon this people, became of their wickedness and abominations. This land, both North and South America, is the Land of Zion. The land in the north is called by the Book of Mormon the Land of Mulek. We call it America. Translated, it means The Land of the King, or The Land of the Lord, our King. That is The Land of Zion. It is a choice land,)2 and all who dwell thereon, under the penalty of God's displeasure if they do not, shall serve Him. He has appointed us to do His bidding. If we do so, blessings await us; if we do not, justice will be ours. The blessing God promised the fathers of the Nephite and Lamanite races-Lehi and his sons, that those who live in this land and are firm and steadfast in keeping the commandment of the Lord shall be prospered and otherwise blessed-is a promise to us who live here now and those who ever shall, even as it was to the seed of Lehi and Nephi. The Lord does not forget His promises!

GENERAL NOTES

Verse 12

THIS LAND—THE LAND OF ZION (See, Chapter 20:14)—THE NAME AMERICATHE ACCEPTED THEORY OF ITS ORIGIN—THE MORE PROBABLE THEORY

America. We have already seen, under Mulek, that, according to Prof. Jules Marcou, America is an American name, and the suggestion was offered that the root of the word is the same as that of Mulek. It remains to consider, briefly, the accepted theory of the origin of the name. (See, Volume III, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, p. 328ff)

"The naming of the Western Continent which has since been known as America took its rise from a voyage made in 1499 by Amerigo Vespucci, a distinguished Florentine navigator. Vespucci wrote a number of letters in Latin to Lorenzo di Medici, one of which was printed in 1505, and was the first of his narratives published. On September 4, 1504, he wrote a letter from Lisbon to Rene, Duke of Lorraine, in which he claimed to have discovered the mainland in 1497. As Vespucci was a man of superior learning and intelligence, and his name was thus publicly connected with the New World, as the discoverer of the continent-although he was not the first to reach Terra Firma-Columbus, Cabot, and others having preceded him-the well known cosmographer, Martin Waldseemuller, of Fribourg, patronized by Rene, decided in 1507 to give the New World the name of America."

This is a concise and correct statement of the popular theory concerning the origin of the glorious name of our Country and Continent. But does it really rest on facts?

Meaning of Amerigo. As to the meaning of the name, Prof. Fiske informs us that Amerigo "is an Italianized form of the old German Amalrich which in medieval French became Amaury," and that it means the steadfast.

"Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy seed, and them who shall be numbered among thy seed, forever, for the land of their inheritance; for it is a choice land, saith God unto me, above all other lands, wherefore I will have all men that dwell thereon that they shall worship Me, saith God." (II Nephi 10:19)

"And the Lord would not suffer that they should stop beyond the sea in the wilderness but He would that they should come forth even unto the Land of Promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord had preserved for a righteous people." (Ether 2:7)

"And thus the Lord did pour out His blessings upon this land, which was choice above all other lands; and He commanded that whoso should possess the land should possess unto the Lord, or they should be destroyed when they were ripened in iniquity; for upon such, saith the Lord: I will pour out the fulness of My wrath." (Ether 9:20)

The Orthodox Theory Not Undisputed. Most readers of history take it for granted that the naming of America after Vespucci is an indisputable and undisputed historic fact. But this is far from the truth. The Amerigo-theory has been under fire of controversy ever since its first appearance in the realm of letters. It has been pointed out, in the first place, that Vespucci was not the discoverer of America at all, Columbus, and Cabot, and others having preceded him; in the second place, that the country could not, consistently, have been named after him, because he never was the commander of an expedition to the New World. It is not the custom to name a new land, or sea, or river, after the mate or the pilot or any other subordinate officer. It is the commander who is the discoverer, not the pilot. Sanch Ruiz, the pilot of Columbus, would never be mentioned as the discoverer of the West Indies. Nor would Estevan Gomez be regarded as the discoverer of the Straits of Magellan, although he was the pilot of the ill-fated sailor. Why, then, should we be required to believe that an absurd exception has been made in favor of Vespucci?

The story of the Florentine in 1497 is, and always has been, disputed, because of lack of evidence. Mr. Bancroft presents the arguments on both sides and then sums up the case thus: "To me the proofs seem conclusive that Vespucci made no voyage to South America prior to 1499, when he accompanied Alonzo de Ojeda. Against a North American expedition the evidence, if less conclusive, is still very strong since the most that can be claimed in its favor is a probability that the Central American coast was visited by some navigator before 1502, and a possibility, though certainly a slim one, that Vespucci accompanied such navigator."

In other words, in the opinion of Mr. Bancroft, there is no evidence that Vespucci made an American voyage in 1497, either to North or South America. Emerson was almost vehement in his denunciation of the Amerigo-theory. He gave vent to his feelings thus: "Strange that broad America must wear the name of a thief Amerigo Vespucci, the pickle-dealer at Seville, who went out in 1499, a subaltern with Ojeda, and whose highest naval rank was boatswain's mate in an expedition that never sailed, managed in this lying world to supplant Columbus and baptize half the earth with his own dishonest name."

Prof. Marcou's Objections. Prof. Jules Marcou, whose article in the Atlantic Monthly for March, 1875, goes into the subject thoroughly, points out that the first name is never used in geography, to honor a person, except in the case of royalty. We say, Louisiana, Carolina, Maryland, Victoria, etc., in honor of crowned heads; but the Straits of Magellan, Vancouver's Island, Tasmania, Van Dieman's Land, etc., after common mortals. According to this rule, our country ought to be called Vesputia, or some such name, in honor of Vespucci. In our judgment this argument is unanswerable. There is no doubt a blunder was committed, both historical and philological, when the conclusion was jumped at that America somehow was derived from Amerigo, or Albericus which was the name Waldseemuller knew. It is more probable that America was coined after Amerique or Maraca-indigenous American words-than that America was invented in honor of Albericus. Somehow the cart has been put before the horse in this instance.

Montesinos' Spelling. Montesinos always wrote Hamerica intend of America. The odd explanation of that peculiarity is that he wanted letters enough to make the anagram hec Maria out of the name. But that seems to be far-fetched. It is more probable that, during his many years of residence and travel in America, he had heard the name pronounced with an h. That would seem to him a justification for regarding it as an anagram of the name of the Virgin. If he had added the h himself, it would have been no argument for his favorite theory. But his supposition that the name was made up of the letters in the name of Mary proves that he, at least, did not accept the Amerigo-theory.

America and Amaleki. In the article previously referred to, we have made the statement that America is, both in form and meaning, identical with the Book of Mormon names Amaleki and Amalickiah. These words consist of three parts, a, which is the same as the Hebrew definite article, the; maIek, or malick, which mean king; and i, or iah, which mean Jehovah. Compare A-meric-a with Amaleki, or Amalickiah, and note how close the resemblance is. The only difference is that between the r and the l, but that is a difference in appearance only, not in reality. This statement may need further explanation.

Franz Boaz, in his Handbook of American Indian Languages10 gives us this information.

"Certain sounds that occur in American languages are interpreted by observers sometimes as one European sound, sometimes as another. Thus the Pawnee language contains a sound which may be heard more or less distinctly sometimes as an l, sometimes as an r, sometimes as n, and again d, which, however, without any doubt, is throughout the same sound, although modified to a certain extent by its position in the word, and by surrounding sounds. It is an exceedingly weak r, made by trilling with the tip of the tongue at a point a little behind the roots of the incisors, and in which the tongue hardly leaves the palate, the trill being produced by the lateral part of the tongue adjoining the tip. As soon as the trill is heard more strongly we receive the impression of an r. When the lateral movement prevails and the tip of the tongue does not seem to leave the palate, the impression of an l is strongest.

Mr. Boaz also says that the r-sound is rare in the languages of the American Indians, and that the trill of it is so weak it merges into l, d, n, or y, as the case may be.

The conclusion from this is that the l-sound, in all probability, is the original sound, and that the r-sound is a secondary linguistic acquisition; that, in other words, the l-sound in Amaleki was first in point of time, and that the r-sound in America is, virtually, the same sound, or the latter variant of it. In some Indian dialects the l is retained in America. The Choctaws, for instance, call our country, MiIiki. For king their word is Minko, in which the l in Mulek has merged into a sort of nasal sound instead of one represented by our r.

Garcilasso de la Vega, speaking of the Quichua, the Cusco dialect, says, it lacks six letters used in the Spanish alphabet, one of which is l. R, he says, "Takes its place, as peru for pelu; Rimac, "he who speaks," as an oracle, for Lima, etc. That accounts for the change of Amalek to Amarek. A conspicuous change from l to r in North America is found in the word Oregon from Oligon-unk, which Rafinesque says means hollow mountain.

This peculiarity is, by no means, confined to the American languages. According to Champollion the Egyptian hieroglyph for l, the lion couche, was the equivalent of the Hebrew lamed, but in Greek and Latin proper nouns it was rendered by an r. The old Latin tellus, earth, or ground, has become terra, in later Latin, and tlalli in the old Mexican.

America and Mulek. From all this, the evolution of the name of America is as plain as the transformation of any word the origin of which is supposed to be known. The first Aryan roots mol-ik became molouk in Egyptian and melech in Hebrew. Among the descendants of Lehi in this part of the world it became Mulek, and from this stem, the words Amaleki, Amalickiah, and others branched out. These names became marca, Americ, Amerique, and finally, America.

There is less difference between America, and the root words mol-ik than there is between some of the familiar Old Testament names, as written in other records. Compare the following, which are the same names in two languages:

Hebrew Egyptian

Zerah (II Chron. 14:9) Usahkon

Shishak (I Kings 11:40) Sheshenq

Hittire Khati

Jerusalem, or Jerushalaim Ourousalimou

Joseph Joshoupilu

Hebrew Apouriou (?)

Compare, further, Amraphel (Genesis 14:1) with Hammurabi (or with Amara-pal); Noph (Isaiah 19:13) with Memphis; the Hebrew Jochanan (or Johana) with our name John, or its various modern forms, such as Johannes, Johan, Janne, Juan, Jean, Ivan, etc. This will help us to realize that the suggestions made now and the preceding ones, are well within the laws by which the evolution of words is governed.

The Name Found in Nicaraqua. Under MuIek it is stated that the name America, or, which is the same, Amerique, or Amerrique was found by the noted English traveler and scientist, Thomas Belt, to be an Indian name of a mountain range, and that he so states in his Naturalist in Nicaragua.

The Pan-American offices in Washington, D.C., has kindly furnished us with a copy of this famous work, and from it we are able to produce a copy of the passage we refer to:

"We gradually ascended the range that separates the watershed of the Lake of Nicaragua from that of the Blewfields River, passing over grassy savannahs. About two leagues from Libertad there are many old Indian graves, covered with mounds of earth and stones. A well-educated Englishman, Mr. Fairbalm, has taken up his abode at this place, and is growing maize and rearing cattle. There are many evidences of a large Indian population having lived at this spot, and their pottery and fragments of their stones for bruising maize have been found in some graves that have been opened. Mr. Fairbalm got me several of these curiosities, amongst them are imitations of the heads of armadillos, and other animals. Some of these had formed the feet of urns, others were rattles, containing small balls of baked clay. The old Indians used these rattles in their solemn religious dances, and the custom is probably not yet quite obsolete, for as late as 1823 Mr. W. Bullock saw, in Mexico, Indian women dancing in a masque representing the court of Montesuma, and holding rattles in their right hands, to the noise of which they accompanied their motions. Several stone axes have been found, which are called thunderbolts by the natives, who have no idea that they are artificial, although it is less than four hundred years ago since their forefathers used them. Like most of the ancient Indian towns, the place is a very picturesque one. At a short distance to the west, rise great perpendicular cliffs, and huge isolated rocks and pinnacles. The name of this range gives us a clue to the race of the ancient inhabitants. In the highlands of Honduras, as has been noted by Squier, the termination of tique or rique is of frequent occurrence in the names of places as Chaparristique, Lepaterique, Llotique, Ajuterique, and others. The race that inhabited this region were the Lenca Indians, often mentioned in the accounts given by the missionaries of their early expeditions into Honduras. I think that the Lenca Indians were the ancient inhabitants of Chontales, that they were the 'Chontals' of the Nahuatls or Aztecs of the Pacific side of the country, and that they were partly conquered, and their territories encroached upon by the latter before the arrival of the Spaniards, as some of the Aztec names of Places in Nicaragua do not appear to be such as could be given originally by the first inhabitants; thus Juigalpa, pronounced Hueygalpa, is southern Aztec for 'Big Town.'"-Thomas Belt, F.C.S., The Naturalist in Nicaragua, Chapter 9, p. 154.

"The site of Juigalpa is beautifully chosen, as is usual with the old Indian towns. It is on a level, dry piece of land, about three hundred feet above the river. A rocky brook behind the town supplies the water for drinking and cooking purposes. The large square or plaza has the church at one end; on the other three sides are red-tiled adobe houses and stores, with floors of clay or red bricks. Streets branch off at right angles from the square, and are crossed by others. The best houses are those nearest the square. Those on the outskirts are mere thatched hovels, with open sides of bamboo poles. The house I stayed at was at the corner of one of the square blocks, and from the angle the view extended in four directions along the level roads. Each way the prospect was bounded by hills in the distance, northeast were the white cliffs of the Amerrique range, mantled with dark woods. The intervening country could not be seen, and only a small portion of the range itself; framed in, as it were, by the sides of the street. It looked close at hand, like a piece of artificial rockery, or the grey walls of a castle covered with ivy. The range to the southwest is several miles distant; and is called San Miguelito by the Spaniards, but I could not learn its Indian name."-Ibid., Chapter 10, p. 176.

"Having finished our business in Juigalpa, we arranged to start on our return early the next morning, Velasquez going round by Acoyapo whilst Rito accompanied me to the mines. I had a fowl cooked overnight to take with us, and set off at six o'clock. I shall make some remarks on the road on points not touched on in my account of the journey out. After leaving Juigalpa, we descended to the river by a rocky and steep path, crossed it, and then passed over alluvial plains, intersected by a few nearly dry river beds, to the foot of the southwestern side of the Amerrique hills, then gradually ascended the range that separates the Juigalpa district from that of Libertad. The ground was gravelly and dry, with stony hillocks covered with low trees and bushes."-Ibid., Chapter 10, p. 178.

"At last we reached the summit of the range, which is probably not less than three thousand feet above the sea, and entered on the district of Libertad. Rounded boggy hills covered with grass, sedgy plants and stunted trees, replaced the dry gravelly soil of the Juigalpa district."-Ibid., Chapter 10, p. 183.

"Our road, now lay over the damp grassy hills of the Libertad district. It edged away from the Amerrique range on our right. To our left, about three miles distant, rose the dark sinuous line of the great forest of the Atlantic slope. Only a fringe of dark-foliaged trees in the foreground was visible, the higher ground behind was shrouded in a sombre pall of thick clouds that never lifted, but seemed to cover a gloomy and mysterious country beyond. Though I had dived into the recesses of these mountains again and again, and knew that they were covered with beautiful vegetation and full of animal life, yet the sight of that leaden-colored barrier of cloud resting on the forest tops, whilst the savannahs were bathed in sunshine, ever raised in my mind vague sensations of the unknown and the unfathomable. Our course was nearly parallel to this gloomy forest, but we gradually approached it. The line that separates it from the grassy savannahs is sinuous and irregular. In some places a dark promontory of trees juts out into the savannahs, in others a green grassy hill is seen almost surrounded by forest."-Ibid., Chapter 10, p. 184.

"As we rode on, the grass increased, there were swampy places in the hollows, and now and then very muddy spots on the road. On every side the prospect was bounded by long ranges of hills-some of them precipitous, others covered to the summits with dark foliaged trees, looking nearly black in the distance. About noon we came in sight of the Amerrique range, which I recognized at once, and know that we had reached the Juigalpa district, though still several leagues distant from the town."-Ibid., Chapter 17, p. 324.

We have italicized the name Amerrique.

In connection with this the following information, secured from authentic sources at Washington, is important and interesting:

In the book entitled Nicaragua, by E.G. Squier, published in Boston, 1860, the orographic system to which the highlands in question belong is thus described:

"The second or principal mountain range, the great backbone of the continent and the true Cordilleras, enters the state from Honduras in the Department of Nueva Segovia and extends due southeast until it strikes the San Juan River at a point about fifty miles above its mouth. It sends out numerous spurs or dependent ranges towards the Atlantic, between which flow down the many considerable streams that intersect what is called the Mosquito Shore."

Another reference to these mountains is found in a book by the French traveler, Paul Levy, published in Paris, 1873. Levy designates this range as the "Honduran-Nicaraguan Range, following the authority of the German geographer, Berghaus (Physikalisehen Atlas, Dresden, 1838).

Felix Belly, another French explorer, uses the same general denomination in his work A travers l'Amerique Centrale, Paris, 1867.

La Republica de Nicaragua, an official guide published by the Nicaraguan government in 1900, gives a description of the orography of the country which follows the terminology of Berghaus.

In a letter to the writers from the staff of the Nicaraguan government in Washington, D.C., we quote the following:

"The work of the celebrated English scientist, Thomas Belt, entitled The Naturalist in Nicaragua, and first published in London in 1873, is the one in which the name 'Amerrique' is given to the highlands between Juigalpa and la Libertad. Mr. Belt lived in the province of Chontales from 1868 to 1872 and was employed as Superintendent of the Chontales Gold Mining Company. He traveled extensively through Nicaragua and while his assertion regarding this name is not confirmed by other travelers and geographers, this fact will only prove that the use of such name was or is restricted to a small and somewhat isolated region of the country. The authority of Mr. Belt as a keen observer and an accurate writer is very high and there is no possibility of error in statements of this kind, contained in a book recognized as a classic among the literature of natural history. A copy of the passages from the book where the name 'Amerrique' appears is enclosed.

It is, then, an indisputable fact that the name America is an original American word, much older than both Vespucci and Waldseemuller. It is, perhaps, still applied to the mountain region described by Mr. Belt, and in its several variations it is found practically all over the American continents.

Mr. Belt's discovery is of special interest to readers of the Book of Mormon, as an indication of a Mulekite origin of the name of the mountain district he describes.

Prof. Marcou was of the opinion that America is the accepted form of the old Indian Americ or Amerique, and not, as generally held, a name coined in glorification of Amerigo Vespucci. If this view is correct, America is, both in form and meaning, identical with the Book of Mormon names, Amaleki and Amalickiah, the meaning of which is, "The King of Jehovah," and, as applied to the country, "The Land of the King of Jehovah"; that is to say, in other words, The Land of Zion.

SC3 Ne 9 133 Ne 9 143 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18Verses 13-18

SC3 Ne 9 133 Ne 9 143 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18In Me is the Law of Moses fulfilled. When the heavenly Voice had finished the recital of the calamities that had befallen the land and its inhabitants, the Speaker commenced an appeal to those who yet lived, and revealed to them Who He was.

3 Ne 9 13Verses 13

3 Ne 9 13That I may heal you. The solemn benediction pronounced by the heavenly Voice upon the "fear-becrazed" survivors of the great catastrophe that had engulfed the entire Nephite Land, gave hope and courage to its distraught people who were about to despair. The Lord, seeing their distress, pitied them, and said: "Whosoever will come, him will I receive; and blessed are those who come unto Me." (v. 14) Strongly marked with Heaven's gracious command, were other blessings the Voice proclaimed, chiefest among these was the promise "that I may heal you." (v. 13) Repentance was the condition thereof, "and a return unto Me," the price. We understand the phrase, "that I may heal you," means, make whole from any and all afflictions whatsoever, especially, those of the spirit.

3 Ne 9 14Verse 14

3 Ne 9 14Come unto Me. This verse seems to indicate that of all human achievements, to gain Eternal Life in God's Kingdom is the greatest of any. Eternal Life is God's most precious gift to His children. The gracious invitation of the giver of that divine utterance, "Come unto Me," made His request more alluring by Himself offering aid to the weak and weary, to the helpless and those who have no helper but the Lord. We are strongly reminded of a story that Jesus told His disciples in Old Jerusalem. In the Parable of the Lost Sheep He likens His followers to sheep, and Himself to their Shepherd. As a Good Shepherd He watches over His flock continually, and when in want, gives His sheep succor according to the hour and the power of their need. In this verse He says: "My arm of mercy is extended towards you." He is the Helper, the Shepherd! The poor, stray sheep may be lost in the woods, hunted by the wolf, fallen over the precipice, hungry, helpless, and cold. But the Good Shepherd is on His way, and is looking for it, and will find and will take it in His arms, and will carry it to the fold, and with his friends and neighbors will rejoice that the lost is found and the dead is again alive. While the words, "Come unto Me," are an expression of divine hope, still we must remember, "Thy word, O God, is my law."

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18Verses 15-18

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. With great power the Voice declared: "I am Jesus Christ the Son of God," thereby witnessing to all who heard that the owner thereof was high in the Councils of Heaven, and had unquestioned authority to declare its blessings. "I created the heavens and the earth, and all that in them are," the Voice again declared; so we ask, "Why should not the elements from which they are made obey His will?")15 All things obey His will. The infirmities of the flesh, the imposts life lays, the burdens carried to the grave, are often blessings coming from Him to us in disguise, and that in healing these afflictions the Lord rebukes the destroyer, and places the repentant sinner beyond the power of evil. "That," the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "is Eternal Life." "If ye will come unto Me ye shall have Eternal Life." (v. 14)

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18I was with the Father from the beginning. Jesus Christ, the Son o:f God, alone, is the Only-Begotten of the Father, but He also was the First born to God in the World of Spirits. That was the beginning of which Christ speaks in verse 15. He was with His Father in all the works accomplished by His Father. The grand Creation was done under His Father's supervision.

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18I am in the Father, and the Father in Me. This is not a difficult passage. It means that the desire of one, is the desire of the other; Their purpose is the same, to bring about the Salvation and Eternal Life of man. Their aim, that for which They strive, is mutual. No dissensions, no disagreement in opinion, no discord between Them; They are alike in manner, form, and degree.

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18Christ, Himself, when He ministered to the Nephites in the Land Bountiful, chose Twelve Disciples to minister for Him after He was gone, and the prayer He offered to His Father in Heaven, thanking Him for them, is a full and complete explanation of the sentiment He expressed in this verse (15): "Father, thou hast given them the Holy Ghost because they believe in Me; and Thou seest that they believe in Me because Thou hearest them, and they pray unto Me; and they pray unto Me because I am with them. And now Father, I pray unto Thee for them, and also for all those who shall believe their words, that they may believe in Me, that I may be in them as Thou, Father, art in Me, that we may be one." (III Nephi 19:22-23)

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18Shortly before Christ left the Nephites in the care of the Twelve He had chosen, He granted to each of them the desire of his heart. To three of them whose desire was the same as what His beloved Disciple, John, desired when He ministered among the Jews.

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18We may get a fuller and freer understanding of the sentiment spoken by Jesus, "In Me hath the Father glorified His Name," when we remember that all evil came into the world through the Transgression of Adam. Through him all men became "carnal, sensual, and devilish.")

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18'Therefore, as they had become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature, this probationary state became a state for them to prepare; it became a preparatory state." (Alma 42:10)19 Carnal means fleshy, or of the flesh; that is "a state of nature." (Alma 41:11) All mortal men "are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; they are without God in this world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness." (Ibid.)

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18Evil things are unclean things; evil thoughts are unclean thoughts. No unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.)

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18"And He doth not dwell in unholy temples; neither can filthiness or anything which is unclean be received into the Kingdom of God...." (Alma 7:21)

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18"And I say unto you again that He cannot save them in their sins; For I cannot deny His word, and He hath said that no unclean thing can inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore, how can ye be saved, except ye inherit the Kingdom of Heaven? Therefore, ye cannot be saved in your sins." (Alma 11:37)

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18"And no unclean thing can enter into His Kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into His rest save it be those who have washed their garments in My blood, because of their Faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end." (III Nephi 27:19)20 Heaven is that place where God and the angels dwell, and where God is, no evil may come. As we have noted, mankind in his carnal state is the victim of evil; his joys are of the flesh, and his pleasures, sensual. Many of his hopes are of the devil, devilish. Death itself is of the devil. But even at death man cannot return to that place where he once was, or where his Father lives. The Father and His children are parted-separated. This is where the Plan of Salvation is best understood; this is where it may be said that the Way has been prepared and the Pathway marked out whereby a return to that ineffable Home may be attained by mortals. The Father and His children must be reunited. The Father's glory is the Salvation and Exaltation of His children. A reconciliation between them must be had. That reconciliation has been accomplished by Him Who is King of kings and Lord of lords. A return to his Father's House is the reward of the repentant sinner who endures to the end; and that reward is through Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, the Great Mediator between God and man. "In Me hath the Father glorified His Name." (v. 15)

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18And here, let us not forget that we, too, may glorify the Name of our Father by serving Him as did Christ by His serving His Father's children, and by us diligently keeping His commandments. To serve God means among many other things a constant sacrifice on our part of all selfish longings. To minister to the needs of His children is but a "thank-offering" to God for the blessings we receive from Him; in serving others we put to their highest use the things He has entrusted to our care. We thus become His servants; we do His will. In all ages God's servants served His children. It is good to remember that none were ever overcome who put their trust in the Great Father of us all by ministering to His children, our fellows. The service we render to God is measured by the same rod, and in the same terms with which we serve one another. We should always keep in our minds, that to serve Him in perfect freedom, and to worship Him is life's greatest happiness and its true satisfaction. King Benjamin, one of the great Prophet-Kings of the Nephites, said: "In my days of service to you...I have only been in the service of God." In serving God's children we may become poorer in the things of the world, but we will be richer in heavenly treasures; and always remember, "Better is little with the fear of the Lord than great treasure and trouble (turmoil) therewith." (Proverbs 15:16)

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18In the Gospel Plan no lessons are more boldly proclaimed than the lesson of service. The conclusion is not to be escaped that we serve God best by sharing with the needy the gifts we constantly receive from His bounteous hands, by showing compassion for the distressed, by upholding the falling, by loosing the bound. Truly, we can ennoble our lives no more graciously than by serving God with deeds of loving-kindness to our fellowmen. Yes, indeed, we can glorify the Name of our Father in thus doing.

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18In reading the magnificent and profound sentiments expressed by the Voice as they are recorded in Verse 15, we feel constrained to repeat the fervent prayer offered by the Jews of this day:

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18"May the time not be distant, O God, when Thy Name shall be worshiped in all the earth, when unbelief shall disappear and error be no more. We fervently pray that the day may come when all men shall invoke Thy name, when corruption and evil shall give way to purity and goodness, when superstition shall no longer enslave the mind, nor idolatry blind the eye, when all inhabitants of the earth shall know that to Thee alone every knee must bend and every tongue give homage. O may all created in Thine image recognize that they are brethren, so that, one in spirit and one in fellowship, they may be forever united before Thee. Then shall Thy Kingdom be established on earth and the word of Thine ancient seer be fulfilled: 'The Lord will reign for ever and ever.'"

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18Truly, the wonderful gift bought for us on Calvary's Hill inspires us to greater deeds of love and helpfulness to our fellow men, and we ourselves pray: "O Heavenly Father, put into our hearts the love and fear of Thee, that we may consecrate our lives to Thy service and glorify Thy Name in the eyes of all men."

SC3 Ne 9 153 Ne 9 163 Ne 9 173 Ne 9 18In ending our discussion of Verse 15, may we do so by repeating the last verse of the 65th Section of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants: "Wherefore, may the Kingdom of God go forth, that the Kingdom of Heaven may come, that Thou, O God, mayest be glorified in Heaven so on Earth, that Thine enemies may be subdued; for Thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever. Amen."

3 Ne 9 16Verse 16

3 Ne 9 16My Own received Me not. For ages the wise men and the poets of the Jews had foretold the coming of a King, one Who would lead them into battle, which in every case would be victorious, and would enthrone Jerusalem above the nations of the earth. But when He came and was crucified in their Capitol; when they found that His emissaries were not princes and nobles but poor fishermen of Galilee, their hard hearts became like granite; their hatred intense, their spite was keen and inexhaustible, and they left no stone untouched or unturned that they might throw at the bulwarks and battlements of the Christian Church.

3 Ne 9 16When the day would come in which He would reign, all Judah's foes would be subdued. Jerusalem, the beloved City of the Jews, would be the Capitol of the World, and they would rule the nations of the earth in regal splendor. He would be their King, and they His loyal subjects. He was to be of noble parentage, a Son of King David, of a family whose great name was "like unto the name of the great men that are in the earth." (II Samuel 7:9)

3 Ne 9 16But when Christ was born in Bethlehem, He was of a family whose home was with the despised inhabitants of the Roman Province of Galilee. His father was a carpenter, and most of His relations were fishermen. He was born in a manger, the only lodging available in the City where Joseph went to pay taxes. Jesus' birth, however, brought to pass a prophecy uttered many hundreds of years before: "But, thou, Bethlehem, Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall He come forth unto Me That is to be ruler in Israel; Whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting." (Micah 5:2)

3 Ne 9 16The humble birth of Jesus was not what the Jews expected of their King. And Nazareth, by the blue waters of Galilee, where, as a child, He played, grew to manhood, and studied, was of so little repute that when Philip told Nathaniel: "We have found Him, of Whom Moses in the Law, and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph," Nathaniel replied, "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" (John 1:45-46)

3 Ne 9 16Truly, Christ's forefathers were of the kingly and illustrious "House of David," but when he came, its glory had departed, and its splendor was remembered only in song.

3 Ne 9 16"And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of its roots." (Isaiah 11:1) Jesse was the father of King David, but when the fruit of his loins (Acts 2:30), Christ, was raised up to sit on David's throne, the age of prophecy had passed. The Jews had rejected any new word coming from God; many of His servants were slain, and the laws given by Him, through Moses, had been changed to meet the ambitious purposes of priests and kings. As a nation, the Jews were apostate. There appeared to be a famine in the land "...not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord." (Amos 8:18) The voice of God's holy prophets had been stilled. The Jews roamed in the twilight of a brilliant past. When compared to the time of David, when Christ was born, all was changed. A story we tell softly and in the spirit of holiness is: On an occasion a huge throng was assembled in Pilate's Council Chamber. The Son of God, Jesus, the King of the Jews, the Creator of the Heavens and the Earth, stood amid scorn before the judgment bar of man, rejected, condemned; His Own received Him not. As was the custom at this holiday time of each year, the Judge, a Roman Procurator, offered to release to the people one who was accused of crime. Pilate, seeing no evil in Jesus, offered to them His release, or that of Barabbas, a well-known culprit. To this suggestion they shouted: "Not this man, but Barabbas." "What then," said Pilate, "shall I do with Him Who you call King of the Jews?" And in their ignorance and infatuation they again shouted: "Crucify Him; Crucify Him." "My own received Me not." (v. 16)

3 Ne 9 17Verse 17

3 Ne 9 17In Me is the Law of Moses fulfilled. Out of seventy souls, including the eleven sons of the Patriarch Jacob, who went down into Egypt at the behest of Joseph, another son who was already there, there grew a people who "increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty"; and filled the whole land with a goodly offspring. This caused a great fear to come upon Pharaoh, the King of that Land, who was new there and did not know Joseph. Pharaoh appealed to his people, saying: "Behold, the people of the Children of Israel are more and mightier than we: Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply....Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens....But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew. And they were grieved because of the Children of Israel. And the Egyptians made the Children of Israel to serve with rigor. And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigor." (Exodus 1:7-14)

3 Ne 9 17Many harsh measures were heaped upon the backs of God's children, increasing their labor far beyond the possibility of its completion, thereby adding to their suffering and mental anguish. Even it was decreed by Pharaoh that all male children born of Israelitish parents should be cast into the River Nile.

3 Ne 9 17"And it came to pass in process of time, that the King of Egypt died: and the Children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage. And God heard their groaning and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. And God looked upon the Children of Israel, and God had respect unto them." (Exodus 2:23-25)

3 Ne 9 17God called Moses to be an instrument in His hands for their deliverance. Both Moses and his brother, Aaron, at God's command, presented themselves before Pharaoh many times, demanding that the Children of Israel be set free from bondage, that thereby they might worship, or serve, the God of their Fathers. Pharaoh hardened his heart and would not that they should go. Many times penalties, the most severe, settled upon the land and upon its inhabitants because of his refusal. At length, when other, what are called plagues, failed to soften his heart, or cause him to relent, the death of all first-born of both man and beast in all the Kingdom including those from Pharaoh down to the captive that was "in the dungeon," together with the first-born of all cattle, caused him to yield. Fear came upon the Egyptians for they said: "We be all dead men," so they urged haste in the Israelites' departure. Pharaoh, too, was anxious that they depart quickly, "And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said: 'Rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the Children of Israel; and go, serve the Lord, as ye have said. And also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone;..." (Exodus 12:31-32)

3 Ne 9 17"Now the sojourning of the Children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years. And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt." (Exodus 12:40-41) In all there were more than 600,000 numbered among the Israelites besides women and children. (Ibid., 12:37)

3 Ne 9 17It was a heterogeneous mass of humanity that made up the numbers of the Children of Israel; there were old and young. There were both male and female, infirm and whole; there were farmers and stockraisers who brought along with them their flocks and herds; there were fishermen who had plied their trade along the banks of the River Nile; there were makers of brick, and workers in brick and stone; there were carpenters and laborers of every kind. Altogether, in one grand effort, they formed the Army of Israel which was the Army of the Lord.

3 Ne 9 17However, they were not united in their purpose as an army should be. Some sought glory; some for advantage over their fellows; some adventure, but most sought freedom to serve the God of their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Their different objectives disarranged their orderly advance. Notwithstanding that the power of God and His goodness in their behalf was manifested to them, they, at times, openly rebelled against Him. (Witness the incident of the Golden Calf.) Even some wanted to return to Egypt and to their former bondage. (Numbers 14:4) We must remember that during their years of bondage to the Egyptians, many of the Children of Israel had forgotten the God of their Fathers and had adopted the customs and habits of their bondmasters. They toiled, as did their taskmasters, on the day the Lord had set apart as a day of rest and one in which to think of Him. They took great oaths as did the Egyptians, and they made for themselves gods of wood and gods of stone and of precious metals. To these they bowed down and worshiped. Their roots were deeply imbedded in Egyptian soil. It became necessary, and God also commanded it, that Moses, to preserve what discipline and unity there was among them, appointed captains from their numbers to drill and marshal them into an army, (Exodus 18:25;Deut. l:l5) and to be to them righteous judges. Their unity was the discipline of the rod, not the inspiration of their hearts.

3 Ne 9 17The story of the famous Exodus of the Children of Israel has been told thousands of times, and thousands of times has God's goodness to them and His watchful care over them been extolled. It reminds us of the 114th Psalm of King David wherein is accounted how the Lord prepared their way: "When Israel went out of Egypt, the House of Jacob from a people of strange language; Judah was His sanctuary, and Israel His dominion. The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back. The mountains skipped like rams, and the hills like lambs. What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills, like lambs? Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob; Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of waters." (See, Numbers 20:8-11; Deut. 8: 15 )

3 Ne 9 17Now, as we have noted, that from the very first, Israel was an obstinate and stiff-necked people. Often it refused to walk in the Lord's path which had been shown to it, but chose different ways that led it along the road to degradation and sorrow. It was so imbued with the ideas and sympathies of the Egyptians that it could not shake itself free from its habits and customs. Only a few of the people could live the Gospel of Christ with its high moral standards. They understood not its spirit of love.

3 Ne 9 17"...It was expedient that there should be a law given to the Children of Israel, yea, even a very strict law; for they were a stiffnecked people, quick to do iniquity, and slow to remember the Lord their God. Therefore there was a law give them, yea, a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards Him. But I say unto you, that all these things were types of things to come.

3 Ne 9 17"And now, did they understand the Law? I say unto you, Nay, they did not all understand the Law; and this because of the hardness of their hearts; for they understood not that there could not any man be saved except through the Redemption of God. For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem His people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began-have they not spoken more or less concerning these things?

3 Ne 9 17"Have they not said that God Himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon Him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth? Yea, and have they not said also that He should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that He, Himself, should be oppressed and afflicted? (Abinadi, Mosiah 13:29-35)

3 Ne 9 17"And the Lord God hath sent His holy prophets among all the children of men, to declare these things to every kindred, nation, and tongue, that thereby whosoever should believe that Christ should come, the same might receive remission of their sins, and rejoice with exceeding great joy, even as though He had already come among them. Yet the Lord saw that His people were a stiffnecked people, and He appointed unto them a Law, even the Law of Moses. And many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows, showed He unto them, concerning His coming; and also holy prophets spake unto them concerning His coming; and yet they hardened their hearts, and understood not that the Law of Moses availeth nothing, except it were through the Atonement of His blood." (King Benjamin, Mosiah 3:13-15)

3 Ne 9 17The Law of Moses was, we may say, prophetic. It commanded sacrifice, which was indicative of the great Sacrifice that was to be made. Its performances and ordinances were visible signs of the Messiah, Whose coming they foretold.

3 Ne 9 17The Nephites were of Israel. All Israelites of ancient times were taught to accept the Law as their guide. It was emblematic of things to come. It pointed out the way to Christ, the Messiah, Whose coming they awaited. By faith they saw these things as though they had already happened. The Law thus promised Salvation to everyone who looked to Christ for Redemption. Faith in that which is to come is not unusual, nor is it strange. There is no doubt that faith imposes burdens, but its rewards are sure. All things are done by the power of faith. Israel, in the days of Moses, as now, walked by faith. Ancient Israel looked forward to His coming; we look back. Both visions are equally efficacious.

3 Ne 9 17Passages from the Book of Mormon, showing the purpose for which the Law of Moses was given and its fulfillment, are made particularly clear by the following: "Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the Law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of Him." (II Nephi 11:4)

3 Ne 9 17"And notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the Law of Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the Law be fulfilled?" (II Nephi 25:24)

3 Ne 9 17"For, for this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of His glory many hundred years before His coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of His glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us. Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in His Name, and also we worship the Father in His Name. And for this intent we keep the Law of Moses, it pointing our souls to Him; and for this cause it is sanctified unto us for righteousness...." (Jacob 4:4-5)

3 Ne 9 17"And they also took of the firstlings of their flocks, that they might offer sacrifice and burnt offerings according to the Law of Moses." (Mosiah 2:3)

3 Ne 9 17"Yea, and they did keep the Law of Moses; for it was expedient that they should keep the Law of Moses as yet, for it was not all fulfilled. But notwithstanding the Law of Moses, they did look forward to the coming of Christ, considering that the Law of Moses was a type of His coming, and believing that they must keep those outward performances until the time that He should be revealed unto them. Now they did not suppose that Salvation came by the Law of Moses; but the Law of Moses did serve to strengthen their faith in Christ; and thus they did retain a hope through faith, unto Salvation, relying upon the spirit of prophecy, which spake of things to come." (Alma 25:15-16)

3 Ne 9 17As many as have received Me, to them have I given to become the sons of God. In spite of the fact that He was rejected by His Own, and was crucified by them notwithstanding He sought only their good, Christ foretold of no retaliation for His evil reception by the Jewish hierarchy, but promised all who shall believe on His Name that they would become the sons of God.

3 Ne 9 17John, in his Gospel, says: "But as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on His Name." (John 1:12) Bible commentators on this important subject say that Christ gave to them that should believe on His name the right, or privilege, to become the sons of God. That is true. But not all the meaning of Christ's promise is therein expressed. Words too often, somehow or other, fail to reveal the real meaning of a thought; they do not fully elucidate and explain it. They hide the sense they intend to convey under a mass of verbiage just as a beautiful flower is sometimes hidden underneath a growth of rank grass. This promise of our Lord is one of the fair and fragrant flowers of Christianity. It blossoms in our hearts. We not only have the privilege to become one among the sons of God, but also through the Atonement of Christ we have restored to us, and that literally, our rightful inheritance in His Kingdom as a son or daughter of our Heavenly Father, Who is God.

3 Ne 9 17When we read the above-mentioned statement of John's, we remember that the power Christ gave to those who believed on His Name was not like the power of a priest who can make an ecclesiastic, or the power of man that can make a just and an upright person, but that only a divine power from Heaven above, can make of a mortal one who is worthy to be called a son of God.

3 Ne 9 17The best comments on this wonderful theme are those made by the Savior Himself, and some of His inspired servants. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, Who was crucified for the sins of the world, even as many as will believe on My Name, that they may become the sons of God, even one in Me as I am one in the Father, as the Father is one in Me, that we may be one." (D. & C. 35:2)

3 Ne 9 18Verse 18

3 Ne 9 18I am the Light and the Life of the world. "Verily, thus saith the Lord...I am the true Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world." (D. & C. 93:1-2) The Prophet Abinadi, in preaching to the wicked priests of King Noah, said of Christ: "He is the Light and the Life of ,the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death." (Mosiah 16:9) In Christ is that Life which is Eternal. His atoning Blood, shed for us on Calvary's Hill, is the Ransom He paid that we might live. To Him, and to none other, be the honor and the glory; the might, majesty, and dominion, forever; for, for us, by His grace and by His free-will Offering He broke the bands of death, and thereby brought immortality to man. "Surely, He hath home our grief, and carried our sorrows...." (Isaiah 53:4) Our grief is death, brought about by the Fall of Adam; and our sorrows, the incidents of carnal existence. Instead of death, Christ brought Life Everlasting; instead of sorrow, He brought joy.

3 Ne 9 18We find no better place than here to record our thanksgiving to the Lord God Who is Jesus Christ for the blessing of Life Everlasting, and this by repeating the words of Ammon, son of King Mosiah, spoken to his brethren at the close of their wonderful mission to the Lamanites about a hundred years previous to the events recorded in these verses: "Therefore, let us glory, we will glory in the Lord; yea, we will rejoice, for our joy is full; yea, we will praise our God forever. Behold, who can glory too much in the Lord? Yea, who can say too much of His great power, and of His mercy, and His long-suffering towards the children of men?..." (Alma 26:25) "...for this is my life and my light, my joy and my Salvation, and my Redemption from everlasting wo. Yea, blessed is the Name of my God...." (Ibid., 26:36)

3 Ne 9 18The Light of the world. In every dispensation of the Gospel, God's inspired servants and teachers have likened truth to light, and have compared error to darkness. "For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God. For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ. And the Spirit giveth light to every man that cometh into the world; and the Spirit enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit." (D. & C. 84:44-46) Wherefore, the Lord said: "I will be a light unto them forever, that hear My words." (II Nephi 10:14) To hear the words of the Lord, or to hear His voice, is to obey Him. Whether those words come directly from Him, or through His servants, they are His; He says: "...I am He that doth speak." (III Nephi 20:39)

3 Ne 9 18To recognize truth when we hear it is a gift of the Spirit. "For the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not." (Jacob 4:13) As but one speaking for many we may say: "Like a Lamp unto my feet, the Lord lighteth the way before me." At this point we are constrained to ask with Isaiah: "Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of His servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light?" (II Nephi 7:10) And again we are constrained to repeat Isaiah's admonition: "O House of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord..." (II Nephi 12:5) And with this thought in mind, we will remember the words of the ancient Hebrew brethren: "For with Thee is the fountain of life: in Thy light shall we see light." (Psalm 36:9)

3 Ne 9 18I am Alpha and Omega. The first and last letters in the Greek Alphabet. They mean the beginning and the end, the first and last. Alpha (A) is a symbol used variously, as in astronomy to describe or to designate the chief or brightest star of a constellation. Christ is the Chiefest and Brightest Star in the firmament of heaven. He was in the beginning and will remain throughout all eternities; He is endless.

3 Ne 9 18Christ is called Alpha and Omega to denote that He is the beginning and the ending: the Author, Preserver, and Upholder, of all things, and His glory is their end. "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor and power, for Thou hast created all things, and for Thy pleasure they are and were created." (Rev. 4:11)

3 Ne 9 19Verse 19

3 Ne 9 19And ye shall offer up unto Me no more the shedding of blood. (See Chapter 15:2-8)

3 Ne 9 20Verse 20

3 Ne 9 20Ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto Me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. (See Helaman 5:45) The Lord does not delight in a blood sacrifice; He has no pleasure in burnt offerings; if so, we would offer them. The sacrifices of the Lord are a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Them, He will not despise.

3 Ne 9 20"Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a steadfast spirit within me. Cast me not away from Thy presence; and take not Thy holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy Salvation, and let a willing spirit uphold me." (Jewish Union Prayer Book)

3 Ne 9 22Verse 22

3 Ne 9 22Whoso repenteth and cometh unto Me as a little child, him will I receive. (See III Nephi 11:37-38)
