Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

The Birth of Christ

Luke, the Evangelist, who had his information from eyewitnesses to the historical beginning of Christianity, and who records incidents which only Mary, the Mother of Jesus, herself, could have told him, gives us a more detailed account of that epoch-making event than any other writer from that time.

One of his most precious bits of history is the well-known narrative of the experiences of the shepherds. They were keeping watch over their flocks during the night, at Bethlehem. Perhaps they were passing the time conversing about the Messiah and His Kingdom, which were burning questions at that time. Suddenly they were surrounded by a bright light. They became frightened. In the light an angel appeared, who told them not to be afraid. He had come, he said, with tidings of great joy: "For unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord." He also gave them a sign by which they would know the truth of this announcement: "Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes lying in a manger." (Luke 2:8-12) And suddenly a heavenly choir was heard praising God: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men."

The Angel who first appeared was, probably, Gabriel, the Angel of the annunciation. (Ibid., 1:26-27) Gabriel, we are told, is Noah, the second ancestor of the human race, who seems to have had a special mission at the time of the introduction of the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time, just as the Angel Moroni had in connection with the beginning of the Dispensation in which we live.

Clothes Significant

The "swaddling clothes," by which the shepherds would know the Babe Whose birth had been announced, were perhaps not the common covering in use at that time. There, probably, were many babes in the overcrowded inn, resting in convenient mangers.

Mme. Lydia Von Finkelstein Mountford, a Christian Jewess, herself born in the Holy Land, in her little book on Jesus in His Homeland, tells us that the baby clothes which were wrapped around the Babe Jesus, were the same which had belonged to the family of David. There was, she says, a garment of white silk with blue stripes, indicating royalty. There was a red garment, that betokened the House of Boaz. There also was a garment of "many colors," indicating that the Child Jesus was to be the Savior of the entire world. This garment of "many colors," proclaimed Him not only of David and Boaz, but of every branch of the House of Jacob. It was similar to the multicolored coat which Jacob gave to his son, Joseph, who proved to be a savior of Egypt, and of his father's whole family. This is all very probable. For, only if the garments-swaddling clothes-meant something great to the shepherds, could they be a sign to them of the birth of the Messiah.

Shortly after the arrival of Lehi and his little company in the Valley of Lemuel, near the Red Sea, Nephi had a remarkable vision. An angel came and stood before him and said, "Nephi, what beholdest thou?"

He said: "A Virgin, most beautiful and fair."

The Angel then asked: "Knowest thou the condescension of God?"

Nephi seemed puzzled about this question. Condescension, of course, means the act of descending to a lower level. Paul uses the word in that sense when he says: "Mind not high things, but condescend to men of lower estate. Be not wise in your own conceits." (Romans 12:161) But how could the vision of the Virgin suggest the "Condescension of God?" That was not clear to Nephi. Wherefore he answered rather evasively: "I know that He loveth His children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things."

The Angel then gave the explanation: "Behold the Virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh."

This indeed was a revelation on the condescension of God. The Virgin now was carried away in the spirit "for the space of a time." Then she reappeared in the vision "bearing a Child in her arms," and the Angel said, "Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father?"

Never was a more important revelation than this given to the world. The incarnation of God in Jesus! The Lamb of God, the Son of the Eternal Father, manifested to destroy the works of the adversary.

World in Confusion

If we look around us in the world today, we see a great deal of confusion. For many years most of the nations of the earth have been in battle array. Great sums of money have been expended every year to expedite war, and make it appear inevitable. Reason has lost its footing; sanity has upset its throne. Men in vast numbers are leaving the beliefs and traditions of their fathers; great nations openly proclaim a disbelief in God. The teachings of the Savior, for ages the vanguard of our civilization, are now declared to be foolishness.

Waters from the stinking springs of iniquity have flooded the earth, deep as an ocean, with their impurities. Hatred is burning in many camps, and no one knows when the fires will be beyond control. All this is the work of the adversary.

The outlook might be discouraging but for the fact that the Lord is the Head of the human family, and will gain the victory just as surely as He conquered death by His resurrection. St. Paul tells us: "So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for Him shall He appear the second time without sin unto Salvation." (Hebrews 9:28) That is to conquer sin, as well as death.

Let us remember that this land (America) is dedicated to God. Let us remember the truly solemn occasion when Moroni, the Commander-in-Chief of the Nephite Armies, B.C. 73, made a banner of his mantle and on it wrote: "In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children." (Alma 46:12) Moroni fastened it to a pole and called it The Title of Liberty. God and religion first, for without these there will be no freedom, neither peace.

But Jesus Christ is the God of this land in a special sense, as we read in Ether 2:12: "Behold this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifest by the things we have written."

This is the daily message of the Gospel of Jesus Christ which shall be heard in every home in this much favored land, so highly blessed by the Lord.

Jesus Christ

Prophecies Concerning Christ, His Advent, Ministry, Death and Resurrection

One of the most remarkable things connected with the history of the Nephites is the great plainness and detail with which the coming of the Redeemer and the events of His life in Judaea were revealed through their prophets, many of whom lived before the time of His advent. Among other things it was declared that:

God, Himself, should come down from Heaven among the children of men and should redeem His people. (Mosiah 15:1)

He should take upon Himself flesh and blood. (Mosiah 15:1)

He would be born in the land of their fathers, the Land of Jerusalem. (Alma 7:10)

His mother's name should be Mary. (Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10)

She should be a Virgin of the City of Nazareth, very beautiful and fair, a precious and chosen vessel. (I Nephi 11:13)

She should be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost. (Alma 7:10)

He should be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God. (Mosiah 3:8)

At His birth a new star should appear in the heavens. (Helaman 14:5)

He should be baptized by John at Bethabara, beyond Jordan. (I Nephi 10:9)

John would testify that he had baptized the Lamb of God. (I Nephi 10: 10)

After His baptism, the Holy Ghost should come down upon Him in the form of a dove. (I Nephi 11.:27; II Nephi 31:8)

He should call twelve men as His special witnesses, to minister in His name. (I Nephi 12:8)

He should go forth among the people ministering in power and great glory, casting out devils, healing the sick, raising the dead and performing many mighty miracles. (Mosiah 3:5)

He should take upon Himself the infirmities of His people. (Alma 7:12)

He should suffer temptation, pain of body, hunger, thirst and fatigue; blood should come from every pore of His body by reason of His anguish because of the abominations of His people. (Mosiah 3:7, 9)

He should be lifted upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world. (I Nephi 19:10)

He should be buried in a sepulchre, where He would remain for three days. (Mosiah 3:10)

After He was slain He should rise from the dead and should make Himself manifest by the power of the Holy Ghost unto the Gentiles. (I Nephi 10:11)

He should lay down His life according to the flesh and take it up again by the power of the Spirit, that He might bring to pass the resurrection of the dead; He being the first who should arise. At His resurrection many graves should be opened and should yield up their dead. These would be Saints who had beforetime passed away and they would appear to the living. (Helaman 14:15-25)

He should redeem all mankind who would believe on His name. (Helaman 14:2)

In the above we have not mentioned the sayings of Isaiah and other Jewish prophets which are inserted in the Book of Mormon but which also appear in the Bible.

Visits of Jesus Before his Advent

On this continent, as on the Eastern, Jesus manifested Himself from time to time to some of His faithful servants, before His coming in the flesh. He was the guide of His people, the guardian of the Church and the revealer of the mind and will of the Godhead. He went before the people of Jared in their journey, instructing them and covenanting with them. Few events recorded in the Book of Mormon are more widely known than His appearance in the body of His Spirit to the Brother of Jared. His statements with regard to Himself then were: I am He who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem My people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ, ...and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit, will I appear unto My people in the flesh." (Ether 3:8-16)

In later centuries, when making known the Divine Will to the elder Alma regarding the discipline of His Church, He declares: "It is I that taketh upon Me the sins of the world; for it is I that hath created them; and it is I that granteth unto him that believeth unto the end, a place at my right hand."

Not only were the Nephites very familiar with the details of the earthly life of the Redeemer but they also were made acquainted by their prophets, from Lehi to Samuel, the Lamanite, with the fact that after His resurrection He would visit them. This was shown in a vision to Nephi (I Nephi 12:6) and Nephi taught it to his people. (II Nephi 26:1-9) It so continued to be taught by the Priesthood throughout all their generations. (Alma 16:20)

The time of His birth at Bethlehem was also declared by the prophets with great exactness. Nephi states that His birth should take place 600 years from the time his father left Jerusalem and this prophecy was known to all his descendants. (See, I Nephi 10:4; 19:8; II Nephi 25: 19) We quote the last: "For according to the words of the prophets, the Messiah cometh in six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem; and according to the words of the prophets, and also the word of the angel of God, His name shall be Jesus Christ, the Son of God."

In the year B.C. 6, Samuel, the Lamanite, prophesied that on this continent, at the time of the Savior's birth, there should be great lights in the heavens, so that there should be a day, a night and another day without darkness; a new star should rise and many signs and wonders should be seen in the heavens. Again at the time of the Redeemer's death, the sun should be darkened and refuse to give its light and also the stars; and there should be no light upon the face of this land from the time He died until the time that He rose again from the dead. At His death there should be mighty thunderings and lightnings for many hours and the earth should shake and tremble and the rocks which are upon its face should be broken up and there should be great tempests and many mountains should be laid low and valleys should become mountains of great height and many cities should become desolate. Then many graves should yield up their dead and many Saints who would then be resurrected, should appear to the living.

Signs of His Birth

When six hundred years had passed from the time Lehi left Jerusalem, the time arrived of which Samuel, the Lamanite, and other prophets had borne testimony, when the phenomena should appear to bear witness of the birth of the Son of God. As the day drew near, signs and miracles increased among the people. But the hardened in heart began to circulate the idea that the time had passed and the prophecies had failed. They even went so far as to appoint a day when all who believed in the coming of the Savior should be slain, except the sign be first given.

This gross wickedness caused Nephi, the High Priest, great sorrow. Before God, in mighty prayer, he bowed all the day long. At last the comforting word came; the Anointed One said: "On this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfill all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of my holy prophets." (III Nephi 1:13) As it was thus declared, so was it fulfilled. At the going down of the sun, it was as light as daytime and so continued until the morning, when the sun again rose in its usual course. A new star had also appeared in the heavens. Then the faithful rejoiced. They knew that their Redeemer was born and that the great Plan of Salvation had entered its most glorious phase; but the wicked quaked with awful dread; they realized the extent of their iniquity, they also knew they were murderers at heart, for they had planned and plotted to take the lives of the righteous and in the fear and terror that this overwhelming sense of their piteous condition wrought, they sank to the earth as though they were dead.

Many now believed who previously had scorned the divine messages that the prophets bore; but others, inspired of Satan, as soon as they recovered from the fright which the appearance of the promised signs had produced, began to explain them away and by various lying rumors endeavored to nullify the good that had been done in the hearts of many. Others commenced to teach that it was no longer expedient to observe the Law of Moses, or to offer sacrifices, not comprehending that the infinite Sacrifice had not yet been made.

Signs of the Death of Christ

On the fourth day of the thirty-fourth Nephite year after Christ's birth, the promised sign of the Savior's crucifixion began. A terrible and devastating tempest burst upon the land. The earth quivered and groaned and opened in wide, unfathomable depths and chasms. Mountains were riven and swallowed up in yawning gulfs or were shattered into fragments and dispersed like hail before the tearing wind. Towers, temples, houses, were torn up, scattered in pieces or crushed by falling rocks and together with their inmates were lost and ground to dust in the convulsion. Blue and yellow flames burst from the edges of sinking rocks, blazed for a moment and then all was the deepest darkness. Rain poured down in torrents, cloudbursts, like floods washed away all with which they came in contact and pillars of steaming vapor seemed to unite earth and sky. This unparalleled storm raged throughout the land for three hours only, but during its short continuance the whole face of nature was changed. Mountains sank, valleys rose, the sea swept over the plains, large stagnant pools of water usurped the place of flourishing cities, great chasms, rents and precipices disfigured the face of the earth.

Three days of unnatural and impenetrable darkness followed the horrors of the tempest and from the heavens a voice was heard by the affrighted people proclaiming in their terrified ears the destruction that had taken place.

Terrible was the catalogue of the woes which that heavenly voice rehearsed. Nearly all their cities, great and small, had been destroyed by flood or fire, by earthquake or hurricane. The desolation was complete, the face of the earth was changed, tens of thousands, probably millions, of their neighbors had suddenly been called to meet the reward of their sinful lives; for this destruction came upon them that their wickedness and abominations might be hid from the face of Heaven and that the blood of the prophets and Saints they had slain might not come up any more in appeal unto God against them.

When the heavenly voice had finished the recital of the calamities that had befallen the land and its inhabitants, the speaker appealed to those who yet lived to repent of their sins and return unto Him and that they should have Eternal Life and He then revealed to them who He was. He declared unto them that:

I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father and the Father in Me and in Me hath the Father glorified His name.

I came unto My own and My own received Me not. And the Scriptures concerning My coming are fulfilled.

And as many as have received Me, to them have I given to become the sons of God and even so will I to as many as shall believe on My name, for behold, by Me redemption cometh and in Me is the law of Moses fulfilled.

I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. (III Nephi 9:18)

After the people had heard this glad message they ceased mourning for their dead relatives and there was silence in the land for the space of many hours. Then again was the voice of Jesus heard recounting how often He had sought to gather His children but they would not and promising in the future that He would again gather them if they would listen to Him. But if they would not heed Him the places of their dwellings should become desolate until the time of the fulfilling of God's covenant with their fathers. When the people heard this awful prophecy they began to weep and howl again because of the loss of their kindred and friends.

As on the Eastern Continent, so on this; at the time of Christ's Resurrection, numbers of the Saints who were dead arose from their graves and were seen and known by many of the living.

Three days had passed in darkness, in terror and in woe, when the thick mist rolled off the face of the land, revealing to the astonished eyes of the survivors how great had been the convulsions that had shaken the earth. As the darkness passed away the earth ceased to tremble, the rocks were no longer rent and the tumultuous noises ended. Nature was again at peace and peace filled the hearts of the living; their mourning was turned into praise and their joy was in Christ, their Deliverer.

Christ Ministers to the Nephites

Some time after the terrible events which denoted His death, exactly how long we know not, a multitude assembled near the temple which was in the Land Bountiful. Possibly many of those holding the High Priesthood had gone there to call upon the Lord and to officiate in the duties of their calling. The multitude spake one to another with regard to the Savior, of whose death the three days of unexampled, impenetrable darkness had been a sign.

While thus engaged a strange, sweet voice fell upon their ears, yet it pierced them to the centre, so that their whole frames trembled. At first they knew not what it said or whence it came, nor even when the words were again spoken did they understand. But when those words came a third time they understood their glorious import and knew that it was the voice of God. He said unto them: "Behold, My Beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified My name-hear ye Him." (III Nephi 11:7) Obedient to this heavenly voice they cast their eyes upward and to their joyous astonishment beheld the Messiah, clothed in a white robe, coming out of heaven.

Even yet they did not comprehend who He was but thought Him an angel. As He descended to the earth and stood in their midst their wondering eyes were all turned towards Him but for awe not a mouth was opened nor a limb moved. Then the Redeemer stretched forth His hand and said to the multitude: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world. And behold, I am the light and life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given Me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon Me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning." (III Nephi 11:10-11)

Then the whole multitude fell to the earth. They remembered the sayings of the prophets; they realized that their God stood in the midst of them.

Again the Risen Redeemer spake: "Arise," said He, "and come forth unto Me, that ye may thrust your hands into My side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in My hands and in My feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world." (III Nephi 11:14)

Now they who heard Him from the first to the last went forth and assured themselves that it was He of Whom the prophets had spoken. Then with shouts of praise they cried: "Hosanna! blessed be the name of the Most High God." (III Nephi 11:17) And they fell down at His feet and worshiped Him.

Jesus next called Nephi to Him, then eleven others and gave them authority to baptize the people, at the same time strictly charging them as to the manner in which they should perform this ordinance, that all disputes on this point might cease among the believers.

After Jesus had chosen the Twelve Disciples, He commenced to teach the people the principles of the fullness of the Gospel. Step by step He led them over the same precious ground of universal truth as He had done to His followers in Galilee, Judaea and Samaria. Sometimes, though, the difference of the inspired translation of the Book of Mormon and the worldly-wise one of the Bible, a slight difference is noticeable in the wording of the instructions but as a rule these differences are trivial, the advantage being with the Nephites, whose greater faith drew from the Savior deeper truths than Judah had received, or caused Him to display greater manifestations of His omnipotence and boundless love. From the believers He would turn to the Twelve, and give them special instructions as His ministers; then again He would shed forth His words of mercy, truth and divine wisdom upon the multitude and by and by again address the Disciples. So He continued day by day until all was revealed, either to the multitude or to the Twelve, that was necessary for the Eternal Salvation of the obedient. Then He left them to the care and ministry of the chosen Disciples.

Some have wondered why Jesus should have given so many of His teachings to the Nephites in the same manner and words as He did to the Jews. The reason is that those teachings were perfect and could not be improved. They were universal, that is, they were adapted to the wants of all peoples, whether of Israel or of the Gentiles, whether of Judah or Joseph. Among the teachings that He gave the Nephites which do not appear in the Bible account of His ministrations to the Jews are His references to the "Ten Lost Tribes," His explanations of the prophecies of Malachi and of the Prophet Isaiah, His statements regarding the then future history of the peoples on this continent, particularly drawing attention to those events that would concern and be connected with the remnant of the House of Lehi and His declarations regarding the name by which His Church should be known.

The miracles that attended His ministry on this land were, many of them, of the same character as the wondrous works He performed among the Jews; only frequently more marvelous and more glorious, on account of the greater faith of the Nephites. He healed the sick, cast out devils, raised the dead in Bountiful as He did in Judaea and Galilee. But there were other manifestations that were somewhat different. In the Land of Jerusalem, Jesus miraculously fed five thousand by increasing the store of loaves and fishes that had been provided; in Bountiful He administered the Emblems of His body and blood when neither the Disciples nor the multitude had brought either bread or wine. Angels ministered to men during His labors among the Jews; they did so more abundantly during His visits to the Nephites. Again, though we are told in the Bible of the Holy Redeemer blessing little children, we are nowhere to read therein of the glorious manifestations, the outpourings of the Spirit, the ministry of angels, the baptism of fire that took place when the Risen Redeemer condescended to bless the little ones of the Nephites.

Names and Titles Given to Jesus Christ in the Book of Mormon

Among the names and titles given to Christ in the Book of Mormon are: Mediator, Messiah, Redeemer, Great and True Shepherd, Lamb, Lamb of God, Son of God, Son of Righteousness, Son of the Eternal Father, Only Begotten of the Father, Creator, The Eternal Father of Heaven and Earth, King, King of all the Earth, God of Israel, God of the whole Earth, Most High God, Lord Omnipotent, Mighty God, Holy One, Holy One of Israel, Mighty One of Jacob, Wonderful Counselor, Prince of Peace and several others.
