Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 29

3 Ne 29 1Verse 1

3 Ne 29 1The Covenant is already beginning to be fulfilled. When, in the wisdom of Him Who knoweth all things, the Lord shall cause that the knowledge of the ancient Nephites and Lamanites should be made known unto the Gentiles according to the promises He made to the fathers of the much-favored Nephite people, then will we know that the Covenant which He made with Israel has already begun to be fulfilled, wherein the Lord covenanted that all of Israel's Tribes would be restored to the Lands of their Inheritance.; also read Ibid., 47:13ff)

3 Ne 29 1In connection with the Prophecy of Ezekiel it is well to read III Nephi 5:24-26: "And as surely as the Lord liveth, will He gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the Remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth. And as He hath covenanted with all the House of Jacob, even so shall the Covenant wherewith He hath covenanted with the House of Jacob be fulfilled in His own due time, unto the restoring all the House of Jacob unto the knowledge of the Covenant that He hath covenanted with them. And then shall they know their Redeemer, Who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from whence they have been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be."

3 Ne 29 1Palestine will once more become the gathering place of the scattered Children of Judah, through the power of the Mighty One of Jacob, but He always accomplishes His purposes through the instrumentality of His children. When Israel was to be redeemed from Egyptian bondage, Moses was raised up and made the instrument of deliverance. At the end of the Babyloninn Captivity, Cyrus, the mighty Prince of Persia, was moved upon to set the captives free and his successors continued to extend to them their protection while they were restoring their Temple, and repairing the ruined walls of their City. In the same way, it is to be expected that, when the time comes for the last gathering and final restoration, the promises will all be fulfilled by means of natural agencies.

3 Ne 29 1Cyrus was entrusted with power for the very purpose of enabling him to make the return of Israel to Palestine possible. For, about two hundred years before his birth, the Prophet Isaiah foretold his mission in these words: "Thus saith the Lord...that saith of Cyrus, He is My shepherd, and shall perform all My pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid." (Isaiah 44:24-28) Possibly this remarkable prediction was placed on record by divine inspiration, for the effect it naturally would produce on the Persian Ruler when his attention should be called to it. He, himself, acknowledged his obligation to God and issued his famous decree as an expression of his gratitude for the success he had achieved. He says: "The Lord God of Heaven hath given me all the Kingdoms of the earth; and He hath charged me to build Him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all His people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem." (Ezra 1:2-3) That was a graceful act of acknowledgment of divine providence in the military and diplomatic achievements through whch Cyrus had risen to prominence and power.

[Footnote continues in footnote 1c]1b )

3 Ne 29 1Will not God, perhaps in our own day, literally entrust Egypt into the care of the great democratic powers. Notwithstanding the turmoil that divides the earth into two great armed camps, the future of Egypt is assured. It may cause men to wonder at His purposes, but, in the end, His Will will be done, and His Covenant made with the House of Jacob be fulfilled unto their gathering together in the Lands of their Inheritance.

3 Ne 29 1Let us acknowledge the hand of the Almighty in all things leading to the fulfillment of the words of His prophets, their development and their accomplishment. He will give Egypt to the great nations of the earth, as we have said, as a ransom for Israel. It will rest with these great powers to restore the property unto the Lord, they having accepted the price.

3 Ne 29 1There are indications that the thoughts of men are now being directed, as never before, toward the political necessity of restoring Palestine and the establishment in the ancient City of David, of a kind of International Court that will solve the problems that now divide and array nation against nation. Such an action would be due recognition of the interest all enlightened nations naturally have in the place where the cradle of their civilization stood.

3 Ne 29 1When that question shall be actually brought up, good statesmanship will prompt the great nations to proclaim the independence of all Palestine, and to issue an invitation to the Children of Israel to return to the land of their fathers.

3 Ne 29 1The establishment of the independent state of Israel is an auspicious beginning that will yet grow until all the kingdoms of the earth shall become the Kingdom of our Lord.

3 Ne 29 1"Israel, youngest true democracy in the world, enters its seventh year amidst austerity, sacrifice and violence. These elements are not new, historically, to young states nor to the indomitable people who carved their homeland out of the hostile desert.

[Footnote continues in footnote 1d]1c 1d

SC3 Ne 29 23 Ne 29 3Verses 2-3

SC3 Ne 29 23 Ne 29 3The words of the Lord will all be fulfilled. "The Words of the Lord," spoken by His servants, "will all be fulfilled." For the Lord says: "I am He Who speaketh,")

SC3 Ne 29 23 Ne 29 3"Verily, verily, I say unto you, that My people shall know My Name; yea, in that day they shall know that I am He that doth speak." (III Nephi 20:39)

SC3 Ne 29 23 Ne 29 3"And he that believeth not My words believeth not My Disciples; and if it so be that I do not speak, judge ye; for ye shall know that it is I that speaketh, at the last day." (Ether 4:10)2 and we may be assured His speech is not idle talk. Let us not be deceived into thinking that the Lord is unmindful of any of His promises. Let us not fan ourselves into that silly delusion that the Almighty Father is whimsical and liable to a change in fancy. He is not governed by the events of the day, nor does He await their fruition before He acts. The Lord Himself makes the decisions; the incidents of the day do not regulate or vary the Plan of Salvation. The coming of the Lord will be according to His own pleasure. However, He is not a god of caprice, acting on impulse without good reason therefor. The Lord knows all, even the end from the beginning, "And ye need not say that the Lord delays His coming unto the Children of Israel," because, in His wisdom we may be well assured that the time has not arrived that His coming shall be fulfilled. Remember the words of Moroni: "For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all His promises shall be fulfilled." (Mormon 8:22)

SC3 Ne 29 43 Ne 29 5Verses 4-5

SC3 Ne 29 43 Ne 29 5Wo unto him that spurneth at the doings of the Lord. When the knowledge of their fathers shall come unto the Remnant of the Lamanites who shall be living at that day, and Christ is preached unto its benighted people by the Gentiles, who themselves believe in His Holy Name, "Then ye need not any longer spurn at the doings of the Lord." Spurn, means to reject with disdain, or to treat a thing with contempt. "Wo unto him," Moroni says that he, who by disdainful rejection of the Word of God, or by contemptuous treatment of His works, casts aside these signs as a thing unworthy of any notice, "For the Sword of His Justice is in His right hand," and such a one will reap a harvest of tares, and not a storehouse of plenty. In other words, the Lord will visit him with despair and disappointment. He has seen the signs of His coming, but has rejected the Lord's works, now the Sword of His Justice cuts along that line which he himself has marked out.

3 Ne 29 6Verse 6

3 Ne 29 6Wo unto him that shall deny the revelations of the Lord. "Surely the Lord God will do nothing," said Amos, "but He revealeth His secrets unto His servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7) It was ever thus. The great Ruler of the Universe has so decreed, and from the beginning He has, for the benefit and betterment of His children, taught them His Ways that they, in a higher and greater degree, might understand His Salvation. Through His servants, the prophets, the Lord has revealed to them His holy Mind and Will that they may not stumble in darkness over every unseen obstacle placed in their way, but walk uprightly before Him.

3 Ne 29 6By His power, God revealed unto Adam, the venerable ancestor of the human family, the things he should do, and what he should not do; in doing, or not doing them, Adam would be pleasing in the sight of the Lord. The same is true of us.

3 Ne 29 6Moses, Israel's great leader in its Exodus from Egypt, was caught up into a high mountain, and in vision saw, "God face-to-face, and he talked with Him...And God spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is My Name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless? And, behold, thou art My son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of Mine hands; but not all, for My works are without end, and also My words, for they never cease....And now, behold, this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, My son; for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee. And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created; and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marvelled and wondered." (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 1:2-8)

3 Ne 29 6Moses, continuing in that vision, saw father Adam, and that in his day, "Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the Earth....And Adam and Eve blessed the Name of God, and they made known all things unto their sons and daughters." (Ibid., 5:10-12)

3 Ne 29 6Enoch, the seventh from Adam, by that same power, was shown the world and its inhabitants that were to come for many generations. Moses, in his writings as they were revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in December 1830, said, quoting Enoch: "And it came to pass that I turned and went up on the mount; and as I stood upon the mount, I beheld the Heavens open, and I was clothed upon with glow.

3 Ne 29 6And I saw the Lord; and He stood before my face, and He talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face-to-face; and He said unto me: "Look, and I will show unto thee the world for the space of many generations." (Ibid., 7:3-4)

3 Ne 29 6"And the Lord showed Enoch all things, even unto the end of the world; and he saw the day of righteousness, the hour of their redemption; and received a fulness of joy." (Ibid., 7:67)

3 Ne 29 6The Brother of Jared, one of the leaders of that wonderful people, the Jaredites, whom the Lord said should become the greatest nation of the Earth, was shown all the inhabitants of this planet, both those who had been and those who were to be. The great Giver of that vision, Who was the Lord, told Mahonri Moriancumr, for that was the name of the Brother of Jared, to write down the things he had both seen and heard and seal them up; and said the Lord: "I will show them in Mine Own due time unto the children of men." (Ether 3:25-27) The Gospel, in its purity, has been revealed to God's children in every age.

3 Ne 29 6Let us now turn to the history of the Nephites who were a people blessed beyond measure in Heavenly Gifts. Their story is one marked everywhere with the proofs of Providential care. Revelations from Heaven were their constant guide; angels from the Courts of Glory ministered to them; the Savior Himself, personally and with His Own mouth, taught them the principles of Life and Salvation. Mormon, the abridger of their record, says of them that during the period of their national life when they all listened to what God revealed to them through His servants, "Surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God," because, he noted in the preceding verse, "of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people." (IV Nephi 15-16).

3 Ne 29 6Nephi, the son of the Prophet Lehi, because of his righteousness, had revealed to him of the Lord, His wonderful ways, and the beauties of Christ's Gospel. These marvelous things Nephi recorded in the Record he was making upon metal plates the Lord had commanded him to make. This record became the first of the Nephite Scriptures, and the revelations of God which were therein guided and admonished them even as long as righteousness prevailed among them. Not only that, but to us, the Saints of these latter days, they are as a light unto our feet which cannot be darkened, and a voice as of one from the dead, not saying, but shouting praises to the Holy One of Israel. (See, Mormon 9:30; also see, II Nephi 31:13)

3 Ne 29 6"Behold," said Jacob, Nephi's brother, "great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of Him; and it is impossible that man should find out all His ways. And no man knoweth of His ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of God. For behold, by the power of His word man came upon the face of the Earth, which Earth was created by the power of His word....Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from His hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that He counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all His works." (Jacob 4:8-10)

3 Ne 29 6The words of revelation among the Nephites were many, and the exhortations of their leaders were fearless and mighty. "Behold, will ye reject these words?" asked Jacob, of whom we have just referred. "Will ye reject the words of the prophets; and will ye reject all the words which have been spoken concerning Christ, after so many have spoken concerning Him; and deny the good word of Christ, and the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and quench the Holy Spirit, and make a mock of the great Plan of Redemption, which hath been laid for you? Know ye not that if ye will do these things, that the power of the Redemption and the Resurrection, which is in Christ, will bring you to stand with shame and awful guilt before the Bar of God?" (Ibid., 6:8-9)

3 Ne 29 6In speaking of the revelations of God, Nephi declared in a few words the thing of which we have been writing: "And He surely did show unto the prophets of old all things concerning them...." (1 Nephi 19:21) "O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord....Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling before Him." (Mormon 9:27)

3 Ne 29 6The words, deny and despise, as used in the Book of Mormon are not synonymous, but to us they connote the same thing, reject. To reject the commandments of the Lord, would be adding the burdens of blameworthiness upon our shoulders. Blame because of guilt, therefore we are made recipients of blame because of our enlightenment, or in spite of it; and in it we choose not to acknowledge the truth of God's Holy Words.

3 Ne 29 6"But, behold, ye not only deny my words, but ye also deny all the words which have been spoken by our fathers, and also the words which were spoken by this man, Moses, who had such great power given unto him, yea, the words which he hath spoken concerning the coming of the Messiah." (Nephi, the son of Helaman, Helaman 8:13)

3 Ne 29 6"I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues. Behold, I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the Gospel of Christ...." (Mormon 9:7-8)

3 Ne 29 6We are told in many places of Scripture that the Lord knows the end from the beginning, therefore, we say, "He can command and it is done!" The Earth is not a great laboratory in which the Creator experiments. Life is not empirical, neither is it fortuitous. Things are not by chance. The Bible or the Book of Mormon does not even recognize the word. By chance or by accident, things do not so occur to the writers thereof. What we sometimes call accidents are really not so. As we have said: "The accidents of man are the inspirations of God, and the incidents of this life, are the teachings and the guidings of Him Who made it."

3 Ne 29 6"And again, I exhort you, my brethren, that ye deny not the gifts of God, for they are many; and they come from the same God. And there are different ways that these gifts are administered; but it is the same God Who worketh all in all; and they are given by the manifestations of the Spirit of God unto men, to profit them." (Moroni 10:8)

3 Ne 29 6"For behold, I am the Father, I am the Light, and the Life, and the Truth of the world." Therefore Jesus Christ says: "Come unto Me, O ye Gentiles, and I will show unto you the greater things, the knowledge which is hid up because of unbelief." (Ether 4:12-13)

3 Ne 29 6Yea, wo unto him that shall deny the revelations of the Lord, and that shall say the Lord no longer worketh by revelation, or by prophecy, or by gifts, or by tongues, or by healings, or by the power of the Holy Ghost!" (v. 6)

3 Ne 29 7Verse 7

3 Ne 29 7Yea, and wo unto him...that shall say, to get gain, that there can be no miracle wrought by Jesus Christ. Mormon was constrained, by the spirit of prophecy which was in him, to warn them that a miserable and sorrowful state awaits all those who, at that last day, shall preach the Gospel only for money.

3 Ne 29 7He saw that at that time wicked and crafty men would turn preaching the message of Life and Salvation from a duty of love towards Christ to a money-making proposition. To do so is to turn religion into an industrial craft, and that is "priestcraft."

3 Ne 29 7Priestcraft means, not only crafty and wicked ruses to lead the unwary astray, but also the making of religion a profession in which the aim is to obtain worldly honor, gold and silver, and the plaudits of men.

3 Ne 29 7The rejection of the Messiah by the Jews, and their consequent dispersion, are traced to the existence of priestcrafts and the attendant iniquities thereof. By the words, priestcrafts and iniquities we do not merely mean such subtlety as is ascribed to the serpent in the Garden of Eden (Genesis 3:1), or such wickedness as originates in the realm of Lucifer. It has a special meaning which should be carefully noted. To us, it means, the practice of religion for worldly gain and the praise of men.

3 Ne 29 7Not only that, but in doing so, the great and glorious saving truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ are bought and sold as common merchandise, and God's sanctuary, a place where we bring our prayers and our praise, and our offerings of homage, is turned into a market-place where all manner of hucksters with raucous voices peddle their wares in the Name of Him Who to us is most holy.

3 Ne 29 7The Lord, knowing the mercenary desires of many men, commanded them that there should be no priestcrafts among them. "For," He said to the early fathers of the Nephites, "behold priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion. Behold, the Lord hath forbidden this thing; wherefore, the Lord God hath given a commandment that all men should have charity, which charity is love. And except they should have charity they were nothing. Wherefore, if they should have charity they would not suffer the laborer in Zion to perish. But the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money they shall perish." (II Nephi 26:29-31)

3 Ne 29 7To those who want to see the contrast complete between the work of the Lord, and the work of priestcrafts, which are the works of the devil, we offer the following Nephite Scriptures. Their substance is this: Our Lord God never does a thing but that which will benefit His children. (II Nephi 26:24) He loveth the world. He invites all to come unto Him and get "milk and honey" freely. (Ibid., v. 25) In other words, Salvation is offered freely to all. (Ibid., vv. 27-28) There shall be no "priestcrafts"-no preaching for money and fame, but only for the welfare of Zion. (Ibid., v. 29; compare II Nephi 10:5; III Nephi 16:10-20)

3 Ne 29 7Isaiah, speaking of this same thing, says: "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." (Isaiah 55:1-2)

3 Ne 29 7There can be no miracle wrought by Jesus Christ. There are only two churches-the Church of God and the church of the devil. This may seem a hard statement to make, but Jesus Christ is the Founder and Creator of but one. All the opposing ones, with their contending and dissenting factions, form the other. It has become infiltrated with different modes of "priestcraft." Any excuse and every pretext is offered by its founders to apologize for its shortcomings. Even fraud and deception are called in by them to reinforce the claims they make to divine authority. The Church of Christ, otherwise the Church of God, must be founded upon His authority, or under His jurisdiction. All others are vain.

3 Ne 29 7Christ's promise to His followers among the Jews in Jerusalem, and to the Nephites in the new Land of Promise, that these signs shall follow them that believe, "In My Name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover; and whosoever shall believe in My Name, doubting nothing, unto him will I confirm all My words, even unto the ends of the Earth," (Mormon 9:24-25) is now declared to be foolishness, and the followers of the meek and lowly Lamb, victims of their own folly.

3 Ne 29 7In their ignorance and infatuation, priests ordained by men, and preachers of religion, "to get gain" "Deny the power of God, the Holy One of Israel; and they say unto the people: Hearken unto us, and hear ye our precept; for behold there is no God today, for the Lord and the Redeemer hath done His work, and He hath left His power unto men; Behold, hearken unto my precept; if they shall say there is a miracle wrought by the hand of the Lord, believe it not; for this day He is not a God of miracles; He hath done His work." (II Nephi 28:5-6)

3 Ne 29 7There can be no miracle wrought by Jesus Christ, means this: Do not believe in miracles, for now there are no more miracles; God has done His work. In the 19th century, during what is called "the age of enlightenment," certain men who, according to their own notions, were known as rationalists, advocated exactly the same thing. They made human, scientific, knowledge the highest standard of truth. Being unable to explain scientifically what we know as miraculous, they treated the signs Christ promised with disdain, or as myths; either that, or denied them. Rationalism became the wet-nurse of infidelity.

3 Ne 29 7"Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts and shall seek to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark....

3 Ne 29 7O the wise, and the learned, and the rich, that are puffed up in the pride of their hearts, and all those who preach false doctrines, and all those who commit whoredoms, and pervert the right way of the Lord, wo, wo, wo, be unto them, saith the Lord God Almighty, for they shall be thrust down to hell." (Ibid., 28:9, 15)

3 Ne 29 7That is exactly what Mormon tells us in the 7th verse of our text. Those who deny that through the power of the Lord God Who is Jesus Christ these gifts, sometimes called signs, shall follow them that believe "shall become like unto the Son of Perdition, for whom there is no mercy." "For they shall be thrust down to hell," as Nephi expresses the thought, has the same meaning as when Mormon says: "shall become like the Son of Perdition."

3 Ne 29 8Verse 8

3 Ne 29 8Yea, and ye need not any longer hiss, nor spurn, nor make game of the Jews. To make game of the Jews, or as Mormon says, "Any of the remnant of the House of Israel," is to subject them to sport or to ridicule them. In ridiculing the Jews, God's purposes are also ridiculed. The Lord has given them a great part in furthering the Plan of Salvation, and the Jews with gladness will perform everything their prophets have said they would.

3 Ne 29 8In days now past, (thank Almighty God they are), Jews were thought to be the natural prey of Christian people. And even today, they are the target of raucous gibes, or prejudice and intolerance. The world is guilty of downright ignorance in its anti-Semitic aggressions, of having insufficient knowledge concerning them, and an unreasonable predilection of what is right and what is wrong in dealing with them. What is still more offensive to the humble follower of Jesus is that in persecuting the Jews, open rebellion is carried on in defiance of God and His laws. They are made to appear as something to be spurned and despised; a hiss and a byword among the nations of the earth. For ages persecution has been their lot. Great nations have openly sought their martyrdom. But in spite of great and powerful enemies, the Jews, today, after two thousand years of censure and unjust treatment, remain with us a magnificent source of unbounded energy, and also a reminder to all "That the Lord He is God in Heaven above, and upon the Earth beneath: there is none else." (Deuteronomy 4:39) Through the Jews, mankind has inherited knowledge of the True and Living God, and that alone should make us love and not hate them.

3 Ne 29 8In all our contemplation of the Jews, let us remember that the Jews have given to the world much that is most noble and fine; much to advance the science of medicine, mathematics, and all forms of discovery. Music and the arts have benefited greatly by their contributions, and we will not forget the great moral and intellectual ethics to which they as a people have attained.

3 Ne 29 8A full and complete answer to all appeals that are made to passion and prejudice in our rendering of judgment on the Jews, let us consider that they are truly the Chosen People of ,the Lord, and too, the Savior and the Redeemer of the world is a Jew.

3 Ne 29 8"And now comes an event in the history of the Church that causes the most intensive faith in the work of the Lord in this day. The Prophet Joseph Smith sent Apostle Orson Hyde to the Holy Land in 1841, where he dedicated that Land for the return of the Children of Judah. The prayer was prophetic in every way. Beautiful are the words of Orson Hyde as he prayed to God that the Holy Land of the Jews should be saved. I give only a few words of the prayer:

3 Ne 29 8Now, O Lord! Thy servant has been obedient to the heavenly vision which Thou gavest him in his native land; and under the shadow of Thine outstretched arm, he has safely arrived in this place to dedicate and consecrate this land unto Thee, for the gathering together of Judah's scattered remnants, according to the predictions of the holy Prophets-for the building up of Jerusalem again after it has been trodden down by the Gentiles so long, and for rearing a Temple in honor of Thy name....

3 Ne 29 8Grant therefore, O Lord, in the name of Thy well-beloved Son, Jesus Christ, to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land, and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty soil. Let the vine and olive produce in their strength, and the fig-tree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly fruitful when possessed by its rightful heirs; let it again flow with plenty to feed the returning prodigals who come home with a spirit of grace and supplication; upon it let the clouds distil virtue and richness, and let the fields smile with plenty. Let the flocks and the herds greatly increase and multiply upon the mountains and the hills; and let Thy great kindness conquer and subdue the unbelief of Thy people. Do Thou take from them their stony heart, and give them a heart of flesh; and may the Sun of Thy favor dispel the cold mists of darkness which have beclouded their atmosphere. Incline them to gather in upon this land according to Thy word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their windows. Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eye. (Documentary History of the Church IV, pp. 456-457, italics added. Quoted by President Levi Edgar Young in a sermon delivered in the Salt Lake Tabernacle April 5, 1957)

3 Ne 29 9Verse 9

3 Ne 29 9Therefore ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand of the Lord unto the left. Mormon here warns those who spurn, and treat the words and works of the Lord as something of no worth, that His work will go on in spite of their ill will, and by it they can in nowise hope to have Him nullify that which "He hath sworn."

3 Ne 29 9In the bloody pages of history that record the persecutions of the Jews in many parts of the world, we see not only the wrath of God displayed in their dispersion, but also love for His chosen people in preparing the way for their gathering together again; that they may again be a light unto the world, and that again the Word of the Lord shall go forth from Jerusalem. (See, Isaiah 2:3) Yes, the Lord has and will "execute judgment unto the fulfilling of the Covenant which He hath made unto the House of Israel."

General Notes

The Lands of their inheritance. (v. 1) We understand the Lands of their Inheritance to mean all the countries in which their possessions, that is the Twelve Tribes of Israel, were once allotted to them; the entire region between the River of Egypt and the Euphrates, once inhabited by Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaims, Canaanites, Girganites, and Jebusites. (Genesis 15: 18-21) According to the Mosaic Law, land possessions disposed of by the owner thereof returned automatically every fiftieth year to its original owner: "In the year of the jubilee the field shall return to him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession did belong." (Numbers 27:24) The original Covenant was made with the descendants of Abraham, and this fact may have to be considered in the solution of what now appears to be a difficult problem, involving perfect justice between Hebrews and Arabs.

Tel Aviv. This is the name of a Jewish City on the Mediterranean Sea, near the City of Jaffa. It was founded in 1909. In 1913 it had a population of only 908. Now its inhabitants number many, many, times that. In Tel Aviv, the ancient language of the Hebrews, thought to be dead because it was used only by scholars and of no commercial value, has been revived. Newspapers there are printed in pure Hebrew. Theaters and even signboards use that tongue. The streets are thronged with well-dressed people, with new motor cars and motor buses. The traffic policemen are dressed much like the American policemen in summer uniform. The shops are bright and modern. The homes are of the California type of bungalow, or flat buildings. Jews from South Africa, from Argentina, from Brazil, from the United States, from Yemen in central Arabia, in large numbers from Russia and from Poland, Austria, England, and many other countries. There, they are adapting themselves to the new civilization being built up in a purely Jewish atmosphere.

Tel Aviv is only one of the manifestations of the establishment of the Jewish home, and in it we can see that the Covenant God made with their fathers "is already beginning to be fulfilled." (v. 1)
