Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 30

SC3 Ne 30 23 Ne 30 1Verse 1

SC3 Ne 30 23 Ne 30 1Hearken, O ye Gentiles, and hear the Words of Jesus Christ. After urgently imploring those of the Remnant of Israel to be prepared for the coming of that Day when the Lord in His wisdom shall fulfill the promise He made to their forefathers, Mormon directs an appeal to the Gentiles, or to those not favored as the seed of Abraham.

SC3 Ne 30 23 Ne 30 1Jews, although they are only part thereof, are spoken of as the Children of Israel, or the House of Israel. Jews and Gentiles are on an equal level before God, save those who do not keep His commandments. Gentiles who repent, thereby join the Covenant People of the Lord, and share its privileges and prerogatives, as well as its duties and responsibilities. Likewise, Jews, who will not repent, will be cast off.

SC3 Ne 30 23 Ne 30 1Nephi, the son of Lehi, in speaking to his brethren, some of whom were in reality his brothers, said: "I, Nephi, would not suffer that ye should suppose that ye are more righteous than the Gentiles shall be. For behold, except ye shall keep the commandments of God ye shall all likewise perish; and because of the words which have been spoken ye need not suppose that the Gentiles are utterly destroyed. For behold, I say unto you that as many of the Gentiles as will repent are the Covenant People of the Lord; and as many of the Jews as will not repent shall be east off; for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in His Son, Who is the Holy One of Israel." (II Nephi 30:1-2)

SC3 Ne 30 23 Ne 30 1Paul teaches the same doctrine. He says: "For the promise was not to Abraham, or his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith." (Romans 4:13) Faith as used here means the Gospel of Christ. Again Paul says: "For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek (Gentiles): for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon Him." (Ibid., 10-12) And again: "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." (Ibid., 8:14)

SC3 Ne 30 23 Ne 30 1Mormon is emphatic in that he had been commanded by the Lord to call all the Gentiles to repent of "... all your wickedness and abominations," and return unto your Father that "ye may receive a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that ye may be numbered with My people who are of the House of Israel."
