Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

The Fourth Book of Nephi

Who is the son of Nephi-One of the Disciples of Jesus Christ

These are strange times. If we look out over the world today, the people of the Earth are confronted by problems and vicissitudes quite unprecedented in the past. Never before have our pathways been strewn with such failure and disaster. "Rarely has this Earth known such peril as today?" (President Dwight D. Eisenhower, Inaugural Address, January 21, 1957) The awful tumult of things to come, things yet unseen, fill our hearts with fear and trembling. Only the bravest look towards the future; no one knows what the morrow may bring forth.

These are strange times! Strife and angry passions mark the roads we travel. Fraud and deception are re-enforced by every pretext and excuse the ingenuity of man can suggest. Waters from the stinking springs of iniquity have flooded the Earth, deep as an ocean, with their impurities. The upright man is upbraided because of his righteousness, and the sinful one held in repute. Where joy and thanksgiving once resounded throughout the Earth, there is remorse; there is sorrow where there should be gladness.

Nor, is that all! Hymns of Hate are heard in every land. Madness steers the Ships of State. Reason has lost its footing. Sanity has upset its throne. Men, in vast numbers, are leaving the beliefs and traditions of their fathers; others seek in religion that which will deaden the terrible forebodings of coming woe. Great nations openly proclaim a disavowal of belief in God. The teachings of the Savior, for ages the vanguard of our civilization, are now declared to be foolishness.

Indeed, these are strange times.

They are, however, not particularly new.

Every generation has had its problems, and wise men, and good men, for the benefit and betterment of mankind, have sought to solve them. From the very first many attempts have been made to do just that. If we search the past, we find the many laws that have been made to lift mankind to higher levels of goodness and purity. We see the philosophies and the religions that today are merely academic.

We hear again the appeals that were once made to passion and prejudice, to ignorance and infatuation, to arrogance and to pride.

All have failed!

We know of only one that was lasting and real. The Book of Mormon tells of one that did not fail.

We refer the student to the visit of the Risen Redeemer to the Nephites here in this land. You will remember that the Savior taught His Gospel to the Nephites the same as He, aforetime, had taught it to the Jews at Jerusalem.

From their annals as recorded in the Sacred Record you will learn that when the Nephites kept the commandments of the Lord, they were prospered and otherwise blessed far beyond our poor powers of description. We, in the record which was kept by Nephi, son of Nephi the Disciple of Christ, and called by us, THE BOOK OF IV NEPHI may learn this truth which is today as forceful to us as it was then to them.

Here, in brief, is their own account written in our words: When Jesus left the Nephites to the care of His Disciples, He had so thoroughly filled the people with the influences and powers of the Eternal Worlds that evil utterly ceased in their midst. They were united in all things, temporal and spiritual. Universal peace prevailed. Love, joy, harmony, everything desirable to make the life of man a perfect condition of unalloyed, holy happiness, reigned supreme. Indeed, it may be said that a type, a foreshadowing of the Millennium, for once found place and foothold among the erring sons of humanity.

At this blessed period, Nephi, the son of Nephi and the grandson of Helaman, received the sacred Plates. His duty, as the recorder of the doing of his people was a happy one. He had nothing but good to relate of their lives and actions, and to record that perfect peace prevailed upon all these vast Western Continents. The Nephites increased in numbers-there were no Lamanites-they prospered in circumstances; they grew in material wealth, all of which was held in common according to God's Order. They colonized and spread far abroad; they rebuilt their ancient capital and many other cities; they also rounded new ones. Above all, they were rich in heavenly treasures; the Holy Spirit reigned in every heart and illumined every soul.

When Nephi died (110 A.D.) this happy, heavenly, inexpressibly peaceful state still continued in undiminished warmth of divine and brotherly love. All the generation to which Nephi belonged entered in God's Kingdom at the Strait Gate and walked the Narrow Way to the Eternal City of God; not one of them was lost.

At Nephi's death, his son, Amos, became the custodian of the Holy Things, and he held them for 84 years, or from 110 to 194 A.D. He lived in the days of the Nephites' greatest prosperity and happiness. The perfect law of righteousness was still their only guide. But before he passed away to his heavenly home, a small cloud, a fatal harbinger of an approaching devastating storm had gathered. A few that were weary of the uninterrupted bliss, the perfect harmony, the universal love, that everywhere prevailed, seceded from the Church and took upon themselves the title of Lamanite, which ill-boding name had only been known to the Nephites in tradition for more than 100 years.

It may be asked, "How was it possible that men and women should withdraw from such a holy order or society where all was perfect peace; where every man dealt justly with his neighbors; where none afflicted wrongs and none suffered from injustice done them; where angels ministered to the children of mortality, and heavenly revelations were their constant guides?"

If the inquirer will answer why Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, in Heaven itself, rebelled against the Almighty Father and led astray one-third of the angelic hosts, we will reply by saying that he, Satan, tempted the dissenting Nephites with the same spirit of rebellion to the Divine Power and that he succeeded in ensnaring them and leading them away captive to his will.

A second Amos followed his father as keeper of the Records. His duties were not the happy ones of his immediate predecessors. Instead of good, he had much to chronicle of evil.

Amos, himself, was a righteous man, but he lived to witness an ever-increasing flood of iniquity inundate the land, a phase of evil-doing that rose rot from false tradition or from ignorance, but from direct and wilful rebellion against God, and apostasy from His laws. The wholesome checks to vice and misery found in the Plan of Salvation were knowingly or intentionally removed and done away with. The voice of reason was disregarded. The promptings of the Holy Spirit were defiantly repelled. Man's unbridled passions again bore sway; disunion, dissension, violence, hatred, distress, dismay, bloodshed, and havoc, spread the wide continents over; and from their high pinnacle of righteousness, peace, happiness, refinement, social advantage, etc., the Nephites were once more hurled into an abyss of misery and barbarism, now more profound, more torturing, and more degrading than ever.

We may conclude of the Nephites as did Isaiah many hundreds of years before concerning the Jews, and whose words were written upon the Brass Plates of Laban. The Prophet, after pronouncing woe upon the wicked and the wise who were wise in their own eyes, also the mighty who justify the wicked for reward and who take away the the righteousness of the righteous, exclaimed: "Therefore, as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossoms shall go up as dust; because they have east away the law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. Therefore, is the anger of the Lord kindled against His people, and He hath stretched forth His hand against them, and He hath smitten them" (II Nephi 15:24-25)

The commencement of the apostasy. Let us consider a little more fully the events leading up to the catastrophic destruction of the Nephite Race about 400 A.D. By the year 201 A.D., all the second generation had passed away save a few; the people had greatly multiplied and spread over the face of the land, north and south, and had become exceedingly rich; they wore costly apparel which they adorned with ornaments of gold and silver, with pearls and precious stones. From this date they had no more their property in common, but like the rest of the world, every man sought gain, wealth, power and influence for himself and his. All the old evils arising from selfishness were revived. Soon they began to build churches after their own fashion, and hire preachers who pandered to their lusts; some even began to deny the Savior.

From 210 A.D. to 230 A.D., the people waxed greatly in iniquity and impurity of life. Different dissenting sects multiplied, infidels abounded. The three remaining Disciples were sorely persecuted notwithstanding that they performed many mighty miracles. They were shut up in prison, but the prisons were rent in twain by the power of God; they were cast into fiery furnaces, but the flames harmed them not; they were thrown into dens of wild beasts, but they played with the savage inmates as a child does with a lamb, and they received no harm; they were not subject to many of the laws that govern our mortal bodies; they had passed through a glorious change by which they were freed from earthly pain, suffering, and death Not only did the wicked persecute these three blessed ones, but others also of God's people suffered from their unhallowed anger and bitter hatred; but the faithful neither reviled at the reviler nor smote the smiter; they bore these things with patience and fortitude, remembering the pains of their Redeemer.

In the year 231 A.D., there was a great division among the people. The old party lines were again definitely marked. Again the old animosity assumed shape and Nephite and Lamanite once more became implacable foes. Those who rejected and renounced the Gospel assumed the latter name, and with their eyes open, and a full knowledge of their inexcusable infamy, they taught their children the same base falsehoods that in ages past had caused the unceasing hatred that reigned in the hearts of the children of Laman and Lemuel toward the seed of their younger brothers.

By 244 A.D., the more wicked portion of the people had become exceedingly strong, as well as far more numerous than the righteous. They deluded themselves by building all sorts of churches, with creeds to suit the increasing depravity of the masses.

When 260 years had passed away, the Gadianton Bands, with all their secret signs and abominations, through the cunning of Satan, again appeared and increased until, in the year 300 A.D., they had spread all over the land. By this time also, the Nephites, having gradually forsaken their first love, had so far sunk in the abyss of iniquity that they had grown as wicked, as proud, as corrupt, and as vile as the Lamanites. All were submerged in an overwhelming flood of infamy, and there were none that were righteous, save it were the followers of Christ.

Amos entrusted the Records to his son, Ammaron, in the year 306 A.D. Owing to the increasing depravity and vileness of the Nephites, Ammaron was constrained by the Holy Spirit to hide up all the sacred things which had been handed down from generation to generation. (320 A.D.) The place where he hid them, Moroni, in his comments, said was a Hill called Shim, in the Land Antum. After he hid them he informed Mormon, then a child of ten years, and placed the buried treasures in his charge.

The Book of Mormon

Chapter 1

SCMorm 1 1Morm 1 2Morm 1 3Morm 1 4Morm 1 5Morm 1 6Verses 1-6

SCMorm 1 1Morm 1 2Morm 1 3Morm 1 4Morm 1 5Morm 1 6And now I, Mormon, make a record ... and call it the Book of Mormon. Mormon was the last great Prophet-General of the Nephite Race, but better known to us as the custodian and compiler of the records of his people, and the writer of the greater portion of the work named after him, and known to us as the Book of Mormon. The father of Mormon who was a descendant of Nephi bore the same name as his illustrious son. The younger Mormon was born on the Northern Continent (311 A.D.), but when he was eleven years of age his father and he traveled to the land southward, "even to the Land of Zarahemla."

SCMorm 1 1Morm 1 2Morm 1 3Morm 1 4Morm 1 5Morm 1 6Before his departure south, Mormon formed the acquaintance of Ammaron whose name is the last word in the Book of Fourth Nephi. Ammaron was the brother of the younger Amos, and when Amos died, Ammaron took possession of the Sacred Things which because of the wickedness of the people he had hidden in a hill in the Land Antum. Ammaron perceived that Mormon was a lad of unusual perspicacity and that he was somewhat learned, Mormon himself notes "after the manner of the learning of my people." Impressed by Mormon's soberness and his ability to observe things quickly and accurately, he informed Mormon-then a child ten years old-of what he had done and placed the buried treasures in his charge. He instructed Mormon to go, when he was about twenty-four years old, to the hill where they were hidden and take the Plates of Nephi and record thereon what he had observed concerning the people. The remainder of the Plates, or the Records, etc., he was to leave where they were.

SCMorm 1 7Morm 1 8Morm 1 9Morm 1 10Morm 1 11Morm 1 12Verses 7-12

SCMorm 1 7Morm 1 8Morm 1 9Morm 1 10Morm 1 11Morm 1 12The whole face of the land had become covered with buildings. In the journey with his father to the Land of Zarahemla, or to the Land Southward, Mormon observed that the whole face of the land through which they traveled was covered with buildings, and the people who dwelt thereon were as numerous as the "sand of the sea." This observation made by such a sober young man should verify the fact that the Nephite people had grown great in numbers, and fat in material things.

SCMorm 1 7Morm 1 8Morm 1 9Morm 1 10Morm 1 11Morm 1 12It was in the year 322 A.D., that actual war broke out between the Nephites and the Lamanites for the first time since the Redeemer's appearing. It commenced in the Land of Zarahemla near the Waters of Sidon. A number of battles were fought in which the armies of the Nephites were victorious, the Nephites having gathered together more than thirty thousand men to do battle. The Lamanites, unprepared to meet such a formidable array withdrew their design of conquest, and retreated to an uneasy peace which lasted for four years.

SCMorm 1 13Morm 1 14Verse 13-14

SCMorm 1 13Morm 1 14The Lord did take away His Three beloved Nephite Disciples. Wickedness became widespread throughout all the land. Pride and the love for the things of the world, crowded all thoughts of obedience to God's laws from the peoples' hearts, and all manner of iniquity took the place of goodness and purity. Many did whatever pleased their fancy, or gratified their whims; they forgot the peace that filled the hearts of their ancestors for over two hundred years immediately after the visit of the Risen Redeemer. Now all was changed. They no longer joyfully kept God's commandments; what once they loved, they now hated, and where once the teachings of the Savior was a light unto their feet, they now walked in darkness. Surely, sin lay at their door, their cup of iniquity was almost full, and was filling rapidly. Tumult, strife, and angry passions, murders and whoredoms, deceit and lying, marked these times as worthy only the designs of hell.

SCMorm 1 13Morm 1 14In such an unholy atmosphere the influence of which pervaded not only the religious and moral, but also the political lives of the people, the Spirit of the Lord could not dwell. In spite of the many marvelous miracles performed by God's servants, and His watchful care over them, His children quickly forgot their Father. Insomuch did the iniquity of the people increase day by day that "the work of miracles and of healing did cease," Mormon notes, among them. The gifts that are the rewards of righteous living also ceased, and the Holy Ghost "did not come upon any," to confirm them in their most holy faith, and to lead and guide them along the Paths of Holiness in which Paths their fathers had trod. The Three Disciples whom the Lord loved so well, and to whom He gave marvelous powers, failed longer to minister to the people, and all except the followers of Christ were left with no succor coming from Above to guide them. Mormon says that the Lord took away His beloved Disciples who for almost two hundred years had tarried among the Nephites and had ministered to their spiritual wants and needs.

SCMorm 1 15Morm 1 16Morm 1 17Verses 15-17

SCMorm 1 15Morm 1 16Morm 1 17I was visited of the Lord. In these verses Mormon relates that when he was but fifteen years of age (about 326 A.D.), the Lord visited him, and he tasted of the "goodness of Jesus" in, we may imagine, a spiritual feast served as it were upon the Table of our Lord wherein he ate and drank of God's Holy Word. We can conceive the sweetness thereof. (See, I Nephi 8:11) For as a result of this marvelous outpouring of the Spirit, Mormon was anxious in the Work of the Lord. With a clarion voice he wanted to cry unto the people, "Repent ye, repent ye," but the Spirit restrained him; "My mouth," he says, "was shut, and I was forbidden that I should preach unto them...."

SCMorm 1 15Morm 1 16Morm 1 17It is recorded of this generation (the third after Christ), "They did not dwindle in unbelief, but they did wilfully rebel against the Gospel of Christ; and they did teach their children that they should not believe, even as their fathers." (IV Nephi 38) Mormon says of them, "They had wilfully rebelled against their God." We repeat a comment we made on this subject beforehand: "Amos, the son of Amos, and the grandson of Nephi, the Disciple, was the keeper of the Sacred Record during this period of Nephite history. He himself was a righteous man, but he witnessed an ever-increasing flood of iniquity break over the land. A phase of evil-doing that arose not from ignorance and false tradition, but from direct and wilfull rebellion against God, and apostasy from His laws. The wholesome checks to vice and misery found in the Plan of Salvation were knowingly done away with, or intentionally removed; the voice of reason was disregarded; the promptings of the Holy Spirit were defiantly repelled; man's unbridled passions again bore sway; disunion, dissension, violence, hatred, distress, dismay, bloodshed and havoc, spread the wide continents over; and from their high pinnacle of righteousness, peace, happiness, refinement, social advantage, etc., the people were hurled once more into an abyss of misery and barbarism, now more profound, more torturing, and more degrading than ever."

SCMorm 1 18Morm 1 19Verses 18-19

SCMorm 1 18Morm 1 19The Lord had cursed the land. In verse seventeen we read: "And because of the hardness of their hearts the land was cursed for their sake." For many years the people had no more all things in common, but like the rest of the world, every man sought gain, wealth, power, and influence for himself and his. All the old evils arising from selfishness were revived. The Gadianton Bands, with all their secret signs and abominations, through the cunning of Satan, again appeared and increased until, in 300 A.D., they had spread over all the land. They were feared by the Nephites, not only because the Robbers were numbered among the Lamanites, but also because their name implied just what they were robbers, indeed. The inhabitants of the land, Mormon notes, "began to hide up their treasures in the earth; and they became slippery, because the Lord had cursed the land, that they could not hold them, nor retain them again." (v. 18; See also, Helaman 13:30-32; Mosiah 17:14-20) Just as in the Dark Ages of Europe when Satan seemed to control men's hearts and minds, there was an overwhelming flood of "sorceries, and witchcrafts, and magics," let loose upon the people; anything that would blind the minds or harden the hearts of an already stiff-necked generation was made to appear to them as desirable. Yes, all that human ingenuity could suggest, or evil power achieve, was woven into their lives, until at this time the Nephites, having forsaken their first love, had so far sunk in the abyss of iniquity that they had grown as wicked, as proud, as corrupt and as vile as the Lamanites. All were submerged in an overpowering deluge of infamy, and there were none who were righteous save it were the followers of Jesus.

SCMorm 1 18Morm 1 19Thus we see that the prophecies of the Lord's servants, Abinadi and Samuel, the Lamanite, were fulfilled even to every word which they uttered.
