Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 3

Morm 3 1Verse 1

Morm 3 1The Lamanites did not come up to battle again until ten years had passed away. The treaty that was made between the Nephites on one hand, and the Lamanites with their many dissident Nephites on the other, lasted for ten years, in which interim of warfare, the peaceful pursuits of the Nephites were largely devoted to the preparation for war that seemed to Mormon as inevitable. During that time, he says, "I had employed my people, the Nephites, in preparing their lands and their arms against the time of battle."

Morm 3 2Verse 2

Morm 3 2The long-suffering of the Lord was again made manifest in offering mercy to the wayward Nephites, if only they would repent, "and come unto Me...." "Build up again My Church," came the voice of the Lord to Mormon, and at the same time he was commanded to cry this message to his people. The Lord promised them in doing so, that "ye shall be spared," from the ravages of their foes which for years, barring short intervals of an uncertain peace, had been the plague and scourge of their lives. In His offer of forbearance the Lord again makes known that He does not desire the death of the transgressor, but that the sinner live and return unto Him.

Morm 3 3Verse 3

Morm 3 3I did cry unto this people, but it was in vain. Mormon's people were so steeped in sin, and had become so hardened to sensibility that they were no longer able to choose between good and evil, let alone see the right when opposed by that which was wrong. They had the idea that whatsoever pleased the fancy or gratified the demands of their carnal selves would bring happiness. In this they were mistaken! Mormon says that they did not realize, nor did they bring into actual existence the fact that it was God alone Who spared them in times past. The loving-kindness of the Lord for His wayward children during their period of offense was made evident in His patience and endurance for them which countered every move of their enemies to destroy them. Notwithstanding the offer the Lord made to spare them, if they would repent, and save them from the adversary who sought to destroy them, "They did harden their hearts against the Lord their God."

SCMorm 3 5Morm 3 6Morm 3 7Morm 3 8Morm 3 4Verses 4-8

SCMorm 3 5Morm 3 6Morm 3 7Morm 3 8Morm 3 4The King of the Lamanites in the year 360 after the coming of Christ again declared war. In the year 360 after the coming of Christ, the King of the Lamanites again declared war by sending an epistle to Mormon telling him that they (the Lamanites) were preparing to come to battle against the Nephites. To repel the threatened invasion, the people of Nephi were gathered at the Land of Desolation. There the Lamanites attacked them, were defeated, and returned home. Not content with this repulse, the following year the Lamanites made another inroad into the Northern Country, and were again repulsed with many who were slain. The dead bodies of the slain were cast into the sea.

SCMorm 3 9Morm 3 10Morm 3 11Morm 3 12Morm 3 13Morm 3 14Morm 3 15Morm 3 16Verses 9-16

SCMorm 3 9Morm 3 10Morm 3 11Morm 3 12Morm 3 13Morm 3 14Morm 3 15Morm 3 16The Nephites began to boast in their own strength. The hard hearts of the Nephites, which had become like stone, rejected Mormon's appeals, and unmindful of His help, refused to admit they conquered in the strength of the Lord, but boasted in their own might. Day by day they went their way forgetting His wisdom and guidance. They forgot that their utmost strength when compared to God's was absolute weakness, and their wisdom but foolishness. They had no alliance with a power greater than theirs. In their folly this they would not recognize, but swore "before the Heavens that they would avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren." Not only that, but they called upon God to witness their determination to cut their enemies "off from the face of the land."

SCMorm 3 9Morm 3 10Morm 3 11Morm 3 12Morm 3 13Morm 3 14Morm 3 15Morm 3 16For them to rely upon their own impregnability and ignore His might was repugnant to the Lord's purposes as proclaimed by Mormon. The wickedness and abandonment of the Nephite people were fast reaching their maximum. They sought not the Lord, but repelled His Spirit and knowingly rebelled against His mandates. For this reason, and this reason alone, Mormon refused to longer be their Commander. Here Mormon recalls that in spite of their waywardness, he had led the Nephites many times into battle, and had done so because they were his people, and therefore he had loved them with a fervor almost divine. And in this love he had unceasingly poured out his heart in prayer unto God that He in His might would save them from their own folly. But, Mormon sadly notes that because "of the hardness of their hearts" his petitions did not prevail before Him Who reigns On High. Notwithstanding the fact of which they were aware, that in recent years Mormon had led the Nephite Armies to victory when the Nephites were attacked by the Lamanites, the people nevertheless did not repent of their wickedness. They continued on in their iniquity, and in their unhallowed wrath swore by the Heavens and by the Throne of God in what they thought was their newly found strength that they would persist in battle until the blood of their brethren who had been slain in previous encounters was avenged.

SCMorm 3 9Morm 3 10Morm 3 11Morm 3 12Morm 3 13Morm 3 14Morm 3 15Morm 3 16This was not pleasing unto the Lord Who had commanded that man should not swear by anything. And inasmuch as all thoughts of God had been crowded from their hearts, and no praise or thanksgiving offered Him by the Nephites for their deliverance, His voice came to Mormon: "Vengeance is Mine, and I will repay." It was not for the Nephites to mete out punishment, or to inflict it for past injuries or offenses committed by the Lamanites as the Nephites had sworn to do, but to leave it to God in Heaven Who knoweth the end from the beginning. Evidently, the Lord had become weary of the Nephites' sinful ways,) I am weary with repenting, many times the Lord had thought to destroy the wicked Jews, and just as many times had relented because of the prayers of the righteous, but now their cup of iniquity was full and He refused to alter His decision to destroy them. He would not again change the verdict He had given. Also read Mormon 5:1 where the word repent is used in exactly the same sense.

SCMorm 3 9Morm 3 10Morm 3 11Morm 3 12Morm 3 13Morm 3 14Morm 3 15Morm 3 16The great purpose for which Mormon addressed his exhortation was that all men must "stand before the Judgment-Seat of Christ ... to be judged of your works, whether they be good or evil." (v. 20) To the end that no one shall have an excuse for his actions and thereby be prepared when that time comes, Mormon, with sincere purpose of heart, closes his warning with a prayer: "I would that I could persuade all ye ends of the earth to repent and prepare to stand before the Judgment-Seat of Christ."1 and now His long-suffering was at an end, He said: "They shall be cut off from the face of the earth."

SCMorm 3 17Morm 3 18Morm 3 19Morm 3 20Morm 3 21Morm 3 22Verses 17-22

SCMorm 3 17Morm 3 18Morm 3 19Morm 3 20Morm 3 21Morm 3 22I write unto you, Gentiles ... and unto you, House of Israel ... and also unto the Remnant of this people. Anxious in the work of the Lord, and eager to advance its cause, Mormon never ceased to proclaim its great message. Under every circumstance whatsoever as the opportunity presented, he published the Name of Christ whom he declared to be the very Eternal God. For this cause that the Jews who slew Jesus "Whom they saw and heard," (v. 21) might have another witness of His Godhood, Mormon testified to all the world-knowing that his words shall come to them at some future time-both Gentiles and Jews, and the Tribes of Israel, wherever they may be, that this same Jesus was the Christ Whose coming they awaited, and therefore he admonished all to believe the teachings of Jesus which, he promised "ye shall have among you." (v. 21)
