Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 7

SCMorm 7 1Morm 7 2Verses 1-2

SCMorm 7 1Morm 7 2Know ye not that ye are of the House of Israel. Mormon's great concern now was about the survivors of the battle that had ended so ingloriously for the Nephites. They had lost many thousands of men, not counting women and children, but the Lamanites also had suffered severe losses. Both nations were near equal in strength, man for man. However, the Lamanites were more numerous than were the Nephites, but in spite of their numerical superiority we may assume that their losses were equal in manpower to that of the Nephites. Wickedness had a great accounting that day.

SCMorm 7 1Morm 7 2Many of the Lamanites were Nephite apostates, but nevertheless they were of the House of Israel, and entitled to the blessings of the Covenant God made with Abraham which was repeated to his grandson, Jacob. All true Lamanites, that is, we mean, actual descendants of Laman and Lemuel, were also Israelites, which brings Mormon to express the point: "Know ye that ye are of the House of Israel."

Morm 7 3Verse 3

Morm 7 3Know ye that ye must come unto repentance, or lie ye be saved. Mormon knew of the many faults and iniquities of the Lamanites, for had he not battled against their wicked ways, lo, for many years? Had he not been a preacher of righteousness, as well as military leader? Many times, especially in his younger days, he had called on them to repent, and now, as by inspiration, he wrote to the remnant of those who survived the slaughter of the recent battle that they, too, must repent of the wicked ways into which their fathers had led them, or, he warned, "Ye cannot be saved."

Morm 7 4Verse 4

Morm 7 4Know ye that ye must lay down your weapons of war. Murder and bloodshed, even if it is called war, unless God commands it, is not consistent with the Gospel of Christ. In no way does it find place in the Plan of Salvation. Taking a human life, except by law, is murder, and is the greatest of sins when committed against the light and knowledge of God. (Alma 39:6)

Morm 7 4Mormon's teachings wherein he says that "ye must lay down your weapons of war, and delight no more in the shedding of blood, and take them not again, save it be that God shall command you," are an important part of the Gospel's fulness.

Morm 7 4When the converted Lamanites who took upon themselves the name of their King, Anti-Nephi-Lehi, who also was a convert to the teachings of Christ as announced by the sons of Mosiah, they buried deep in the earth their weapons of war, and covenanted not to again take them up even in defense of their own lives.

Morm 7 4We recommend the reader to peruse most carefully Chapters 24 and 25 of the Book of Alma wherein this doctrine is fully elucidated.

SCMorm 7 6Morm 7 7Morm 7 5Verse 5

SCMorm 7 6Morm 7 7Morm 7 5Ye must believe in Jesus Christ Know that ye must come to the knowledge your fathers once had, "that Jesus is the Christ, that He is the Son of God, and that He was slain by the Jews, and by the power of the Father. He hath risen again, whereby He hath gained the victory over the grave; and also in Him is the sting of death swallowed up.")1 (v. 5)

SCMorm 7 6Morm 7 7Morm 7 5The foregoing is a brief, but consistent statement of Gospel truths. In a concise form, these are the requirements of the Gospel Plan and every believer in the divinity of Christ must have faith that they mare true. Believing so, in him is made manifest the power of God unto Salvation. To Mormon's mind he recalled the history of those times of the Nephites (there were no Lamanites) when the knowledge of God and His marvelous ways was had by even the humblest among the people. He remembered reading the words of Jesus as recorded by Nephi, the Disciple who kept the records: "And now, behold, My joy is great, even unto fulness, because of you, and also this generation; yea, and even the Father rejoiceth, and also all the holy angels, because of you and this generation; for none of them are lost." (III Nephi 27:30) Now, to Mormon, all seemed lost. But he also remembered the promises of the Lord to his fathers that the remnant of this people would some day have the Gospel preached unto them, and they should become a white and a delightsome people. Mormon rejoiced in the promises of the Lord, and the thought that at some future time when righteousness again prevailed, he with them would dwell in the presence of God in His Kingdom, and there sing ceaseless praises with the choirs above,King Benjamin also expresses a desire to be fully prepared to "join the choirs above."

SCMorm 7 6Morm 7 7Morm 7 5Does it seem improbable that there are choirs in the realm inhabited by the Redeemed? The ability to sing and compose music is a divine gift. The very purpose of it is to enable man to praise the Lord and to glorify His name.

SCMorm 7 6Morm 7 7Morm 7 5We know that John the Beloved, on several occasions in his Apocalyptic visions, became aware of singing and music of heavenly origin. (Revelation 5:9; 14:3; 15:3) We also know that at the time of the birth of our Lord, a heavenly host sang praises to God, audible to mortal ear. (Luke 2:13-14)

SCMorm 7 6Morm 7 7Morm 7 5And here, let me, Janne M. Sjodahl (co-author of this commentary), in all humility, place on record that to my own personal knowledge, singing and music were heard in the Manti Temple at the time of its dedication. On two separate occasions I had the privilege of hearing the super-earthly harmonies. The first was just before the beginning of the services on the day I artended. It sounded as a very distant organ music, for a brief moment, as if a door had been suddenly opened, and then almost immediately closed. The second occasion was a few days later, when I was preparing to do some ordinance work for some of my friends on the other side. It sounded as the singing of male voices, also for a brief moment, and came as from far distance. There were other manifestations during those days, never to be forgotten. During the service I noticed that some of the Twelve, notably Elder Heber J. Grant, and also John W. Taylor, were surrounded by rays of light, resembling the colors of a rainbow, only softer.

SCMorm 7 6Morm 7 7Morm 7 5Yes, there are choirs on the other side, and bands, and John describes their performances as "the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder ... and the voice of harpers harping with their harps." (Revelation 14:2)2 unto the Father, and unto the Son, and unto the Holy Ghost, which are one God, in a state of happiness which hath no end." (v. 7)

Morm 7 8Verse 8

Morm 7 8Repent, and be baptized in the Name of Jesus. Mormon, now admonishes all who may at some future time read the words he writes, "to repent, and be baptized in the Name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the Gospel of Christ." Which Gospel shall be made known unto them, he affirms, not only in the records of their fathers that have been kept from generation to generation, but also a record of the Jews that contain these things which shall come unto them through the Gentiles.

Morm 7 9Verse 9

Morm 7 9This is written that ye may believe these things. This verse contains Mormon's appeal to those who should live, when, in the Lord's own due time, He will cause the Records of their forefathers, and the Records of the Jews to come unto them whose father's bodies are now moldering in dust upon the field of battle, and whose time of repentance was procrastinated too long. His desire was to add his own to the testimony of these two records. For, Mormon infers, that if you believe the Gospel as it is made known to you by the Jewish Records which will come to you through the Gentiles, you will believe my words; and further he says that if you believe what is written in the Records of the Jews, you will believe what is written about your forefathers, and will also see wherein the words of Lehi, your venerable ancestor, were indeed true when in past ages they were literally fulfilled in God's wonderful ways among his descendants: "Great and marvelous are Thy works, O Lord God Almighty." (I Nephi 1:14) Mormon here uses other words, but in them expresses the same idea; he says: "Ye will know concerning your fathers, and also the marvelous works which were wrought by the power of God among them." (v. 9)

Morm 7 10Verse 10

Morm 7 10You will also know that ye are a remnant of the Seed of Jacob. With a pride only exceeded by his knowledge of their mutual heritage, Mormon avers that they are of the Seed of Jacob, and as such are numbered among those of the House of Israel. They are by the fact of being such, heirs of the Priesthood, and children-even if they were wayward-of the Most High God. They were entitled to every blessing of righteousness which the Lord, the Mighty Judge, promised, if only they would repent and do no more the things they should not do, and do that which they should do.

Morm 7 10"And if it so be that ye believe in Christ," Mormon tells them in his admonishing them, "and are baptized, first with water, then with fire and with the Holy Ghost, following the example of our Savior, according to that which He hath commanded us, it shall be well with you in the Day of Judgment."
