Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 8

SCMorm 8 1Morm 8 2Verses 1-2

SCMorm 8 1Morm 8 2Behold, I, Moroni, do finish the record of my father, Mormon. Feeling that the Lamanites, who already were in ascendancy of the Nephites, would destroy the records if they fell into their hands, Mormon hid all the plates which contained said records in the Hill Cumorah. He hid all of them except a few which he gave to his son, Moroni, with instructions to engrave thereon certain things the nature of which is evident in the things Moroni thereafter wrote.

SCMorm 8 1Morm 8 2The spite which they had in their hearts for all Nephites, and their intense hatred towards them, were so keen and inexhaustible that the Lamanites, even after their victory at Cumorah, hunted and destroyed those of the Nephites who had escaped into "the country southward."

Morm 8 3Verse 3

Morm 8 3My father also was killed by them. The lonesomeness that filled Moroni's heart was made the more acute by the realization also that the Lamanites had killed his father, Mormon. Through all the vicissitudes of battle and preaching the Gospel, in their anxiety for the safety of each other, Mormon and Moroni had been more than father and son; they had been companions. Now that relationship was broken by Mormon's death, and Moroni was left alone to write "the sad tale of the destruction of my people." To this end and because his father had so commanded, Moroni wrote the bitter story of the extinction of this once divinely favored people.

Morm 8 3Moroni, all his kinsfolk slain by the Lamanites, expected that he himself would, at any moment, be a victim of Lamanitish hatred; not knowing, he says, "whether they will slay me," he takes a collected retrospect of all his past life, and expresses no regrets and offers no apologies, pretexts or excuses, but enters calmly and even joyously upon the prospect of his coming doom and neither flinches nor fears it. He says, "How long the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not."

Morm 8 4Verse 4

Morm 8 4I will write and hide the Records in the earth. Complying with the instructions Moroni had received from his father, he commenced the work of finishing the Record Mormon had made. At length, not only did he consummate the work he had been assigned, but for its safety he decided to hide the Record in the earth.

Morm 8 4In the fifth verse, Moroni notes that his father had included in the Record he was making the intent for which he wrote. (See, Mormon 7:9) If there had been more space upon the Plates to write, Moroni informs us that he, too, would write his own purpose. However, that he was forced to forego. The intent, or purpose of both father and son was that in any future development, their testimony concerning God's wonderful ways in dealing with the former inhabitants of this Promised Land might be made known to some future generations of their descendants. But, he says that he has no "ore" to make additional plates, therefore the intent expressed by Mormon would also give vent to the satisfaction of his own desires.

Morm 8 9Verse 9

Morm 8 9There are none save it be the Lamanites and robbers that do exist upon the face of the land. It was now four hundred years since the birth of the Savior, or the year 401 A.D., that the Lamanites became the complete and sole masters of the Western Hemisphere. They would not let what was left of the people of Nephi rest in the ignominy of defeat, but hunted them down wherever they might be, until all had been found and slain. The wonder of it was that their utter destruction had been brought about by their own iniquity, the Lord using the Lamanites to punish the Nephites for their wickedness.

Morm 8 9The Lamanites, not content with the defeat of the Nephites, began a war among themselves. Their bloodthirstiness, and the love they had for killing, were not gratified in the slaying of their enemies, but that measure of their want was in a way gratified only with them taking the lives of their neighbors. Moroni tells us that "the Lamanites are at war one with another; and the whole face of this land is one continual round of murder and bloodshed; and no one knoweth the end of the war." (v. 8)

Morm 8 9Moroni closes his description of Lamanitish atrocities, because he could find no good to relate of them; noting in doing so that there are none but "the Lamanites and robbers that do exist upon the face of the land."

Morm 8 9When the days of that last fearful struggle were ended, all but twenty-four of the Nephite Race had been, by the hand of violence, swept into untimely graves, save a few, a very few, who had fled into the South Country. The powers, the glories, the beauties of this favored branch of Israel's chosen Tribe had sunk beneath a sea of blood; the Word of God, which they had so long disregarded, was vindicated; the warnings of His servants were fulfilled.

Morm 8 9The Lamanites were now rulers of the Western World, their traditional enemies being utterly destroyed. But they did not cultivate peace; no sooner were the Nephites obliterated, than they commenced fighting among themselves. The lonely Moroni, the last of the Nephites, tells us, 400 A.D. that the Lamanites are at war one with another; and the face of the land is one continual round of murder and bloodshed; and no man knoweth the end of the war. And again, he writes yet later: "Their wars are exceeding fierce among themselves."

Morm 8 9Such was the sad condition of the Lamanite race in the early part of the fifth century after Christ. There the inspired Record closes; henceforth we have nothing but uncertain tradition. The various contending tribes, in their thirst for blood so long slaked, sank deeper and deeper into savage degradation; the arts of civilization were almost entirely lost to the great mass of the people. Decades and centuries passed away, and after a time, in some parts of this chosen land, a better state of things slowly arose. In Central America and Mexico, in Peru and other places, the foundations of new empires were laid, in which were built up gradually civilizations peculiarly their own, but in many ways bearing record to the idiosyncrasies of their ancient predecessors. Of this we have here little to do; many of their traditions (though disregarded by nearly all) bear testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and we have the unequivocal assurance that the words of their ancient prophets recorded therein have been fulfilled to the very letter in their humiliation; and as they have drunk to the dregs from the cup of bitterness of the wrath of God, so is the glorious day now dawning, when the light of the eternal Gospel shall illumine the hearts of their children; fill them with the love of God; renew their ancient faith and steadfastness, and make them the fitting instruments in His hands of accomplishing all His holy purposes with regard to them, in which also shall be fulfilled all the gracious, glorious promises made by Jehovah to this transplanted Branch of the Olive Tree of Israel.

SCMorm 8 11Morm 8 10Verse 10

SCMorm 8 11Morm 8 10There are none that do know the true God save it be the Disciples of Jesus. (See, III Nephi, Chapter 28) The three Disciples of Christ, who, Moroni says, "did tarry in the land until the wickedness of the people was so great that the Lord would not suffer them to remain with the people," alone of all the inhabitants of the land, knew the true God, and he further says: "Whether they be upon the face of the land no man knoweth. But behold, my father and I have seen them, and they have ministered unto us."

Morm 8 12Verse 12

Morm 8 12And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these. (See, Foreword Commentary on the Book of Mormon, Volume VII, The Bible and the Book of Mormon)

SCMorm 8 13Morm 8 14Verse 13-14

SCMorm 8 13Morm 8 14I am the son of Mormon, and my father was a descendant of Nephi. After giving a brief notation of his ancestry, Moroni avers that he it is who "hideth up this Record unto the Lord," meaning that it is hidden up awaiting the purposes of the Almighty which in due time will be made known. The Record, or the Plates upon which the Record is engraven, is of no material value to the holder thereof because the Word of the Lord is to that effect. The gold of which they are made, shall be, in the case of false ownership, counted as dross, as skum from molten ore or metal; waste matter or refuse. But, however, the Record itself is of great worth, and him will the Lord bless whosoever bringeth forth unto man, the knowledge therein impounded.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16Verses 15-16

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16None can have power to bring it to light save it be given unto him of God. The great purpose to which the Record of these ancient people is consecrated, is that it might be, by His holy Spirit, rendered greatest to the glory of God, and most for the welfare of "the ancient and long-dispersed covenant people of the Lord," the House of Israel.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16By the power of God, and none other, this Record shall come unto the knowledge of the people who dwell upon all the earth. That which is hidden shall be made known; it shall be found, and that which is dark shall be made light; as a lamp that was hid in a dark place, it shall shine forth.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16The coming forth of this Record was prophesied of by Lehi when that great leader gave a blessing to his son, Joseph. In words most easily understood, he told Joseph, his son, in speaking of Joseph, who was sold into Egypt:

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"For Joseph truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And I will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work, save the work which I shall command him. And I will make him great in mine eyes; for he shall do my work.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And he shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the land of Egypt.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins-and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants saith the Lord.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O home of Israel, saith the Lord.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And thus prophesied Joseph, saying: Behold, that seer will the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord, of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure of the fulfilling of this promise;

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of the father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"Yea, thus prophesied Joseph: I am sure of this thing, even as I am sure of the promise of Moses; for the Lord hath said unto me, I will preserve thy seed forever." (II Nephi 3:6-16)

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16And the means whereby these Records will be made known to the children of men has been provided by the Lord. The means to this end were told by one Ammon from Zarahemla to King Limhi, in the Land of Nephi, as follows:

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"Now Ammon said unto him: I can assuredly tell thee, O king, of a man that can translate the records; for he has wherewith that he can look, and translate all records that are of ancient date; and it is a gift from God. And the things are called interpreters, and no man can look in them except he be commanded, lest he should look for that he ought not and he should perish. And whosoever is commanded to look in them, the same is called seer.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And behold, the king of the people who are in the land of Zarahemla is the man that is commanded to do these things, and who has this high gift from God.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And the king said that a seer is greater than a prophet.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And Ammon said that a seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"Thus God has provided a means that man, through faith, might work mighty miracles; therefore he becometh a great benefit to his fellow beings." (Mosiah 8: 13-17)

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16The means whereby the knowledge contained in these Records shall be given unto the covenant people of the House of Israel is made mention in that which follows:

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And it came to pass that the Lord said unto the brother of Jared: Behold, thou shalt not suffer these things which ye have seen and heard to go forth unto the world, until the time cometh that I shall glorify my name in the flesh; wherefore, ye shall treasure up the things which ye have seen and heard, and show it to no man.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And behold, when ye shall come unto me, ye shall write them and shall seal them up, that no one can interpret them; for ye shall write them in a language that they cannot be read.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And behold, these two stones will I give unto thee, and ye shall seal them up also with the things which ye shall write.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"For behold, the language which ye shall write I have confounded; wherefore I will cause in my own due time that these stones shall magnify to the eyes of men these things which ye shall write.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And when the Lord had said these words, he showed unto the brother of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"For he had said unto him in times before, that if he would believe in him that he could show unto him all things-it should be shown unto him; therefore the Lord could not withhold anything from him, for he knew that the Lord could show him all things.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And the Lord said unto him: Write these things and seal them up; and I will show them in mine own due time unto the children of men.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And it to pass that the Lord commanded him that he should seal up the two stones which he had received, and show them not, until the Lord should show them unto the children of men. (Ether 3:21-28)

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16The words of Jesus Christ, the Savior of mankind, spoken to the Nephites in the Land Bountiful when He ministered among them thereby confirm the words of his servants:

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And verily I say unto you, I give unto you a sign, that ye may know the time when these things shall be about to take place-that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel, and shall establish again among them my Zion;

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And behold, this is the thing which I will give unto you for a sign-for verily I say unto you that when these things which I declare unto you, and which I shall declare unto you hereafter of myself, and by the power of the Holy Ghost which shalt be given unto you of the Father, shall be made known unto the Gentiles that they may know concerning this people who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, and concerning this my people who shall be scattered by them;

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"Verily, verily, I say unto you, when these things shall be made known unto them of the Father, and shall come forth of the Father, from them unto you;

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"For it is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel;

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"Therefore, when these works and the works which shall be wrought among you hereafter shall come forth from the Gentiles, until your seed which shall dwindle in unbelief because of iniquity;

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"For thus it behooveth the Father that it should come forth from the Gentiles, that he may show forth his power unto the Gentiles, for this cause that the Gentiles, if they will not harden their hearts, that they may repent and come unto me and be baptized in my name and know of the true points of my doctrine, that they may be numbered among my people, O house of Israel;

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these things-it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the people who are of the house of Israel.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16And when that day shall come, it shall come to pass that king shall shut their mouths; for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"For in that day, for my sake shall the Father work a work, which shall be a great and a marvelous work among them; and there shall be among them those who will not believe it, although a man shall declare it unto them.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"But behold, the life of my servant shall be in my hand; therefore they shall not hurt him, although he shall be marred because of them. Yet I will heal him, for I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil.

SCMorm 8 15Morm 8 16"Therefore it shall come to pass that whosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant." (III Nephi 21:8-11)

Morm 8 17Verse 17

Morm 8 17If there be faults they be the faults of men. (See Inspired Preface of the Book of Mormon; also Foreword, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, Volume VII, The Finger of God)

Morm 8 18Verse 18

Morm 8 18Show unto me, or ye shall be smitten. Many there were who said to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "Show unto me, or ye shall be smitten," demanding thereby to see the Gold Plates themselves from which God's Prophet, the promised Seer, translated the ancient Record. They threatened the Prophet, abused and sought to intimidate him that by any chance they might force him to show unto them the Plates. By them he was "smitten." He was arrested, tried, beaten, scourged, imprisoned; he was brought before their courts and accused of false crimes by witnesses suborned for that purpose. They imagined in their hearts that to destroy the Prophet, would be to get rid of the very idea of Mormonism. To this end they lost no time, nor left a thing undone. In consequence, the Prophet died as a Martyr. He sealed his testimony with his own blood. "Now," they said, "Mormonism must surely die." They thought that the heart-beats in the Prophet's breast, were the great heart-throbs of Mormonism. But in this they were mistaken! Mormonism is immortal. The Sacred Record is immortal. It will live on forever, because it has God for its author, Omnipotence for its Shield, and Eternity for its glorious life. Thanks, be to God, it like the Bible, will go on and on, to help the helpless and those who have no other helper but the Lord.

Morm 8 18The Prophet's enemies, as we have said, threatened him that if he did not show the Plates unto them, they would "smite" him; nevertheless, and in spite of their openly expressed intentions to inflict evil upon him, he remained firm in not doing that which the Lord had forbidden. (v. 18)

SCMorm 8 19Morm 8 20Verses 19-20

SCMorm 8 19Morm 8 20Man shall not smite, neither shall he Judge. It takes one higher than you or me to be a judge. We, being mortals, sometimes allow passion and prejudice to pronounce the opinions and judgments of our consciences. Therefore is the commandment given, "Thou shalt not judge." When it matters most, there will be but one Judge Who will preside in that court of righteous and holy decisions at the Last Day. The verdict of that tribunal will be final. Its findings of fact cannot be appealed. It will, nevertheless, judge justly, and its decisions will be according to mercy and truth.

SCMorm 8 19Morm 8 20Moroni cautions us not to judge imprudently, or as he says, "rashly," meaning thereby, not to be over-hasty, or false to ourselves in making our decisions. Therefore, if our decisions are not according to justice, we can expect that measure to be given us in return. "For according to his works shall his wages be." (v. 19) Moroni, in great regard for that eternal truth, reminds us, "He that smiteth shall be smitten again, of the Lord." Those who rashly judged the Prophet Joseph Smith to be a pious fraud and one worthy of death, were themselves smitten of the Lord.

SCMorm 8 19Morm 8 20We are reminded of a comment we made when studying IV Nephi, 34th verse; it concerns the Nephites in the days of Amos. The wicked, it appears, reviled at the righteous because of their righteousness, and the wrong-doer, they held in repute. The Sacred Record says, "And they did smite upon the people of Jesus." But, however, the righteous did not revile at the reviler, nor did they smite the smiter. They bore all these things with courage and fortitude, remembering the pains of their Redeemer.

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22Verses 21-22

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22He that shall breathe out wrath and strifes against the Work of the Lord...is in danger to be hewn down and cast into the fire. In the annals of the Germanic peoples, especially the Scandinavians of Northern Europe, and the Anglo-Saxon tribes that invaded England in the 5th and 6th Centuries, together with native and Danish elements, all of which intermingled and formed one great race, we can see the Finger of God in the incidents of their lives that thereafter developed.

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22In no place in history is it more clearly to be seen than here, that the work of the Lord is progressing in all parts of the earth. And in it we may behold that what we sometimes call accidents, are really not so. But, we conclude, that in all righteous nations the incidents of their history are the inspirations of God, and the so-called accidents therein are the leadings and guidings of Him Who caused their foundations to be laid.

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22It is certain that many of the people above mentioned are of Israel, the Covenant People of the Lord.

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22There is another race of God's children which some delight to imprecate, and to say of them all manner of evil. These are the descendants of Judah, the son of Jacob and the great grandson of Abraham.

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22The Jews, although they have gone astray, and no longer remember the Covenant their fathers made with God at Sinai, are still His chosen people, and as such have been given a mighty work to perform to the honor and glory of God. They have already paid heavily for their errors, and are still paying, but notwithstanding the trials and the humiliation that have been for over two thousand years, heaped upon them by their neighbors, they will fulfil every word spoken by their holy prophets. Instead of their homeland being a dry and unyielding place where only jackals roam; a land of poverty and suffering, the Land of their Inheritance shall again "be as a watered garden, and they will sorrow no more." Prophesying of this time when Judah, which is now scattered abroad throughout the whole earth, shall return to its native home, the Land of Jerusalem, Jeremiah, one of its great prophets, says: "Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, 'He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd does his flock. For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. Therefore they shall come in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the flock and the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all...for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow...!" (Jeremiah 31:10-13)

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22The abridger of the Larger Plates of Nephi, Mormon, also prophesied of these times. He says: "And as surely as the Lord liveth, will He gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the Remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth. And as He hath covenanted with all the House of Jacob, even so shall the covenant wherewith He hath covenanted with the House of Jacob be fulfilled in His Own due time, unto the restoring all the House of Jacob unto the knowledge of the Covenant that He hath covenanted with them. And then shall they know their Redeemer, Who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they had been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be." (III Nephi 5:24-26)

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22The angel who accompanied Nephi in his vision of events that would thereafter transpire, and explained to him the meaning thereof, spake to Nephi concerning certain records which Nephi saw, and of them, the angel said: 'These last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles,' meaning the Book of Mormon, 'shall establish the truth of the first,' which is the Bible...'and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto Him, or they cannot be saved.'" (1 Nephi 13:40)

SCMorm 8 21Morm 8 22To cry this truth to Jew and Gentile is our work which is also the Lord's work, and let us beware that in any thought or action, we do not attempt to sabotage His work by decrying and denying the Jews. No power on earth, or in hell, can destroy His work, or cause Him to forget the Covenant which He made with the House of Israel. "For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all His promises shall be fulfilled."

SCMorm 8 23Morm 8 24Verses 23-24

SCMorm 8 23Morm 8 24Those Saints who have possessed this land, shall cry, yea, even from the dust will they cry unto the Lord. The prophecies of Isaiah tell of this thing; Moroni would have written them, but he had no space upon the Plates wherein to write. But Moroni points out that the cries of the Saints "who have possessed this land" in the ages that are gone, have been "unto the Lord," that He will not forget their brethren who may stray, and in His mercy "remember the Covenant which He hath made with them."

SCMorm 8 23Morm 8 24In the last verse of the last chapter of the Book of Mormon (9:37) in which Moroni fulfilled a solemn compact he had made with his father that he would finish writing the history of their people, Moroni notes that the cries of his people unto the Lord "are according to the prayers of all the Saints who have dwelt in the land." That their brethren who had "dwindled in unbelief" would some day have the Gospel of Christ preached unto them, and again have restored to them the knowledge of Christ that their fathers had, was the earnest supplication of their sires who had gone on before.)1

SCMorm 8 25Morm 8 26Verses 25-26

SCMorm 8 25Morm 8 26Their prayers were also in behalf of him that the Lord should suffer to bring forth these things. The Lord having promised their fathers that the record of the Nephites should come forth to those who did survive among their Remnant, it was an almost constant prayer with them that God's servant who was to be the instrument in His hands to bring these Records forth, should be made strong and firm, and in every way be blessed that he may accomplish God's purpose in bringing them out of darkness into the light.

SCMorm 8 25Morm 8 26To one who doubted these things, Moroni became emphatic. "The Lord hath spoken it," and for that reason, no one need say, "They shall not." "Out of the earth shall they come, by the hand of the Lord, and none can stay it,")2 was his further elaboration.

SCMorm 8 27Morm 8 28Morm 8 29Morm 8 30Morm 8 31Morm 8 32Verses 27-32

SCMorm 8 27Morm 8 28Morm 8 29Morm 8 30Morm 8 31Morm 8 32It shall come in a day when it shall be said that miracles are done away. In that day when miracles no longer "shall follow them that believe," and sham and deceit shall take their place, these things shall be heard as one from the dead. The world conditions that shall mark that time are occasions that bring fear and trembling. They fathom the depths into which men plunge in following after the pseudo-joys and follies of the world. Even in the church that men build up, pride and vanity will usurp the place of humility and meekness. Secret combinations shall shed the blood of the innocent, and the guilty shall devour the guiltless. Crime, degradation, and filth, shall pollute the earth, and waters from the stinking springs of iniquity shall cover the earth, deep as an ocean, with their impurities. Not only that, but many shall seek to excuse their iniquity by lying and deceiving, and all manner of abominations. In their wickedness they shall say, "Do this, or do that, it mattereth not, for when overtaken by the Lord's own, He will excuse a little folly and uphold us at the last day." O, how mistaken they will be. Their pretexts and their excuses therefore will find them in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity. At the last day they will be the slaves of passion, the victims of corruption.

Morm 8 33Verse 33

Morm 8 33O ye wicked...and stiffnecked people. Moroni, who was greatly imbued with the spirit of righteousness could not understand the ways of wickedness. He could not comprehend why man should choose to do evil when the good is placed before him. Man, he knew, was endowed with reason to distinguish between right and wrong, with freedom to choose between good and evil. He, no doubt, thought of the wonders of creation. How that the eyes of man had, by the grace of Him Who created all things, been opened to the beauties round about him. But nevertheless and notwithstanding the glory of God therein seen, he pondered, Why does man seek the things of the world that pass swiftly by, and not the Lord Who is always near to the hearts of the lowly? We remember here the prayer of King David which we find in the 119 Psalm, verses 33-40. We hereby give the Jewish translation. (Union Prayer Book) In spite of his vision of things to come in the Last Days, it expresses the hope that Moroni had concerning these times. "Teach me, O Lord, the way of Thy statutes and I will keep it at every step. Give me understanding that I keep Thy law and observe it with my whole heart. Make me tread in the path of Thy commandments; for there in do I delight. Incline my heart unto Thine testimonies and not to covetousness. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken me in Thy ways. Confirm unto Thy servant Thy Word, which pertaineth unto the fear of Thee. Turn away my reproach which I dread, for Thine ordinances are good. Behold, I have longed after Thy precepts; quicken me in Thy righteousness."

Morm 8 33"O ye wicked and perverse and stiffnecked people, why have ye built up churches unto yourselves to get gain?" Moroni queried. Why have ye perverted God's holy word, and twisted and turned it to make it appear that therein your souls are damned? "Behold," he said, "look ye into the revelations of God;)4 for behold, the time cometh at that day when all these things must be fulfilled." (v. 23)

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40Verses 34-40

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40The Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you. The Lord showed unto Moroni, as He had shown others of His servants, a panoramic picture of His children down to the Last Days. Great and marvelous were the things Moroni saw. All of which, Moroni indirectly intimated, "shall come forth among you" before that great and last day. Although many generations separate our times, he noted, "I," nevertheless, "speak unto you as if ye were present," for I know your faults, and your failings, and your subversions. That in His mercy, the Lord, he said, for a wise purpose, has shown you unto me that I may warn you of these things which are to come, and that seeing the errors of your ways, you may repent before it is everlastingly too late. We conceive these and other thoughts crowded each other through his mind as Moroni contemplated the scenes of his vision that passed before his astonished eyes.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40May we here add what we consider the best comment on the next few verses. It is part of what Nephi, the son of Lehi who was the learned ancestor of the Nephites and the Lamanites, predicted would come to pass in the latter days:

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"And now, behold, my brethren, I have spoken unto you, according as the Spirit hath constrained me; wherefore, I know that they must surely come to pass.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"The things which shall be written out of the book shall be of great worth unto the children of men, especially unto our seed, which is a remnant of the house of Israel.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"For it shall come to pass in that day that the churches which are built up, and not unto the Lord, when the one shall say unto the other: Behold, I, I am the Lord's; and the other shall say: I, I am the Lord's; and thus shall every one say that hath built up churches, and not unto the Lord-

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"And they shall contend one with another; and their priests shall contend one with another, and they shall teach with their learning, and deny the Holy Ghost, which giveth utterance.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"And they deny the power of God, the Holy One of Israel; and they say unto the people: Hearken unto us, and hear ye our precept; for behold there is no God today, for the Lord and the Redeemer hath done his work, and he hath given his power unto men;

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Behold, hearken ye unto my precept; if they shall say there is a miracle wrought by the hand of the Lord, believe it not; for this day he is not a God of miracles; he hath done his work.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Yea, and there shall be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die; and it shall be well with us.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God-he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts, and shall seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark. "And the blood of the saints shall cry from the ground against them. "Yea, they have all gone out of the way; they have become corrupted.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Because of pride, and because of false teachers, and false doctrine, their churches have become corrupted, and their churches are lifted up; because of pride they are puffed up.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"They rob the poor because of their fine sanctuaries; they rob the poor because of their fine clothing; and they persecute the meek and the poor in heart, because in their pride they are puffed up.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"They wear stiff necks and high heads; yea, and because of pride, and wickedness, and abominations, and whoredoms, they have all gone astray save it be a few, who are the humble followers of Christ; nevertheless, they are led, that in many instances they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"O the wise, and the learned, and the rich, that are puffed up in the pride of their hearts, and all those who preach false doctrine, and all those who commit whoredoms, and pervert the right way of the Lord, wo, wo, wo be unto them, saith the Lord God Almighty, for they shall be thrust down to hell!

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Wo unto them that turn aside the just for a thing of naught and revile against that which is good, and say that is of no worth! For the day shall come that the Lord God will speedily visit the inhabitants of the earth; and in that day that they are fully ripe in iniquity they shall perish.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"But behold, if the inhabitants of the earth shall repent of their wickedness and abominations they shall not be destroyed, saith the Lord of Hosts.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"But behold, that great and abominable church, the whore of all the earth, must tumble to the earth, and great must be the fall thereof.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"For the kingdom of the devil must shake, and they which belong to it must needs be stirred up unto repentance, or the devil will grasp them with his everlasting chains, and they be stirred up to anger, and perish;

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"For behold, at that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is flood.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion: yea, Zion prospereth, all is well-and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell: and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none-and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Yea they are grasped with death, and hell; and death, and hell, and the devil, and all that have been seized therewith must stand before the throne of God, and be judged according to their works, from whence they must go unto the place prepared for them, even a lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment. "Therefore, wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion! "Wo be unto him that crieth: All is well!

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Yea, wo be unto him that hearkeneth unto the precepts of men, and denieth the power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost!

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Yea, wo be unto him that saith: We have received, and we need no more! "And in fine, wo unto all those who tremble, and are angry because of the truth of God! For behold, he that is built upon the rock receiveth it with gladness; and he that is built upon a sandy foundation trembleth lest he shall fall.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need mo more of the word of God, for we have enough!

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken even that which they have.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost.

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40"Wo be unto the Gentiles, saith the Lord God of Hosts! For notwithstanding I shall length out mine arm unto them from day to day, they will deny me; nevertheless,

SCMorm 8 34Morm 8 35Morm 8 36Morm 8 37Morm 8 38Morm 8 39Morm 8 40I will be merciful unto them, saith the Lord God, if they will repent and come unto me; for mine arm is lengthened out all the day long, saith the Lord God of Hosts." (II Nephi, Chapter 28)

Morm 8 41Verse 41

Morm 8 41Behold, the sword of vengeance hangeth over you. The Sword of Vengeance spoken of here is a mighty weapon. In the hands of the Lord, it is terrible. It hangeth heavily over the doers of iniquity. It was forged in the fires of righteousness because of wickedness. Its keen blade and sharp point pierce to the inmost parts. The Wielder of that Sword is the King of all the Earth. He uses it against the devil to protect His Majesty, and to prepare a path before His people, unto whom He says: Seek not vengeance to recompense evil by doing evil; seek not to destroy that which ye cannot build; seek not to take that which ye cannot give. "Vengeance is mine, and I will repay.")5

Morm 8 41"O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker...why are you ashamed to take upon you the Name of Christ?...Yea, why do ye build up your secret abominations to get gain, and cause that widows should mourn before the Lord, and also orphans to mourn before the Lord, and also the blood of their fathers and their husbands to cry unto the Lord from the ground, for vengeance upon your heads? Behold, the Sword of Vengeance hangeth over you; and the time soon cometh that He avengeth the blood of the Saints upon you, for He will not suffer their cries any longer."
