Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 9

Morm 9 1Verse 1

Morm 9 1I speak also concerning those who do not believe. Moroni left off admonishing the perverse and stiffnecked people whom he had seen in his vision, those people whose wickedness was a will to do iniquity, and plead with those of whom it has been said that there are none so deaf as those who will not hear, and none so blind as those who will not see. At this point, we imagine Moroni saying, "Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see." (Isaiah 42:18)

Morm 9 2Verse 2

Morm 9 2Then will ye say that there is no God. Will you who do not believe in Christ remain in your unbelief until the earth shall mourn and fade away "and the haughty people of the earth do languish?" (See, Ibid., 24:4) Will you persist in your unbelief until the things of which I have spoken shall be visited upon you? "Yea," said Moroni, "in that great Day when ye shall be brought to stand before the Lamb of God-then will ye say that there is no God?

Morm 9 3Verse 3

Morm 9 3Do you suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that Holy Being? At that Day when you are brought before Him to be judged for your works on earth, whether they have been good or evil; and with your own eyes behold the Lamb of God, will ye still insist that He is not? Can you gainsay the fact that He presides over that august body there assembled? And therein reject Him. In that great Day, when the glorious splendor of His presence and of His Majesty shall illumine both the Heavens and the Earth, when they shall be rolled up as a scroll I, what will it profit you when the Heavens and the Earth shall pass away if you do not know that bright and morning Star which is the Sun of Righteousness? Do you imagine that in the consciousness of your guilt you would be happy "to dwell with that Holy Being?" Moroni, no doubt, remembered reading from the Brass Plates of Laban, "Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the uprightly in heart." (Psalm 97:11) Neither light nor gladness will be your portion "when your souls are racked" with an awareness of a life of sin while on Earth. Do not longer delay your belief in Christ, but put on His armor and be prepared for that Day. In the anxiety of his heart, Moroni made such an appeal to those who give little time or thought to the welfare of their souls.

Morm 9 4Verse 4

Morm 9 4Ye would be more miserable.... Knowing that sin has defiled your body, and corruption your mind; conscious that pride and deceit has made you filthy in His sight, "Ye," Moroni said, "Would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God...than ye would to dwell with damned souls in hell."

Morm 9 5Verse 5

Morm 9 5It will kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you. At that Day when you stand before the judgment-Seat of Christ, and you can find nothing to hide under; stripped of all pretense and hypocrisy; left alone to ponder; when you see God's glory, and the holiness of Jesus Christ, and be cognizant that you could have been a partaker therein if only you had followed Him, the loss you see you have sustained, will "kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you."

Morm 9 6Verse 6

Morm 9 6O then ye unbelieving, turn ye unto the Lord. O then that you may thwart the designs of the devil, "turn ye unto the Lord"; forsake the ways of Satan. Pray earnestly to the Father in the Name of His Son, Jesus, for light that you may see the right way and for strength that you may continue therein, that in the end at that great Day "ye may be found spotless, pure, fair, and white, having been cleansed by the blood of the Lamb." Moroni invited all to prepare for that Day.

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10Verses 7-10

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10I speak, also, unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away. In this day when any excuse is sufficient, and any pretext is enough to deceive those that would believe in the Lamb, it is not surprising to find many who say that the Gifts of the Spirit no longer follow, as was promised, them that believe. Parallels in belief between the Nephite Church of God, the worship of the ancient Saints in Jerusalem, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints can be found in the history of each. The Savior, when giving His charge to the Twelve Nephite Disciples, said, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned; And these signs shall follow them that believe-in My Name shall they east out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover; And whosoever shall believe in My Name, doubting nothing, unto him will I confirm all My words, even unto the ends of the Earth." (Mormon 9:22-25)

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10Moroni, treating on the same subject, states:

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"Ye may know that He is, by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore I would exhort you that ye deny not the power of God; for He worketh by power, according to the faith of the children of men, the same today and tomorrow, and forever.

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"And again, I exhort you, my brethren, that ye deny not the gifts of God, for they are many; and they come from the same God. And there are different ways that these gifts are administered; but it is the same God who worketh all in all; and they are given by the manifestations of the Spirit of God unto men, to profit them.

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"For behold, to one is given by the Spirit of God, that he may teach the word of wisdom;

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"And to another, that he may teach the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"And to another, exceeding great faith; and to another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"And again, to another, that he may work mighty miracles;

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"And again, to another, that he may prophesy concerning all things; "And again, to another, the beholding of angels and ministering spirits; "And again, to another, all kinds of tongues;

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"And again, to another, the interpretation of languages and of divers kinds of tongues.

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"And all these gifts come by the Spirit of Christ; and they come unto every man severely, according as He will.

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10"And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that every good gift cometh of Christ.

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that He is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and that all these gifts of which I have spoken, which are spiritual, never will be done away, even as long as the world shall stand, only according to the unbelief of the children of men (Moroni 10:7-19)

SCMorm 9 7Morm 9 8Morm 9 9Morm 9 10This is a full and complete answer to those who contend that there are no more revelations given of God, "nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues."

Morm 9 8Verse 8

Morm 9 8He that denieth these things knoweth not the Gospel of Christ. To deny that these Gifts of the Spirit do exist in the Church of Christ, is to admit that we are destitute of understanding, and that even if we have read the Scriptures we do not apprehend their meaning. That statement, Moroni wrote for us as well as to the Remnant of his brethren. He saw a further decline in belief in Christ, and God Who doeth all things according to men's faith, offers these Gifts only to those whose faith is evidenced by their keeping His commandments. It is well to remember that by our actions, we prove our belief in the truth of the things we proclaim.

Morm 9 9Verse 9

Morm 9 9Do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever? (See Moroni 10:19)

Morm 9 10Verse 10

Morm 9 10Have ye imagined up unto yourselves a god who is not a God of miracles. The Gifts of the Spirit are themselves indeed miracles. The Book of Mormon teaches in very strong language that God is a God of miracles. Were it not so, He would cease to be an unchangeable Being. He would be a partial God, blessing one people more than another; but in Him, Moroni lays considerable stress "there is no variableness neither shadow of changing." Moroni warns against letting our imaginations conjure up a god who is not a God of miracles.

Morm 9 11Verse 11

Morm 9 11I will show unto you a God of miracles. To witness that He who Moroni proclaims is a God of miracles, Moroni calls upon all Creation to attest that truth. He himself bears testimony that he speaks of "the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; that same God," he noted, "who created the Heavens and the Earth, and all things that in them are." Moroni thought of other words of King David than those above already noted: "O Lord, our God, how glorious is Thy Name in all the Earth, whose majesty is rehearsed above the Heavens. When I behold Thy Heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the Moon and the stars which Thou hast established; what is man, that Thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that Thou thinkest of him?...O Lord, our God, how glorious is Thy Name in all the Earth. (Psalm 8; Jewish Rendition)

SCMorm 9 12Morm 9 13Morm 9 14Verses 12-14

SCMorm 9 12Morm 9 13Morm 9 14Behold, He created Adam. The entire Plan of Salvation was offered by Moroni as further proof that the God of Whom he spoke was One of miracles. (A miracle, we may understand to be an event or its effect in the physical world deviating from the known laws of nature, or transcending our knowledge of these laws; an extraordinary event brought about by superhuman agency; Mary Baker Eddy, of Christian Science fame, calls a miracle, something that is divinely natural, but must be learned humanly.)

SCMorm 9 12Morm 9 13Morm 9 14Moroni then introduces Adam, the first man who God created in His own image. Adam sinned and brought death and sorrow onto the Earth which had been created by God for the benefit and blessing of mankind. Adam bequeathed to his offspring his legacy of sin. As a result, God the loving Father of all men, Who Himself is sinless, was separated from His children who as we have noted, were carnal, and who had become sinful and sensual in their fallen state. A redemption from the effects of Adam's Fall must be made that again man and his Father may be united. That Redemption, Moroni points out, came about by the Sacrifice Christ made that man might live, and therein brought back into the presence of God, his Father.

SCMorm 9 12Morm 9 13Morm 9 14Through the Redemption of all mankind came man's deliverance from an endless sleep which is the grave. When Moroni's father, who was the Prophet Mormon, engraved an address to the Lamanites who survived the Battle of Cumorah, he said-and his words are particularly important here-"Know ye that ye must come to the knowledge of your fathers, and repent of all your sins and iniquities, and believe in Jesus Christ, that He is the Son of God, and that He was slain by the Jews, and by the power of the Father He hath risen again, whereby He hath gained the victory over the grave; and also in Him is the sting of death swallowed up." (Mormon 7:5)

SCMorm 9 12Morm 9 13Morm 9 14Now that man has been Redeemed from death and the grave by the Sacrifice made by Christ, man is held responsible for his actions here upon the Earth, whether they have been good or whether they have been bad. If he has not repented of sin and still remains in his guilt, he will still be filthy, or unclean, but the righteous shall be happy because of their righteousness, and will go on forever being happy and righteous in that they delight in keeping the commandments of God. That is wisdom. "Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding." (Job 28:28) The wise old Jewish King, Solomon, gave his experience in these beautiful and never-to-be-forgotten words: "Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding." (Proverbs 3:13) We can easily see the truth of Moroni's assertion "he that is happy shall be happy still..." (v. 14) Therefore, "Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not upon thine own understanding." (Proverbs 3:5) Let the words of Peter forever be in our minds: "If ye suffer for righteousness' sake, happy are you." (1 Peter 3:14)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19Verses 15-19

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19Are not the things God hath wrought marvelous in your eyes? Again, we are reminded of the words of Lehi, when that holy man, in vision, saw many wonderful things concerning the purposes of the Lord and therein rejoiced, he exclaimed: "Great and marvelous are Thy works, O Lord God Almighty!" (! Nephi 1:14) To the minds of mortals, the marvelous works of the Lord are incomprehensible; to us they are inscrutable. Except through revelation (See, v. 7) they cannot be found out. The revealed word of God is a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our path, (See, Psalm 119:105) and here we remember the words of Isaiah: "Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of His servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God." (Isaiah 50:10)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19Moroni now sums up the proofs which he has thus far brought to bear upon his contention that God is a God of miracles. To those who contend the opposite that God can do no miracles, he asks: "Have all these things passed, of which I have spoken? Has the end come yet? Moroni answers his own question: "Nay; and God has not ceased to be a God of miracles?" (v. 15)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19The Creation of the Heavens and the Earth was in Moroni's mind, a great miracle, as also that by God's holy Word, man was created of the dust of the Earth. Not only that, but by the power of His Word have His servants, in the Name of Christ, wrought many mighty miracles.

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19All the works of the Lord are miracles. Listen to the wisdom of the ancient Hebrews; therein is the word of Moroni verified:

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"How manifold are Thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast Thou made them all; the Earth is full of the riches of Thy bounty." (Psalm 104:24)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"From the rising of .the Sun to the going down thereof, we will praise Thy holy Name." (See, Psalm 50:1)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"The Heavens are the Lord's, the Earth also and all that is therein." Expressed somewhat differently:

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"The Heavens are Thine, the Earth also is Thine: as for the world and the fulness thereof, Thou hast rounded them." (Psalm 89:11)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"He made great lights, the Sun to rule the day, the Moon and stars to rule by night." (See, Psalm 136:7)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"He commanded and they were created, He gave a law they cannot Transgress.

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"He covereth the heaven with clouds, and prepareth rain for the earth. He causeth the grass to spring up for the cattle, and herb for the service of man.

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"God ruleth the proud swelling of the sea; when the waves thereof arise, He stilleth them.

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"The everlasting God hath laid the foundations of the earth; He hath placed the cornerstone thereof.

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"The Creator of the Earth fainteth not, neither is He weary; His discernment is past finding out.

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"The way of the Lord is perfect, His word is tried, and His counsels stand forever.

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19"The Lord liveth. Exalted be the God of my Salvation." (Jewish Union Prayer Book)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19The wisdom of the Jews lies in knowing the Only True and Living God, the God of their fathers; while by the wisdom of the Gentiles, Paul says, "The world...knew not God." (1 Corinthians 21)

SCMorm 9 15Morm 9 16Morm 9 17Morm 9 18Morm 9 19May we, in all humility, quote the 111th Psalm as it is by the Jews: "I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart, in the council of the upright, and in the congregation. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have delight therein. His work is glory and majesty, and His righteousness endureth forever. He hath made a memorial for His wonderful works; the Lord is gracious and full of compassion. He hath given food unto them that fear Him; He will be mindful of His Covenant. He hath declared to His people the great power of His works, in giving to them the heritage of the nations. The works of His hands are truth and justice; all His precepts are sure. They are established forever and ever, they are done in truth and righteousness. He hath sent Redemption unto His people; He hath commanded His Covenant forever; holy and awful is His Name. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do thereafter; His praise endureth forever."

Morm 9 20Verse 20

Morm 9 20The reason why God has ceased to do miracles. Because unbelievers have no faith, and even many of those who believe have little, "God can do no miracle among them." (Moroni, Ether 12:12) "Yea, and even all they who wrought miracles wrought them by faith, even those who were before Christ and also those who were after." (Ibid., 16)

Morm 9 20It is the case with many of us, we go our way, day-by-day, forgetting His wisdom and guidance. The task and trials of life absorbs us, and crowd all thoughts of God from our hearts. In that condition of mind, we reject even His great Name; we "know not the God in whom" we "should trust." To eyes that are blind and hearts that are hardened to the word of the Lord, that He can do no miracle among them, again may we offer one of King David's Psalms, also a Jewish rendition; it awakens in nearly every one a sense of remorse when they think of these last words of Moroni, "They know not the God in Whom they should trust. Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness, Thou Who didst set me free when I was in distress; be gracious unto me, and hear my prayer. O ye sons of men, how long shall My glory be put to shame, in that ye love vanity and seek after falsehood? But know that the Lord hath set apart the godly man as His own; the Lord will hear when I call unto Him. Tremble, and sin not; commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord. Many are they who say: O that we could see some good! Lord, lift Thou up the light of Thy countenance upon us. Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than their corn and their wine increase. In peace will I both lay me down and sleep; for Thou, Lord, makest me dwell alone in safety." (Psalm 4)

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Verse 32-33

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33We have written this Record in the Characters called among us the Reformed Egyptian. Near what he thought was to be the close of the Record of his people, an abridgment of which his father had made from the Larger Plates of Nephi, and which Moroni himself had completed, together with the personal writings of his father, Mormon, and himself, Moroni informs us that they had written them according to their own knowledge and the knowledge they had gleaned from the study of their ancestors as it was written upon the Larger Plates.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Also, he tells us that the writings of both him and his father were made in certain characters known to them as the "reformed Egyptian." Moroni notes that in the thousand years which had elapsed between his own and the time of their fathers when they left Jerusalem for the Promised Land, many changes had been made in their manner of speech, therefore, they had altered the characters so that in them they better could express their thoughts.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Again, Moroni tells us that if they could have written in Hebrew they would have done so. But this they could not do because the plates upon which they engraved the Record were insufficiently large to contain the necessary Hebrew Characters. However, he says that the Hebrew also was modified, or made different without changing its meaning into something else. Moroni here expresses, we imagine, a regret that they had not written in Hebrew, because the imperfections in the Record for which he apologizes (See, v. 31) would then not have existed.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Questions concerning the writing upon the Plates, their number, and also the weight thereof, are repeatedly projected both by believers in the divine origin of the Sacred Record, and by unfriendly critics. There are, as far as we know, no data from which to calculate, with accuracy, any answers thereto.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33That we may not be considered negligent in not discussing these questions in point, we hereby reproduce a portion of what we, after careful study, caused to be printed in the Second Volume of this work. (Commentary on the Book of Mormon, Volume II, p. 308ff)

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33The Reverend Mr. M. T. Lamb's Objections. The Reverend Mr. M. T. Lamb who, in 1886 or 1887, favored the Saints in Utah, with a series of lectures against the sacred volume, and was courteously tendered the use of ward houses for that purpose, told us that the 563 pages of the Liverpool text, would have required at least an equal number of plates. Consequently, he said there were on the most liberal estimate possible, enough plates only for from one-third to one-eighth of the text, as printed in the edition then in common use. He arrived at this conclusion by accepting the dimensions of the plates as 7 x 8 inches, and the thickness of the volume as four inches. But the Prophet, he said, did not translate more than one-third of the two hundred which he allowed for the plates at fifty per inch; that is to say, sixty-six or sixty-seven plates, and Joseph Smith could not have obtained the entire book as we have it from such a small number of plates.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Others have asserted that if the Prophet Joseph Smith had a sufficient number of gold plates to contain the entire text of the Book of Mormon, they would have been too heavy to handle as a book. They would have weighed 500 pounds or more.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33By such statements the critics have hoped to break the "Mormon" pitcher at the threshold, as the Greek saying is. If they could make it appear that the Prophet could not have had a sufficient number of plates; or, if he had, that he could not have lifted them, they felt thereby they could remove the entire foundation of the Church, and have nothing more to discuss. It is therefore, interesting to consider just what data is available, and what conclusions may be drawn from them.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33No Definite Data now on Hand. It should be noted, however, that the Prophet Joseph does not enlighten us on the number or weight of the plates, any more than Moses does on the size and avoirdupois of the tables on which the Lord engraved the Law. It should also be remembered that the particulars furnished by eyewitnesses were given many years after they had seen the plates, in answer to questions pressed upon them in the course of what amounted almost to cross examination. They gave, therefore, their individual estimates and nothing more.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Suppose, for the sake of illustration, that two or more men should be examined on the dimensions of a book-say Webster's Dictionary-twenty years after they had seen it. What would their answers be, provided there was no collusion between them? They would call up from the depths of their minds the images produced there many years ago and then each would give his own estimate, as best he could.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33We remember an occasion on which some students were together, and the question of estimating dimensions came up. A "stovepipe hat" was placed in the middle of the floor, where there was no object close to it to compare it with, and the question was asked, "What is the height of the hat?" The estimates, quickly made, varied and ranged all the way from four to ten inches. The actual height, we believe, was five-and-a-half inches. We dare say a carpenters or any other mechanic, would have come closer to the right figure, when the object was before him, but what would be his estimate many years afterward? Probably it would have been more or less than the actual figure, but that would not affect his credibility as a witness to the fact that he had actually seen and handled the object in question. Size of the Plates. The Prophet Joseph Smith gave the size as six-by-eight inches. David Whitmer, in an interview in the Kansas City Journal, said of the plates, shortly before his death: "They appeared to be of gold, about six by nine inches in size, about as thick as parchment, a great many in number and bound together like the leaves of a book by massive rings passing through the edge."

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Martin Harris, according to Myth of the Manuscript Found3 estimated the plates at eight-by-seven inches and the thickness of a volume of four inches, each plate being as thick as thick tin.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Orson Pratt had not seen the plates, himself, but his intimacy with the Prophet and the eyewitnesses lend some weight to his words. He tells us that the plates were eight-by-seven inches, while each plate was about as thick as common tin, and also that the entire volume was about six inches thick. Orson Pratt also said that two-thirds of the volume was sealed.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Such are the statements made on the dimensions of the plates and all show really slight variations. David Whitmer's estimate of the size amounts to fifty-four square inches, but he says nothing of the thickness of the volume. Martin Harris gives us fifty-six square inches as the size of the plates and four inches as the thickness of the volume. Orson Pratt accepts the first figure of Martin Harris but gives six inches as the thickness, as does the Prophet Joseph Smith. According to the latter, each plate had a surface of forty-eight square inches.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33The real question is: "Could one-third (two-thirds being sealed) of a volume of metal plates (leaves) 6 x 8 x 6 (the Prophet Joseph), or 8 x 7 x 4 (Martin Harris), or 8 x 7 x 6 (Orson Pratt), contain a sufficient number of plates, each as thick as parchment or tin, to yield the necessary space for the entire text of the Book of Mormon? If so, what about their immense weight?

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Two remarkable Illustrations. The accompanying illustrations answer these questions.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33The first is a facsimile of a sheet of paper, eight by seven inches, upon which a Hebrew translation of fourteen pages of the American text of the Book of Mormon have been written in the modern, square Hebrew letters in common use. The translation was made by our friend, Mr. Henry Miller, a Hebrew by birth, thoroughly versed in the Hebrew language, and a member of the Church. On this sheet it is demonstrated that the entire text of the Book of Mormon could have been written in Hebrew on 40-37 pages-twenty-one plates in all.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33If it is thought that these characters are too small to be read with alacrity, it may be said that the illustrations, as Mr. Miller wrote them, were quite legible. But turn to the second illustration. This is a reproduction of a translation into Hebrew, also by Mr. Miller, and written in the old Phoenician or Israelitic characters which were known to Lehi and his contemporaries. It contains seven pages of the American text of the Book of Mormon. It proves that even if these larger characters are used, the entire book should be written or engraved on 80-67 pages-forty-one plates in all. Illustration No. 2 is also on seven by eight inch paper.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Hebrew translation of II Nephi, Chapters 5:20 to 11:3 inclusive, (about 14 34 pages of the English version)

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33In the Old World the ancient Semitic Alphabet was, in due time, superceded by the Aramean. This system of writing was adopted by the Hebrew after the Babylonian captivity, chiefly, as Jewish tradition avers, through the influence of Ezra. The square Hebrew letters now in use are the modern offspring of the Aramean ancestors.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33In Egypt the Hieroglyphic letters gradually receded into oblivion, and the Demotic or Enchorian script became popular. At the time of Herodotus, about B.C. 450, only the Hieratic and the Damotic characters were known outside the small circle of scholars. It appears, therefore, that Nephi, in this part of the world, took the same course as regards the reformation of the alphabet as that followed by the scholars of the Old World, as their literary taste and requirements developed.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Hebrew translation of II Nephi, Chapter 11:4 to 16:9 inclusive (Phoenician or Old Israelitic characters. Seven English pages)

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Some time in the dim past, perhaps two thousand years before our era, Semitic scholars, probably Phoenicians, feeling the need of simpler and more practical signs than those in use in Egypt, picked out twenty-one of the old Hieratic characters, modified them, and renamed them. This according to the famed French Egyptologist Emmanuel de Rouge, was the origin of the oldest Semitic alphabet. It has been called the Phoenician or Old Israelitic alphabet. As a matter of fact it was the Egyptian Reformed, and was adapted to Semitic speech. The Law, and most of the Prophets, were at one time written in these characters.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Lehi, the scholarly ancestor of the Nephites and the Lamanites, undoubtedly was familiar with it. It was the alphabet, we have no doubt, on the Brass Plates of Laban, referred to as "the language of the Egyptians," (Mosiah 1:4) meaning, as explained, "the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian." (Mormon 9:32) Nephi knew this system of writing, for he had been "taught somewhat in all the learning of my father." (1 Nephi 1:1) It would, therefore, be natural for him to make use of this Old Semitic alphabet as a foundation for the signs he needed for his record, modified so as to require but little space for the ponderous material on which they were engraved.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Here it should be recalled, perhaps, that we are not in possession of all that the Prophet translated from the record. Martin Harris lost, as is well known, one hundred-sixteen written pages of completed manuscript, which were not retranslated. Just how much printed space they would have occupied, we know not; but fifty pages we consider a very generous allowance for that space. Fifty printed pages would be equal to a little more than seven pages-four plates-if the Phoenician characters were used. Four plates, then, should be added to the forty-one already mentioned, making a total number of plates needed for the entire book that was translated, forty-five.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Hebrew Writing Requires Small Space. This may sound incredible, but it is easily explained. The Hebrews of old did not write vowels. They wrote only consonants, and they did not leave much space between words and lines as we do. Nor did they need so many small words as we do to complete a sentence. Frequently their auxiliary words consisted of a single letter attached to the main word, either as a prefix or suffix. And, finally, they used many abbreviations. All this meant a great saving of space.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33The entire volume was four inches thick (Martin Harris), or about six inches (Orson Pratt). Let us take the smaller number as the most probable. Mr. Lamb has allowed fifty plates to an inch, or two hundred plates to the four inches. One-third only was translated; that is, sixty-six and a fraction plates. But we have demonstrated that the entire book including the lost pages, could have been written on forty-five plates. If we allow sixty-six, or even fifty, we have ample space for a text engraved in large, legible characters.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Regarding the Weight. Thirty-five twenty-dollar gold pieces would cover a surface of about seven by eight inches. To make a column four inches high, forty-eight such pieces would be needed. Consequently, thirty-five times forty-eight twenty dollar gold pieces, or 1,680 in all, would make up the dimensions of the plates, seven by eight by four inches. A twenty-dollar gold piece weighs twenty-one and one-half pennyweights. That would make a total of 123 pounds.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33From this estimate liberal deductions must be made. The Plates were not pure gold. The Plates of Nephi were made of ore, and Moroni also mentions ore as the material of which his plates were made. (Mormon 8:5) The ore, possibly a copper alloy, must have been considerably lighter in weight than the twenty-three karat gold of which a twenty-dollar piece is made. We cannot suppose that the plates fitted as closely together as gold coins do when stacked in a column. There must have been some space between each pair, especially if, as is probable, they were hammered. "And they did beat the gold into thin plates."9 and not cast. Then again, allowance must be made for the metal cut away by the engraver, from each plate. Everything considered, the volume must have weighed considerably less than a hundred pounds, even on the supposition that the dimensions given are strictly accurate and not mere approximations.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Another Calculation. The subject of weight may also be approached from another premise. Let us suppose that the entire text was engraved on forty-five plates, as has been shown to be possible. Forty-five would then be the number of the unsealed one-third and there would be ninety in the sealed two-thirds; that is a total of 135 plates. But if two hundred weigh 123 pounds, 135 would weigh a small fraction over eighty-three pounds. When the necessary deductions, pointed out in the previous paragraph, are made, the entire volume could not have weighed fifty pounds. The plates that the Prophet had in his possession were not heavier than that he, who was an unusually strong man, could lift them and handle them. That is the testimony of eyewitnesses, and that testimony stands.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Similar Objections to Bible Statements. Curiously enough, at one time certain critics of the Bible used to raise objections to the Old Testament description of the Tabernacle furniture on the ground that gold was too heavy to handle. We are told that Bezaleel made an ark or box of wood, in which the Law was deposited. It was overlaid with pure gold "within and without." The cover of this box was a lid made of pure gold (Exodus 25:17); two and one-half cubits long and one and one-half cubits wide. That is, it was an immense gold plaque four feet three inches by two feet seven inches, or about eleven square feet in size. On this lid two cherubs were placed, one at each end. These figures were hammered of pure gold. Their wings covered the lid, and they must have been of considerable size. This box, we are told, was carried by the priests before the Camp of Israel during the wanderings of the Children of Israel, but the critics referred to, used to tell us that was impossible. The box, with its solid gold lid, and immense solid gold statues, its stone tablets, its gold rings and staves, was too heavy to handle, except with machinery. But that kind of "criticism" is old and obsolete, whether applied to the Bible or Book of Mormon.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Metal Plates not Unknown. We have also been told the ancient scribes never used metal plates for their records, and that, therefore, Laban could not have had any brass plates.

SCMorm 9 32Morm 9 33Ivory tablets were used by the ancient Romans. They also used wooden tablets, beech and fir. Sometimes these were coated with wax, and the record was made with a stylus. Two or more of such tablets might be joined together by means of wire rings, similar to the Book of Mormon Plates. Parchment made of animal skins was a favorite material for important records, and vellum, or calf skin, was commonly used in early days for this purpose. But we also read that the High Priest wore a gold plate on his crown, on which words were engraved (Exodus 39:30), and Jeremiah exclaims: "The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart...." (Jeremiah 17:1) This proves beyond question that the Israelites were familiar with engraved tables, for otherwise the words of the prophets would have been unintelligible to them. (See, statement by Padre Gay, page XI, Volume I, Commentary on the Book of Mormon.)

Morm 9 34Verse 34

Morm 9 34The Lord hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof. See, footnote No. 2.

Morm 9 35Verse 35

Morm 9 35Why these things are written. That the blood of our brethren who have dwindled in unbelief may not soil our garments that at the Last Day we may stand spotless before the Judgment-Seat of Christ; and that through no fault of ours they may seek to excuse and palliate what they did, or did not do, while here upon the earth, this record is made.

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37Verses 36-37

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37These things which we have desired. From the very first when contention among them divided into two groups, the sons of Lehi, the prayers of those who followed after Nephi, continually were for the welfare of their brethren who had followed Laman and Lemuel.

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37For the consideration of Book of Mormon students, we submit as proper evidence the words of Enos, who was a grandson of the Prophet Lehi. His words are to be found in the records of the Smaller Plates:

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37"And after I, Enos, had heard these words, my faith began to be unshaken in the Lord; and I prayed unto him with many long strugglings for my brethren, the Lamanites.

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37"And it came to pass that after I had prayed and labored with all diligence, the Lord said unto me: I will grant unto thee according to thy desires, because of thy faith.

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37"And now behold, this was the desire which I desired of him-that if it should so be, that my people, the Nephites, should fall into transgression, and by any means be destroyed, and the Lamanites should not be destroyed, that the Lord God would preserve a record of my people, the Nephites; even if it so be by the power of his holy arm, that it might be brought forth at some future day unto the Lamanites, that, perhaps, they might be brought unto salvation-

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37"For at the present our strugglings were vain in restoring them to the true faith. And they swore in their wrath that, if it were possible, they would destroy our records and us, and also all the traditions of our fathers.

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37"Wherefore, I knowing that the Lord God was able to preserve our records, I cried unto him continually, for he had said unto me: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask in faith, believing that ye shall receive in the name of Christ, ye shall receive it.

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37"And I had faith, and I did cry unto God that he would preserve the records; and he covenanted with me that he would bring them forth unto the Lamanites in his own due time.

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37"And I, Enos, knew it would be according to the covenant which he had made; wherefore my soul did rest.

SCMorm 9 36Morm 9 37And the Lord said unto me: Thy fathers have also required of me this thing; and it shall be done unto them according to their faith; for their faith was like unto thine. (Enos 11-18)

Morm 9 37Verse 37

Morm 9 37May the Lord Jesus Christ grant that their prayers may be answered....Moroni finished the Record commenced by his father with a prayer unto God, the loving Father of all men, that the prayers offered by all the Saints who ever dwelt in the Land of Promise made for the benefit and blessing of his brethren, the Lamanites, would be answered, and also that He Who reigns On High would remember His Covenant made with the House of Israel, of which both the Nephites and the Lamanites were members; "and may He bless them forever, through faith on the Name of Jesus Christ. Amen."
