Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

The Book of Moroni

Chapter 1

Moro 1 1Verse 1

Moro 1 1I, Moroni. Moroni's task having been completed, wherein he undertook to abridge the account of the Jaredites which Mosiah I, that great Prophet, Seer, and King of the Nephites, had translated from the twenty and four Gold Plates of Ether, he (Moroni) intended to write no more.

SCMoro 1 3Moro 1 4Moro 1 2Verse 2

SCMoro 1 3Moro 1 4Moro 1 2Their wars were exceedingly fierce among themselves. After the final battle between the Nephites and the Lamanites in which the Lamanites were victorious, the Lamanites split into many contending factions, each contesting the dominance of the other, and all warring among themselves and pillaging and despoiling the countryside. Moroni notes that "Their wars are exceedingly fierce among themselves." His father, Mormon, had been slain by them, but he, himself, had not perished. By some marvelous power which was the power of God, Moroni's life was preserved for a wise purpose in which we can easily see the hand of God. The power and the purpose of God is made manifest to us in Moroni's then uncontemplated writings which are preserved in the following chapters of his Book.

SCMoro 1 3Moro 1 4Moro 1 2The bitter hatred of the Lamanites for all that was good, and their ferocious enmity toward God's servants, caused them to put to death "every Nephite who would not deny the Christ." (v. 2) All the bitter hatreds and angry passions that hell inspires, all that human wickedness could suggest, or evil power achieve, was let loose by Satan in the bloodthirsty carnival of crime that then bore sway.

SCMoro 1 3Moro 1 4Moro 1 2But in spite of threatened death, one of the most horrible kind, Moroni was firm in his oft-repeated declaration of Christ's divinity; he knew that Jesus was the Christ, and he knew that God knew that he knew it, and I, Moroni, he says, "Will not deny the Christ, wherefore, I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life." (v. 3)

SCMoro 1 3Moro 1 4Moro 1 2Inspired by his prophetic calling, and, no doubt, sensing the mind and will of the Lord, Moroni wrote down a few things which have proved to be of great worth to us in these last days. His prayer was that what he wrote may be of benefit to his brethren, the Lamanites, in some future day. His prayer is now being answered, for not only are we blessed and benefited by the things he wrote, but through us, the Lamanites, many of whom are fast becoming a white and delightsome people will by Heaven's gracious command also be blessed. This is, as Moroni prayed, according to the will of the Lord. (v. 4)

General Notes

Moroni's literary work in the Book of Mormon, so far, consists of the last two chapters, 8 and 9, of the Book that bears his father's name, Mormon, and the fifteen chapters of the Book of Ether. He had finished the record concerning the final tragedy of Cumorah, and he had hidden it in the earth, presumably in the Hill on that battlefield. (Mormon 6:6; 8:4; 14:16 14:16) His first intention was not to make further additions to the completed volume. But, although his life had been spared in the general massacre, he had no opportunity, on account of the bitter enmity of the survivors against the followers of Christ, to testify to and exhort the people. In vain he held the office of a prophet of God bearing the holy Priesthood. He lived in hiding, or went about in disguise (v. I), changing his places of refuge frequently. During this virtual exile, he committed the contents of this Book to writing. It was his only opportunity to bear his testimony.

I wander whithersoever I can. Moroni wandered in all probability not very far from Cumorah. He expected to seal up the records after he had spoken a few words "by way of exhortation." (Moroni 10:2) His hiding place could, consequently, not have been far from the underground repository that contained the other sacred records.

For the benefit of the Lamanites. Lamanites, means here, the American Aborigines who have not accepted the Gospel as it was taught by the Nephites. For genealogical purposes, Lamanites would be the lineal descendants of the sons of Lehi, Laman and Lemuel. But this natural division according to lineage was disregarded, except, we suppose, for special purposes, early in the history of the people. The Prophet Jacob, 50 or 60 years after the exodus from Jerusalem says that they were called, Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites, "But I, Jacob, shall not hereafter distinguish them by those names, but I shall call them Lamanites that seek to destroy the people of Nephi, and those who are friendly to Nephi I shall call Nephites, or the people of Nephi, according to the reigns of the kings." (Jacob 1:14)

In the Land of Zarahemla, during the Millennial conditions prevailing for two hundred years after the visit of the Risen Redeemer, the distinction between Nephites and Lamanites was completely obliterated (IV Nephi 17), until a war began between the two religio-political parties known as Nephites and Lamanites, respectively. (Mormon 1:9)

The future of the Lamanites. According to the prophetic word of the Book of Mormon, the Indians, also known as the Lamanites, may look forward to a glorious future. See, III Nephi 20 on the "remnant of the House of Israel," and the New Jerusalem. Moroni must have had this in mind when he wrote the concluding part of the Book of Mormon, in the hope that it might be "of worth unto my brethren, the Lamanites at some future day."

That the Indians of America had a bright future in store for them, was far from the popular belief at the time when the Prophet Joseph published the contents of the Sacred Record. The general view was that the American-Natives were doomed to extinction. Their ultimate fate seemed to be approaching. It was argued that they had dwindled from an estimated total of about 800,000, at the time of the arrival of the first Europeans, to 294,000 in 1865, when the first government census was taken, As a matter of fact, the generation preceding the present one, expected the native Americans to perish, and some individuals even did what they could to bring the expected tragedy.

It has been shown in a recent official report of the government that the Indians lost by various ways sixty per cent of the lands granted to them by Congress at the first enactment of any laws affecting their welfare. Few seemed to care whether the Indians were starving, or decimated by sickness and death; or sinking in ignorance through the indifference, or incompetence of the Indian Service. But the race did not perish, and a wonderful change has taken place in their condition and future prospects. In an official report published, it is shown that there were 523,591 native Americans (1960 census) under the care of the Indian Service. They are taught to be self-supporting as farmers, cattle-raisers, and makers of jewelry and blankets. Many Indians, the service reports, have gone into, the professions of engineering, law, medicine, teaching, and forestry, after having been educated in reservation schools. Many of these so trained, according to the service, are returning to help their people. "They are imbued with an idea of bettering their race, and rebuilding the Indian Empire along present-day lines."

The Lamanite evidence for the Book of Mormon. This stage of Indian development should be of special interest to the readers of the Book of Mormon, since it furnishes another bit of evidence, the Lamanite evidence, probably new to many them, for the divine inspiration of that venerable Volume. It makes the Indians, with their fabulous adventures and experiences, witnesses for their ancient record for the same reason that the Hebrews, in their preservation throughout the ages prove the truth of the Bible.

Here is a striking story which contains a volume in one brief sentence. What the Court Chaplain of Frederick the Great, of Prussia, was asked by the King for proof in one word of the inspiration of the Bible, he answered, "The Jews, your Majesty." And the King was satisfied. If a friend should make a similar request of a student of the Book of Mormon, the latter might answer, confidently and emphatically, "The American Indians."

Moroni, we may suppose, through inspiration, wrote his Book which is an addition to that which he originally intended, and doing so had the Lamanites "in some future day," in prophetic prospect.
