Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 2

SCMoro 2 1Moro 2 2Moro 2 3The words of Christ as He bestowed the Holy Ghost upon the Nephite Twelve Disciples. Our Lord, in conferring on the Twelve Nephite Disciples the authority to give the Holy Ghost to baptized believers, instructed them to call upon the Father in His (Christ's) Name in mighty prayer. The Apostle Paul gives the same admonition thus: "And whatsoever ye do in word or in deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him." (Colossians 3:17)

SCMoro 2 1Moro 2 2Moro 2 3To ask in the Name of the Lord is not merely to repeat His Name at the beginning and the end of a petition, but is to come before the Almighty because we are granted that privilege, or authority, to do so by the Beloved Son Himself. That brings the desired results.

SCMoro 2 1Moro 2 2Moro 2 3But a prayer in the Name of the Lord must, furthermore, be a "mighty" prayer. If it is mighty, it is sincere. It comes from the heart. It is a function as necessary to our spiritual life, as is breathing, or the circulation of the blood, to our physical being.

SCMoro 2 1Moro 2 2Moro 2 3A "mighty" prayer is dictated by the Spirit of the Lord, and is, therefore, in harmony with His will. That is the secret of its power. The Father will not refuse to grant the prayers of a humble petitioner who asks for that which the Lord wants him to have, no more then He will turn a deaf ear to the pleadings of the Beloved Son Himself. Hence the essence of a "mighty prayer" is, "Not my will, but Thine be done."

SCMoro 2 1Moro 2 2Moro 2 3This is an important Scriptural doctrine. Hear the Apostle Paul: "The Spirit also helpeth our infirmity: for we know not how to pray as we ought; but the Spirit Himself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." (Romans 8:26) John says: "And this is the confidence which we have toward Him, that, if we ask anything according to His will, He heareth us. (I John 5:14) And also James: "Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may spend it in your pleasures. (James 4:5)

SCMoro 2 1Moro 2 2Moro 2 3The Importance of Prayer. Our Lord first authorized the Twelve Disciples to baptize. (III Nephi 11:27; 12:1) Then, as we learn from this text, He conferred upon them the power to impart the Holy Ghost by the Laying of the Hands. But this great gift would be bestowed on them only if they would call upon the Father in mighty prayer to be offered in Jesus' Name. The lesson is that the power of the Priesthood has its source in prayer, fervent, heartfelt, and that the elder who expects to retain his spiritual vigor must attend to his prayers faithfully. Neglect of communion with God makes him weak spiritually, and his administrations may become ineffective.

SCMoro 2 1Moro 2 2Moro 2 3Thus do Mine Apostles. The Apostles in the Church in Jerusalem were living when Jesus called the Twelve in the Land Bountiful.

SCMoro 2 1Moro 2 2Moro 2 3The Multitude Heard it not. Our Lord gave the same instructions to all the Twelve, calling each by name and repeating, one by one it so appears, the same words. In so doing He naturally lowered His voice to a pitch of a private conversation. The Disciples and those who were close by heard Him, but the multitude in the distance heard Him not. "But the Disciples heard it; and on as many as they laid their hands, fell the Holy Ghost." (v. 3)
