Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapters 4 and 5

In the verses of these chapters, Moroni tells us what the words are that were used by the Elders and Priests in administering the holy Emblems of the flesh and blood of the Redeemer to the members of Christ's Nephite Church. He assures us that everything was done in accordance with certain commandments that were given them (the Nephite Saints of God) by Jesus Christ Himself. Therefore, Moroni notes that we know the manner of their administration to be true.

Eating of the Broken Bread and drinking of the Cup of Wine which is also called the Sacrament, is an ordinance observed by all devout Latter-day Saints in remembrance of the flesh and blood of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, Who laid down His Own Life as a Ransom for sin that all might live forever, which is Life Eternal.

During His appearance in the Land Bountiful, observance of the Sacrament was instituted by our Lord for the spiritual benefit of those who believed in Him; and who had been baptized in His Name by the Nephite servants of God.

SCMoro 4 1Moro 4 2Moro 4 3The Broken Bread, one of the emblems of this ordinance, is to be eaten in remembrance of the body of Jesus as a testimony to the Father that the partaker thereof is willing to take upon himself the Name of Christ, and also that His Son, Jesus Christ, the Holy One of Israel, will be by them always remembered.

The Cup of Wine, similarly, is partaken of in remembrance of the blood of our Savior which was shed for all mankind, and in doing so, we witness to the Father that we will always remember His Son. Also, in complying with the requirements of this ordinance we testify to God, the Eternal Father, that we are willing to keep the commandments which He commissioned His Son to give unto us. The great purpose of that commitment is that in keeping His commandments we may always have His Spirit to be with us, that we will be holy unto the Lord, our God.

Hearkening back to the time in their history when the Nephites were as one in serving the Lord, they, in solemn assembly, to evidence their reverence for the Sacramental Ordinance which was to be performed, knelt down in humble prayer to extol God's holy Name, and to invoke His blessings upon the Bread and Wine. Whereupon both Elders or Priests and the assembled congregation of Saints unitedly called upon the Father in the name of Jesus, Crucified, using the words Moroni notes:

SCMoro 4 1Moro 4 2Moro 4 3"O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee, in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it; that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen."

Moro 5 1In blessing the Sacramental Wine that was in the Cup, which afterwards was passed around to Church members, the one who officiated in the ordinance uttered these words:

Moro 5 1"O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee, in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen."
