Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 6

Moro 6 1Verse 1

Moro 6 1I speak concerning baptism. The Nephites, or the portion of them that observed God's holy laws, were strict in requiring certain mental and moral qualifications of those who presented themselves for baptism. Even those who afterwards held the holy Priesthood were, before baptism, enjoined to bring "forth fruit meet that they were worthy of it." Those who at a later time became Elders, Priests, or Teachers, merited baptism because of their good works.

Moro 6 2Verse 2

Moro 6 2Candidates for baptism witnessed...that they truly repented of all their sins. However, good works alone do not entitle the applicant to receive entrance into God's Kingdom. Baptism, nevertheless, is the gate through which all must pass to gain admittance into that glorious place. Besides good works, be it said, those works must be accompanied by a heart broken down with sorrow for sin. Moreover, the seeker, seeking that gate, must approach it confessing his shortcomings, and must be thoroughly penitent therefore, witnessing, as did the Nephite hopefuls, before the other members of Christ's Church "that they truly repented of all their sins."

Moro 6 3Verse 3

Moro 6 3The Name of Christ. Good works, plus a determination to continue therein, gives the doer thereof the key that unlocks the door to the mansions above. That key is the Name of Christ. It is the Name all who are baptized take upon themselves at the Waters of Baptism, and who at the same time make a holy resolve that they will do nothing to betray that Name, nor be found wanting in bringing forth fruit worthy to bear that Name.

Moro 6 4Verse 4

Moro 6 4After baptism they were numbered among the people of the Church of Christ. Not content with only numbers, but more so in the welfare of those who had lately come into Christ's Church, those holding God's holy Priesthood-we may presume it was the active Elders, Priest, and Teachers-called upon the newcomers, nourishing them by the good word of God, teaching them to pray, and at length if any of them strayed, lead them back to the right path. None who were baptized, were forgotten, but their names were added to the records of the Church, and communion with their brethren was the just reward of righteous living.

Moro 6 4Relying not upon their own strength, but on God's Holy Word; not upon merits of their own, but on the worth and excellence of Christ, "Who," Moroni says, "was the author and the finisher of their faith," their thoughts undoubtedly are expressed in the beautiful but simple prayer of the Jews: "Lord of all worlds, not in reliance upon righteousness or merit in ourselves do we lay our supplications before Thee, but trusting in Thine infinite mercy alone. For what are we, what is our life, what our goodness, what our power? What can we say in Thy presence? Are not all the mighty men as naught before Thee, and those of great renown as though they had never been; the wisest as if without knowledge, and men of understanding as if without discernment? Many of our works are vain, and our days pass away like a shadow. Our life would be altogether vanity, were it not for our soul, which fashioned in Thine own image, gives us assurance of our higher destiny and imparts to our fleeting days an abiding value.

Moro 6 4"Therefore we beseech Thee, O our God, to help us banish from our hearts all pride and vainglory, all confidence in worldly possessions, all self-sufficient leaning upon our own reason. Fill us with the spirit of meekness and the grace of modesty, that we may become wise in the fear of Thee. May we never forget that all we have and prize is but lent to us, a trust for which we must render account to Thee. O Heavenly Father, put into our hearts the love and fear of Thee, that we may consecrate our lives to Thy service and glorify thy Name in the eyes of all men." (Union Prayer Book)

SCMoro 6 5Moro 6 6Verses 5-6

SCMoro 6 5Moro 6 6The Church did meet together oft. Near the end of the first paragraph of our comments on verse four, we made the statement and communion with their brethren was the lust reward of righteous living. It is not strange, but enlightening to us, that Moroni says the same thing only in different words: "The Church did meet together oft...to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls." They often refrained from eating material food; fasting, that humility might leaven the bread of righteousness and of spirituality. They prayed for strength, not only for themselves, but for their brethren who knew weakness, not meekness. They prayed for courage that the light within them should not be darkened, but that as a lamp unto the feet of their brethren, it would lead them along that Path which is Strait and Narrow.

SCMoro 6 5Moro 6 6The Saints did not gather together for personal purposes, nor were they in pursuit of their own selfish happiness; they covenanted with God, by partaking of the Sacrament, that they did remember the Lord, Jesus Christ, and would thereafter keep His commandments. They were a happy, peaceful, association of God's children, because in all things they had love for their Father and all men in their hearts.

SCMoro 6 7Moro 6 8Moro 6 9Verse 7-9

SCMoro 6 7Moro 6 8Moro 6 9And they were strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them. The Nephites were not an inferior people. They were not born into poverty, nor nurtured in darkness. When they kept God's commandments, they were prospered. They became rich in worldly goods, and the light of God's Holy Word illumined the way before them. As we have said: "They had revelations from Heaven to guide them; angels from the Courts of Glory ministered unto them; they prospered in material things; and those who were zealous in keeping the Lord's commandments were benefited and blessed." But, at length they were destroyed.

SCMoro 6 7Moro 6 8Moro 6 9Their destruction came upon them because of wickedness; however, in the thousand years in which they dwelt upon the Promised Land of America, they were mostly a good and a just people, holy unto the Lord. Like the Jews who were a contemporary people in the East, the last generation of Nephites lived in the twilight of a brilliant past. In times of peace and prosperity, pride and class distinction because of the worldly things they possessed, became a menace to their welfare. Not only did the Nephites indulge themselves in all carnal pleasures, but pride in their fine clothes and their jewelry crowded all thoughts of God from their hearts.

SCMoro 6 7Moro 6 8Moro 6 9We do not know the period in their history of which Moroni wrote, however our opinion is that the same things may be said of each. He notes, "They were strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them." This became a rule, because time and time again the Nephites had seen in their own history where wickedness was the offspring of pride, and stiffneckedness the sire of both. Pride was the Nephites' undoing. If required, we could state the story of the Nephites in a very few words: Prosperity and Pride-Pride and Wickedness-Wickedness and Destruction.

SCMoro 6 7Moro 6 8Moro 6 9Nevertheless, and notwithstanding the demands of clean and moral living which righteousness made, the Nephites were slow to condemn their fellow man. They gave him that was accused before the Elders of the Church, every opportunity to right a wrong if he was found guilty by that court of righteous and holy decisions. In that court for the Judges to accept any evidence whatsoever it was required that the testimony of at least three witnesses corroborate one another's word. If then the guilty one repented of the wrong he had done, and therein asked to be forgiven, he was forgiven. If he did not repent, his name was "blotted out and he was not numbered among the people of Christ."

SCMoro 6 7Moro 6 8Moro 6 9The meetings of the Nephite Saints, wherever and whenever they might have been, were presided over by one in authority who by the power of the Holy Ghost and the united support of the congregation, "led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done."
