Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 7

Moro 7 1Verse 1

Moro 7 1I, Moroni, write a few words of my father, Mormon, which he spake concerning faith, hope, and charity. In this chapter an address concerning Faith, Hope and Charity, which was delivered by the Prophet Mormon to the Nephite Saints is preserved by his son, Moroni. For our edification, and our better understanding, we may be assured by Alma's admonishment to the Saints in Gideon: "See that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye will always abound in good works." (Alma 7:24)

Moro 7 1Where this address was given is not of the greatest importance, but it will suffice any inquiry thereof to quote Moroni's own words concerning it: "For after this manner did he speak unto the people, as he taught them in the synagogue which they had built for the place of worship."

Moro 7 2Verse 2

Moro 7 2I, Mormon, speak unto you by the grace of God. To begin with, Mormon established his ability to speak unto the assembled congregation, and his authority for so doing. Being favored of God and our Lord Jesus Christ; in and through their kindness and mercy; it being Their will that I so do; having received from Them the blessings necessary unto this calling "I am permitted to speak unto you at this time."

Moro 7 3Verse 3

Moro 7 3I would speak unto you that are of the Church. Mormon addresses his remarks to the members of the Church, those, he says, "Who are the peaceable followers of Christ." One of the first fruits of an association with Christ, or an acquaintance with His teachings, is peace, sometimes called "God's most precious gift." And in this connection, we will not forget the words of Isaiah; quoted by the Savior to the Nephites when He visited them in the Land Bountiful shortly after His resurrection: "And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children." (III Nephi 22:13) Also the words of King David: "Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace," (Psalm 37:37) and "Great peace have they which love Thy law." (Ibid., 119:165) Again, "...And His Name shall be called...The Prince of Peace." (Isaiah 9:6)

Moro 7 3From these and many other passages of both Nephite and Hebrew Scripture, we can easily see why Mormon addressed his words to the "peaceable followers of Christ."

Moro 7 3Mormon coupled that quality of the Saints of God with another of outstanding importance, and thus we may read his salutation: "I speak unto the peaceable followers of Christ who have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord." Mormon adds further to his thought of hope, that the happy expectation of rest in the Lord will be followed by "rest with Him in Heaven." This doctrine is consistent with the magnific and sublime understanding which the Nephites had of the great Hereafter. Alma, in instructing his son upon some points of doctrine which his son, Corianton, wished to become enlightened, gave him this rather detailed description of what the "rest of the Lord" expression really did mean:

Moro 7 3"Therefore, there is a time appointed that they shall rise from the dead; and there is a space between the time of death and the resurrection. And now, concerning this space of time, what becometh of the souls of men is the thing which I have inquired diligently of the Lord to know; and this is the thing of which I do know.

Moro 7 3"And when the time cometh when all shall rise, then shall they know that God knoweth all the times which are appointed unto man.

Moro 7 3"Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection-Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life.

Moro 7 3"And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow.

Moro 7 3"And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the wicked, yea, who are evil-for behold, they have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did enter into them, and take possession of their house-and these shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil.

Moro 7 3"Now this is the state of the souls of the wicked, yea, in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection.

Moro 7 3"Now, there are some that have understood that this state of happiness and this state of misery of the soul, before the resurrection, was a first resurrection. Yea, I admit it may be termed a resurrection, the raising of the spirit or the soul and their consignation to happiness or misery, according to the words which have been spoken.

Moro 7 3"And behold, again it hath been spoken, that there is a first resurrection, a resurrection of all those who have been, or who are, or who shall be, down to the resurrection of Christ from the dead.

Moro 7 3"Now, we do not suppose that this first resurrection, which is spoken of in this manner, can be the resurrection of the souls and their consignation to happiness or misery. Ye cannot suppose that this is what it meaneth.

Moro 7 3"Behold, I say unto you, Nay; but it meaneth the reuniting of the soul with the body, of those from the days of Adam down to the resurrection of Christ.

Moro 7 3"Now, whether the souls and the bodies of those of whom has been spoken shall be reunited at once, the wicked as well as the righteous, I do not say; let it suffice, that I say that they all come forth; or in other words, their resurrection cometh to pass before the resurrection of those who die after the resurrection of Christ.

Moro 7 3"Now, my son, I do not say that their resurrection cometh at the resurrection of Christ; but behold, I give it as my opinion, that the souls and the bodies are reunited, of the righteous, at the resurrection of Christ, and his ascension into heaven.

Moro 7 3"But whether it be at his resurrection or after, I do not say; but this much I say that there is a space between death and the resurrection of the body, and a state of the soul in happiness or in misery until the time which is appointed of God that the dead shall come forth, and be reunited, both, soul and body, and be brought to stand before God, and be judged according to their works.

Moro 7 3"Yea, this bringeth about the restoration of these things of which has been spoken by the mouths of the prophets.

Moro 7 3"The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame.

Moro 7 3"And now, my son, this is the restoration of which has been spoken by the mouths of the prophets-

Moro 7 3"And then shall the righteous shine forth in the kingdom of God.

Moro 7 3"But behold, an awful death cometh upon the wicked; for they die as to things pertaining to things of righteousness; for they are unclean, and no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of God; but they are cast out, and consigned to partake of the fruits of their labors or their works, which have been evil; and they drink the dregs of a bitter cup." (Alma 40:9-26; Italics are the Editor's)

SCMoro 7 4Moro 7 5Moro 7 6Moro 7 7Moro 7 8Moro 7 9Moro 7 10Moro 7 11Verses 4-11

SCMoro 7 4Moro 7 5Moro 7 6Moro 7 7Moro 7 8Moro 7 9Moro 7 10Moro 7 11A man being evil cannot do that which is good. Mormon was not deceived by outward appearances, but he saw and judged his brethren to whom he spoke, rightly and with great compassion. He saw how they walked peaceably, not only before God, but also before one another. To walk peaceably before God, is to walk in the Path of Righteousness. If there is no righteousness, there is no peace. "There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isaiah 57:21) The children of men, to part of whom Mormon spoke (v. 4), want peace, but not every or any peace. They do not want a worldly peace, worldly; but peace rounded upon truth, upheld and sustained by righteousness. Any peace in opposition to righteousness, is all, Peace! Peace! when there is no peace. (Jeremiah 6:14)

SCMoro 7 4Moro 7 5Moro 7 6Moro 7 7Moro 7 8Moro 7 9Moro 7 10Moro 7 11Not only the peace that filled their hearts, but the lives of Mormon's brethren proved their belief in the great truths the Church of Christ proclaimed; their bearing toward their brethren, their faithfulness to God and His laws, their integrity in every line of duty, their determination to walk in the path of duty and loyalty, marked them as peaceable followers of Christ (v. 3), and in Him they had a joyous hope of eternal rest in the Kingdom of God, which is Life Everlasting.

SCMoro 7 4Moro 7 5Moro 7 6Moro 7 7Moro 7 8Moro 7 9Moro 7 10Moro 7 11We may conclude our introduction of Mormon by repeating the words of the Lord concerning Phinehas, the grandson of Aaron the brother of Moses: "The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with Me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity." (Malachi 2:6)

Moro 7 5Verse 5

Moro 7 5By their works ye shall know them. The moral soundness, the integrity and uprightness, of the Nephite Saints of God unto whom Mormon declared His holy word, delighted Mormon's soul. Seeing their good works, he rejoiced in the words of the Lord, Who when speaking of false prophets "who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves," said of them: "Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit neither a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them." (III Nephi 14:16-20)

Moro 7 5The works men do are like the fruit a tree brings forth. Mormon took great comfort and an unceasing joy in that his brethren were like unto good trees; their works were good, so as the Savior said, "they were also good."

SCMoro 7 6Moro 7 7Moro 7 8Moro 7 9Moro 7 10Verses 6-10

SCMoro 7 6Moro 7 7Moro 7 8Moro 7 9Moro 7 10For if an evil man offereth a gift...No matter what the gift, he that is evil attaches thereto a condition, or an unclean motive. At least he expects a gift in return. Someone has said that a gift without the giver is bare. That means just this, that the giver of a gift who gives not himself therewith, gives nothing, and the receiver thereof receives nothing that is of worth. Both gift and giver are vain. As a gift is empty which is given with no real intent of the heart, so prayer to God, without real intent, is void of meaning. Such a prayer profiteth the giver thereof nothing. It is only that a few words are recited, and like a shadow, it is but the outline of something real, and shall pass away. As to gifts, neither the giver nor the receiver profits unless that gift abounds to our credit in the world to come. In other words, a gift attached to evil, whether it is of the giver or of the receiver, is not a gift of righteousness, and it, too, as a shadow shall pass away, and as a treasure in Heaven it will not be counted.

Moro 7 11Verse 11

Moro 7 11If a man follow Christ he cannot be a servant of the devil. Mormon further admonished the Nephite Saints who stood or sat before him-that was their custom-to continue walking together in the path of peace, and thereby he emphasized his great appeal to them for good works and good gifts. "Behold," he said, "a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water; neither can a good fountain bring forth bitter water.") Springs or fountains are called living, when they never cease, but are always sending forth their waters. He then declared the solemn truth which was the high point of his sermon: "A man being a servant of the devil cannot follow Christ; and if he follow Christ he cannot be a servant of the devil."

Moro 7 11The Bible, that good and precious Book says, however, in different words: "No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon." (Luke 16:13)

Moro 7 11James, the brother of our Lord, in a letter to the Twelve Tribes "Who are scattered abroad," notes of those who are worldly wise and those of their own number who speak good and evil at the same time, "blessing and cursing out of the same mouth," says: "Doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? Can a fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries? either a vine, figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh." (James 3:10-11)

Moro 7 11Here may we add that Waters of Life drawn from the Wells of Salvation are good waters; they are the Words of the Lord, and in drinking of the cup in which those waters are contained, we think of the Lord's servant and his exclamation of gladness: "Behold, God is my Salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; He also is my Salvation. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the Wells of Salvation." (Isaiah 12:2-3)

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13Verses 12-13

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13All things which are good cometh from God. The works of God, like the fruits good trees bring forth, are good. Only good comes from the Maker and Creator of all. More properly we might say: "All good comes from Him."

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13As for the devil, the opposite is true, "that which is evil cometh from" him. From the very first, when after the great Council in Heaven, Lucifer, who became the devil, was cast out from His presence, he became an enemy of God, and thereafter without stoppage has fought truth and also the righteousness which is in God. He lures astray, the weak and unwary into paths of wickedness and in rebellion against the Counsels of Heaven. With promises of great reward to those who follow him, he puts into their mouths every pretext and excuse human nature can devise or evil power achieve to apologize for their actions. To thwart the plans of the Almighty, and destroy life, is the devil's aim.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"But behold," Mormon says, "that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good..." Nephi, after whom the Nephites took their name, and shortly after leaving Jerusalem with his father and a few others, enumerated some of the transgressions which are of the devil. He warned the doers thereof that because of "these things" they "shall perish,....None of these iniquities come of the Lord; for He doeth that which is good among the children of men; and He doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men; and He inviteth them all to come and partake of His goodness; and He denieth none that come unto Him...."(II Nephi 26:33)

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13Too many to be numbered, are the works of God, how manifold are His blessings. The Earth is filled with His bounties. The Psalmist in meditating on His wonderful providences, praised God for His great and gracious works. With a "pen of iron, and the point of a diamond," he caused these words to be written, and they remain with us a tribute in words to Him Who is Most Holy:

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honour and majesty.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain:

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind:

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire:

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood above the mountains.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys unto the place which thou hast rounded for them.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses quench their thirst.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing among the branches.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"He watereth the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth;

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man's heart.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"The trees of the Lord are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted;

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir trees are her house. "The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for the conies. "He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Thou makest darkness and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"There go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"These wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat in due season.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"That thou givest them they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works. "He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hills, and they smoke.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more. Bless thou the Lord, O my soul. Praise ye the Lord." (Psalm 104)

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"Praise ye the Lord. I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. "His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousness endureth for ever.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and full of compassion.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his covenant.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"He hath shewed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the heritage of the heathen.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are sure. "They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"He sent redemption unto his people: he hath commanded his covenant for ever: holy and reverend is his name.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13"The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise endureth for ever." (Psalm 111)

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13In the lives of the most humble, those who put their trust in Him, His marvelous works transcend the greatest of human achievements. Lehi, the scholarly ancestor of both the Nephites and the Lamanites, when shown in vision the wonderful purposes of God in bringing about the Salvation of His children, exclaimed in ecstasy: "Great and marvelous are Thy works, O Lord God ALMIGHTY! Thy throne is high in the Heavens, and Thy power and goodness, and mercy are over all the inhabitants of the Earth, and because Thou art merciful, Thou wilt not suffer those who come unto Thee that they shall perish!" (I Nephi 1:14) The power, goodness, and mercy, of God, are shown in His great and marvelous works.

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13May we in humility offer this Hebrew prayer; the words thereof express not only ours but the thoughts of the Elders of the Jews: "O Lord and God of our fathers, Thou art exalted above all human understanding; no tongue can tell Thy goodness and Thy mercy. Yet the countless tokens of Thy love, the innumerable signs of Thine unfailing providence and of Thy loving care for all Thy creatures, tell of Thee. Our eyes are opened to the wonders of this world, wherein Thy presence reveals itself in every star in heaven and in every flower of the field. The Heavens declare Thy glory, O God, and the firmament showeth Thy handiwork."

SCMoro 7 12Moro 7 13Lehi had learned to listen to that still small voice which is heard by the faithful, and which is of God; that comes to lead, and to direct, and to warn the hearer thereof, of things to come. To hear and recognize that voice is a gift of God, and in it is told the wonderful works of the Lord for the preservation of His Own. Not so with the adversary; his design is to preserve evil, and destroy that which is good. When the temptations of the devil that confront us are strongest-which connotes weakness on our part-he himself becomes stronger. Being an opportunist, he seizes this time as fit for our undoing, and leads us along his way until we are bound tightly by forces which we can neither see nor hear, and of which we have lost control. The result is: we do evil continually. "Wherefore," the Sacred Record says: "Every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good...is inspired of God," and "that which is evil cometh of the devil."

Moro 7 17Moro 7 18Moro 7 19Moro 7 20Moro 7 21SCMoro 7 14Moro 7 15Moro 7 16Verses 14-16

Moro 7 17Moro 7 18Moro 7 19Moro 7 20Moro 7 21SCMoro 7 14Moro 7 15Moro 7 16For behold, my brethren, it is given you to judge, that ye may know good from evil. He Who is the strength of all who put their trust in Him; the loving Father of all men, has endowed His children with reason to distinguish between right and wrong, and in wisdom has decreed that freedom to choose good or evil is their heritage. "With a great love hath He loved us." (See, Jeremiah 31:3) He has opened our eyes to behold the wonders of His Creation, and our minds to discern the glory of His works. But, notwithstanding His goodness and grace, we must realize that He has placed us here upon Earth, and enjoined to do His bidding. Sometimes we forget God's mighty works. Too often in pursuit of life's vanities we follow the evil inclinations with which Satan has filled our hearts, and therein transgress God's holy laws. The enticements of the devil, and his invitation to us that we partake with his servants of the pseudo-joys and follies of the world-if we fall to his allurements-leaves us shackled by the bonds of sin, and lettered, both hands and feet, by the chains of hell.

Moro 7 17Moro 7 18Moro 7 19Moro 7 20Moro 7 21SCMoro 7 14Moro 7 15Moro 7 16Little by little, we are bound by Satan; little by little, we become his slaves-the victims of corruption. Our desires for the higher things of life become dulled, and our judgment of what is right, and what is wrong, warped. The Spirit of Christ is crowded from our hearts. The fears of Mormon expressed in verse 14, then become real. "Wherefore," he says, "take heed, my brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil."

Moro 7 17Moro 7 18Moro 7 19Moro 7 20Moro 7 21SCMoro 7 14Moro 7 15Moro 7 16The Spirit of Christ is given to every man. The Spirit of Christ is truth and light. "A light which is endless, that can never be darkened." (Abinadi, Mosiah 16:9) "I am the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:2) "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (Ibid., 50:24) Therefore, we repeat, as we have done before, the words of Isaiah concerning this great light which is the Light of Christ, Who is the Light and Life of the World: "O House of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord..." (II Nephi 12:5) and coupled with it we will also repeat the words of the ancient Hebrew brethren who lived in the Golden Age of Jewish learning and wisdom: for "In Thy light shall we see light." (Psalm 36:9) Again, Mormon says: "Wherefore, I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ." (v. 19) The Spirit giveth light; the admonishment of Mormon differs only in words from the reasoned judgment of the Jewish Elders. "That which is of God is light"; the prophets and teachers of Israel, in every age of the Gospel, have likened light to knowledge and truth; darkness to superstition and evil. All truth is of God.

Moro 7 17Moro 7 18Moro 7 19Moro 7 20Moro 7 21SCMoro 7 14Moro 7 15Moro 7 16The Lord Jesus, Himself, when instructing the Nephites upon His visit to them in the Land Bountiful, said: "Therefore it shall come to pass that whosoever will not believe My words, Who am Jesus Christ...shall be cut off from among My people who are of the Covenant" (III Nephi 21:11), and later, He said through Moroni-that same Moroni who recorded his father's sermon we are now considering-"But he that believeth these things which I have spoken, him will I visit with the manifestations of My Spirit, for he shall know and bear record. For because of My Spirit he shall know that these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good. And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of Me; for good cometh of none save it be of Me. I am the same that leadeth men to all good; he that will not believe My words will not believe Me-that I am; and he that will not believe Me will not believe the Father Who sent Me. For behold, I am the Father, I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world." (Ether 4:11-12)

Moro 7 17Moro 7 18Moro 7 19Moro 7 20Moro 7 21SCMoro 7 14Moro 7 15Moro 7 16"And I know that the Lord God will consecrate my prayers for the gain of my people. And the words which I have written in weakness will be made strong unto them; for it persuadeth them to do good; it maketh known unto them of their fathers; and it speaketh of Jesus, and persuadeth them to believe in Him, and to endure to the end, which is Eternal Life." (II Nephi 33:4)

Moro 7 17Moro 7 18Moro 7 19Moro 7 20Moro 7 21SCMoro 7 14Moro 7 15Moro 7 16In the development of the subject of his sermon, the theme of which he announced as "Faith, Hope, and Charity," Mormon now gives the key by which all may know for a surety the things of God, and the things of the devil. He says, "But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, everything which inviteth and encticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve Him, is inspired of God." (v. 13) That is the truth upon which all things depend.

Moro 7 17Moro 7 18Moro 7 19Moro 7 20Moro 7 21SCMoro 7 14Moro 7 15Moro 7 16They knowing that all good things come from God, Mormon's brethren were urged by him to "lay hold upon every good thing." The weakness of the flesh in spite of the urging of a willing spirit, proposed to their minds a solemn inquiry: "How is it possible that ye can lay hold upon every good thing?" Mormon, perceiving their quandary, was quick to answer: "I will tell you the way whereby ye may lay hold on every good thing." Faith, that force or power by which all things are done, was Mormon's first assault on the dilemma they posed. It was the first part of his promised text, Faith, Hope, and Charity.

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26Verses 22-26

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26God sent angels to minister unto the children of men. That the light of God's holy countenance should shine upon His children, and that they should not be left alone, in ignorance of the Plan of Salvation which in itself revealed Christ and His goodness, God sent messengers from His presence to minister to them, and acquaint them "concerning the coming of" their Redeemer in Whom should come every good thing.

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26In every age of the world, and all parts of the Earth, holy angels sent from God and commissioned by Him, have declared Salvation to all men through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Those who lived before His coming looked forward to that great event; we look back. Both visions are effectual to the working of grace in the hearts of men. These Heavenly messengers, sent from God's presence, were commissioned by Him to minister unto the children of men, as Mormon says, making known to them the power and authority of God, and His great love for them in that He gave His Only Begotten Son, through Whom, we repeat, "should come every good thing."

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26Heavenly manifestations became man's constant guide. Men were taught to pray to God, to rely on His justice and mercy, to do His will; and inasmuch as they did so, they were rewarded with greater knowledge of Christ and His Plan of Redemption.

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26Having transgressed God's holy laws by partaking of the Forbidden Fruit, men became as Gods, "knowing good from evil." In committing that same act, they were empowered to tell right and wrong, and were given the freedom to choose between them. Discretion, to this end, increased within them. Not only did they see and recognize the truth, but also they had power to act "according to their wills and pleasures, whether to do good or to do evil." (Alma 12:31)

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26When the Lord God saw that the children of men were capable in and of themselves to distinguish between truth and error, right and wrong, and also that they had the power or ability to choose good or evil, He gave unto them, by His holy prophets whom He sent among them, laws and certain commandments that by keeping them they would be benefited and blest. He also called priests and teachers and appointed them to instruct those among whom they labored all things concerning Himself and His Immortal Plans. In this way, by preachment and by example, the priests so set apart were able to guide and direct their brethren aright, and always hold before them the proper manner by which they were to look forward to the coming of Christ, Who was their Redeemer and Lord. Indeed, the Atonement of Christ, and the whole Plan of Salvation, God's grace and His loving-kindness, were proclaimed by holy prophets to whom God Himself "declared, by His Own mouth, that Christ should come." (v. 23)

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26"Wherefore, by the ministering of angels, and by every word which proceeded forth out of the mouth of God"-for God said through Moroni when speaking of the words of His holy prophets, "I am He Who speaketh."-"Men began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing; and thus it was until the coming of Christ." (v. 25)

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26After Christ came among men, they, Mormon so enlightens us, were saved by faith just as had those who lived before His glorious advent. We have said earlier in this discussion that they who lived before, looked forward to His coming; we look back. We noted that both visions were effectual to the working of faith in our hearts.

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26Here, we will not enter into a discussion of what faith is, except to say that it is the power or force which makes real the things we hope for, but cannot see. With an eye of faith we look forward continually, having in view those things which God's servants, the angels and His prophets, have placed verbally before us.

SCMoro 7 22Moro 7 23Moro 7 24Moro 7 25Moro 7 26Christ said that if ye have faith in Me, that means if you believe earnestly, not doubting, that I Am, or that I live, that I am the Son of God, "Ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in Me." (v. 33) Whatsoever thing is expedient in Me, means those things which will add to the glory of God by advancing the cause of righteousness; the cause of righteousness is His cause.

SCMoro 7 27Moro 7 28Moro 7 29Moro 7 30Moro 7 31Moro 7 32Moro 7 33Moro 7 34Verses 27-34

SCMoro 7 27Moro 7 28Moro 7 29Moro 7 30Moro 7 31Moro 7 32Moro 7 33Moro 7 34Have miracles ceased because Christ hath ascended into Heaven? One of the favorite excuses with which the powers of evil seek to reinforce unbelief in Christ, is the assertion that there is no such thing as a miracle performed in His Name. Even to those who profess a belief in Him, the things they reject quickest as unworthy of belief, are those of which they know little. We may not be able to explain the metaphysics of what we call miracles, nor can we explain how God answer prayer-itself a miracle-but nevertheless, we know He does. It is no more difficult for the believer in a kind and wise Providence to accept as facts, the miracles recorded in Christ's ministry than the Miracle of Life, the evidences of which we see all about us.

SCMoro 7 27Moro 7 28Moro 7 29Moro 7 30Moro 7 31Moro 7 32Moro 7 33Moro 7 34To reject a truth because we do not understand it, is foreign to the principles of every science. It is unscientific. It is ignorance. As an example: will someone explain to us how it is that two plants placed side by side in a field, each produce, the one wheat and the other barley. Their roots intermingle in the same coarse sand; the same raindrops refresh the parched earth in which they grow; the same sunbeams warm the delicate leaves of both. Yet one produces wheat, the other barley. How is it? We do not know. But we would think him deranged, who would refuse to eat the beautiful white loaf, because, forsooth, he does not understand why that plant should in the end make a wheat loaf instead of a barley cake. However, that is just what the Anti-Christs would have us do. They would have us reject Christ and all good which comes in Him, because we cannot explain in detail the beauties and the glories of His works.

SCMoro 7 27Moro 7 28Moro 7 29Moro 7 30Moro 7 31Moro 7 32Moro 7 33Moro 7 34To complement the words of Mormon, give ear to Jacob, the brother of the Prophet Nephi and the son of Lehi: "Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the Name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea. Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know that it is by His grace, and His great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things. Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of Him; and it is impossible that man should find out all His ways. And no man knoweth of His ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of God. For behold, by the power of His word man came upon the face of the Earth, which Earth was created by the power of His word. Wherefore, if God being able to speak and the world was, and to speak and man was created, O then, why not able to command the Earth, or the workmanship of His hands upon the face of it, according to His will and pleasure?" (Jacob 4:7-9) And still further Jacob says: "Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from His hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that He counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all His works." (Ibid., 4:10)

SCMoro 7 27Moro 7 28Moro 7 29Moro 7 30Moro 7 31Moro 7 32Moro 7 33Moro 7 34Someone has said: "There is a wisdom we cannot fathom, and an omnipotence upon which we can lean, but cannot grasp," and we can leave to that day, when the things we know not now, we shall know hereafter. What, here below, we call miracles and surround them with mysticism really do not deviate from natural law. They constitute part of the science of God's relationship to man. Angels from the Courts of Glory instruct men in its findings. It is the heavenly science of Good Works. The working of miracles is done by the faithful in the Name of Christ, the great Scientist of the Universe; all His works are good.

SCMoro 7 27Moro 7 28Moro 7 29Moro 7 30Moro 7 31Moro 7 32Moro 7 33Moro 7 34The Lord in speaking to Moroni as is shown in our comments on verse 16, further said: "And in that day they (the Gentiles) shall exercise faith in Me...even as the Brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in Me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the Brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all My revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the Heavens and of the Earth, and all things that in them are. And he that will contend against the word of the Lord, let him be accursed; and he that shall deny these things, let him be accursed; for unto them will I show no greater things, saith Jesus Christ; for I am He Who speaketh. And at My command the Heavens are opened and are shut; and at My word the Earth shall shake; and at My command the inhabitants thereof shall pass away, even as by fire." (Ether 4:7-9)

SCMoro 7 35Moro 7 36Moro 7 37Moro 7 38Verses 35-38

SCMoro 7 35Moro 7 36Moro 7 37Moro 7 38God will show unto you...at the Last Day, that these things are true. Mormon witnessed to his brethren that the things whereof he spoke are true; that angels did communicate with man on Earth, that the Holy Ghost bore record in men's hearts that there was no other name than the Name of Christ whereby man can be saved. And that as long as the Earth shall stand, "or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved," these visits by holy angels and the power of the Holy Ghost would not cease among men to the end that "the purposes, of the Lord shall roll on, until all His promises shall be fulfilled?" (Mormon 8:22) Mormon also called upon God to witness the truth of his words. A full and complete answer to Mormon's statement that "God will show unto you, with power and great glory at the Last Day, that they are true," is given by the Lord Himself when speaking of unbelievers in the latter days, "And he that believeth not My words believeth not My disciples; and if it so be that I do not speak, judge ye; for ye shall know that it is I that speaketh at the Last Day." (Ether 4:10)

Moro 7 39Verses 39

Moro 7 39I judge that ye have faith in Christ because of your meekness. Mormon saw that his brethren to whom he spoke were meek and willing to show their faith in Christ by good works-works of righteousness. He also saw in their humility a complete dependence on God, and therein a meekness which the Lord Jesus Himself promised that such a one would inherit the Earth; not as conquering invaders, but as children and heirs of Him, Who is the Ruler of all. Mormon interpreted their integrity to Christ's teachings as a mark of their faith in Him, saying: "If ye have not faith in Him then are ye not fit to be numbered among the people of His Church." (v. 39)

SCMoro 7 40Moro 7 41Moro 7 42Moro 7 43Verses 40-43

SCMoro 7 40Moro 7 41Moro 7 42Moro 7 43I would speak unto you concerning Hope. Mormon now began to discourse on the second portion of his text, Hope, by first asking: "How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall have a hope?" and "And what is it that ye shall hope for?" Again, Mormon answered his own query: "The Atonement of Christ and the power of His Resurrection, to be raised unto Life Eternal. That, dear reader, is the sum and substance of all our joy, our happiness and peace. With an eye of faith we discern Life Eternal; with a clean mind, clean of all worldly things, we joyously hope for it. Our faith in Christ and our desire to obtain its promised reward, Life Everlasting, causes us to strive, for the glory of God, to lay hold upon every good thing (See, vv. 19-20), that in doing so we might attain (See, v. 40) that which we see through the eye of faith, and which in our minds we look forward to-hope for. "Wherefore, if a man have faith he must needs have hope"; for faith begets hope, "for without faith there cannot be any hope."

Moro 7 43Verses 43

Moro 7 43A man cannot have faith and hope, save he shall be meek, and lowly of heart. The phrase, lowly of heart, does not mean a low, debased person, but one, the thoughts of whose heart are easily moulded by Christ-like appeals of virtue, purity, and goodness. We understand it is a mark of freedom from pride and arrogance; condescending in lowly (not low) service to others. It connotes humility, and humility engenders faith, begets hope, and makes charity man's first consideration in ameliorating man's woes. The word charity is used only in the New Testament, never in the Old. In the American Revised Version of the Bible, charity is always translated love.

SCMoro 7 44Moro 7 45Moro 7 46Moro 7 47Verses 44-47

SCMoro 7 44Moro 7 45Moro 7 46Moro 7 47A man must needs have charity. Imbued with many Christ-like virtues, among them being meekness and lowliness of heart, a man whose faith in Christ brings forth good works, and whose hope for Eternal Life is shored up by his faith, offers a sacrifice to God which is acceptable to Him. If, on the other hand, a man is designing, ostentatious, and what he does is for display or show, to say the least, he is pharisaical; and will be like the early Christians who introduced pageantry and gaudy shows into the simple worshiping services of the Saints, he will gradually lose the vision he had through the eye of faith, and which once was bright and clear. Such a man we will find has become destitute of the greatest virtue God has infused into man-Charity.

SCMoro 7 44Moro 7 45Moro 7 46Moro 7 47Charity is ennobling to the soul. Mormon lists many qualities that are evident in one when that one is sort of effervescent with the Spirit of Christ. Without charity, one is nothing, for Mormon says: "Charity is the pure love of Christ," (v. 47) and without it "all things must fail." (v. 46) Without charity, man is but an animal; survival of the fittest is the theme of his existence, and birth, but an accident. Charity, that is love, makes the weak, strong, and the strong, stronger.

SCMoro 7 44Moro 7 45Moro 7 46Moro 7 47The word, Charity, as used by Paul in his First Letter to the Corinthians, Chapter 23, and as it occurs elsewhere in the New Testament, has not been fully understood by Bible readers. It means love, and particularly love of Christ. This is made clear in the Book of Mormon. It does not mean benevolence or alms-giving, etc. The doctrine which St. Paul inculcates is that eloquence, learning, faith, alms-giving, and even martyrdom, are profitless to the soul, unless they are fruits of our love of Christ. Moroni must have felt that the time would come when this explanation would be necessary. It has come. We need to be told that love of Christ must be the spring by which the spiritual mechanism of a Christian life is set in motion and kept going. We need to be told that the purity of this powerful emotion (charity-the love of Christ) will have to stand the test of the Last Day. It must not be mixed with pretense.

SCMoro 7 44Moro 7 45Moro 7 46Moro 7 47St. Peter must have had that same thought in mind, when he wrote: "Adding...to your brotherly kindness "philadelphia"-love, not charity as the King James Version has it. The original is agape. Scholars tell us that paganism knew only philantropia and philadelphia as between relatives in blood, but the agape, the love of Christ, as applied to Peter's brethren, is original with revealed religion, which is the Gospel of Jesus Christ. (See, Second Epistle of Peter, 1:7-11)

Moro 7 48Verse 48

Moro 7 48Pray unto the Father...that ye may be filled with this love....Mormon closed his sermon on faith in Christ, the hope we have in Him of eternal rest in the Kingdom of God, and love of Christ and all men which will bring forth good works, meet for that just reward. He urged his beloved brethren to supplicate God in humble prayer that this love-the love of Christ-may fill their very beings, that truly they might be sons of God. And that when the Savior appears in all the splendor of His might, this hope now fostered within our hearts will be realized by us unto the fulfilling of the vision we see through eyes of faith. "That we may be purified even as He is pure," was Mormon's prayer for all.
