Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 8

SCMoro 8 1Moro 8 2Moro 8 3Verses 1-3

SCMoro 8 1Moro 8 2Moro 8 3An epistle of my father, Mormon, written to me, Moroni...soon after my calling to the ministry. No doubt that Moroni had kept the letter here recorded as a treasured reminder of his youth. He says that his father wrote it to him shortly after he, that is, Moroni, was called to the ministry of Christ.

SCMoro 8 1Moro 8 2Moro 8 3The letter was of a personal nature, but as it deals with a subject of great importance, Moroni was constrained by the spirit of prophecy, to include it in his own writings. By that same spirit, he saw that the time would come when men, unenlightened by God's Holy Spirit, would consign innocent little children to an existence with the devil and his angels because, albeit through no fault of their own, they had not been baptized.

SCMoro 8 1Moro 8 2Moro 8 3After rendering thanks to God that the Lord Jesus Christ had been mindful of his worthy son, and had called him to His holy work, Mormon invoked the continued blessings of the Holy One of Israel on Moroni, to the end that "through His infinite goodness and grace" Moroni would always be preserved "through the endurance of faith on His Name." It was a note that expressed a filial tenderness existing between father and son.

SCMoro 8 4Moro 8 5Moro 8 6Verses 4-6

SCMoro 8 4Moro 8 5Moro 8 6I speak unto you concerning that which grieveth me exceedingly. Without burdening his father who was already high in the councils of the Church, with questions of doctrine, Moroni had evidently spared, or attempted to spare, him from the consideration of opinions that differed one from another concerning the necessity of baptizing little children. That there had been disputations among the Saints where Moroni lived regarding this departure from the "right way" had not previously reached Mormon's attention. However, Mormon had learned the truth (v. 5), and in this written message had urged his son to "labor diligently" that this malignant growth of error "should be removed from among you." To aid Moroni in its removal, was the end and objective to which Mormon had directed this letter stating in no uncertain language, the truth pertaining thereto.

Moro 8 7Verse 7

Moro 8 7I inquired of the Lord concerning this matter. Without any delay on the part of Mormon, he, upon hearing of it, immediately put the matter of disputation before the Lord. Without delay, Mormon told Moroni: "The word of the Lord came to me by the power of the Holy Ghost," Mormon giving that source as authority for what he would thereafter say.

Moro 8 8Verse 8

Moro 8 8Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer..."I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance." The voice of Jesus then repeated words that need no interpreter. They were the words Christ spoke to the Scribes and the Pharisees who complained to His disciples when they saw Him (their Master-Matthew 9:12) eating with Publicans and Sinners: "They that are whole need not a physician; but they that are sick." (Luke 5:31)

Moro 8 8The voice of our Lord then compared little children to one who needs no physician; "Little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin." Baptism is for the remission of sins, therefore, to baptize little children for the remission of sins which they did not commit, and could not, is to hold God to ridicule, and make a "solemn mockery" of His goodness and mercy.

SCMoro 8 9Moro 8 10Moro 8 11Moro 8 12Moro 8 13Moro 8 14Moro 8 15Verses 9-15

SCMoro 8 9Moro 8 10Moro 8 11Moro 8 12Moro 8 13Moro 8 14Moro 8 15This thing shall ye teach. Many who profess religion, especially the teachers in the church of the devil, tell their followers what not to do, but, however, what to do, is not in their curriculum. Mormon tells Moroni what to do. "I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach-repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall be saved with their little children." (v. 10)

SCMoro 8 9Moro 8 10Moro 8 11Moro 8 12Moro 8 13Moro 8 14Moro 8 15Little children who die before they reach the age of accountability, are holy unto the Lord. They are pure, even as He is pure. They are not rebellious when the decrees of Heaven are made known to them. They are obedient to God's commands, and trust in His wisdom and His guidance as they do their earthly parents. From the very first, God has ordained their Salvation, and in His grace, has provided for their well-being. The command is given, "Be thou as a little child." Mormon draws the inevitable conclusion, that to remit a man's sins-wash his garments clean in the Blood of the Lamb-while a child whose garments never were soiled, but are white, goes to an everlasting punishment, is irreconcilable to the idea of a just and merciful God which those have who are righteous.

SCMoro 8 9Moro 8 10Moro 8 11Moro 8 12Moro 8 13Moro 8 14Moro 8 15Little children are alive in Christ. Little children are spotless. They came from God's presence, pure, and so do they return if they die before their actions make them liable. God, in forgiving the sins of one who offends against knowledge, and, at the same time, retains in a child, who in itself is without sin, the sins of their First Parents-original sin as some call it-because of having not been baptized, is a "partial God," treating His children differently, and a "changeable God," deviating from His announced word. (v. 12) Little children are alive in Christ; they are not spiritually dead, but live in His protecting care. If a child dies, we are comforted by the promise of Eternal Life.

SCMoro 8 9Moro 8 10Moro 8 11Moro 8 12Moro 8 13Moro 8 14Moro 8 15To suppose that little children must needs be baptized, lacks understanding of God's love, upon which all Creation was rounded. It marks as unseeing, the eyes that should behold the beauties of the Heavens and the Earth. All things were made and fashioned by the love of God, and He will not depart therefrom. He is the loving Father of all men, and one of His children is as precious in His sight as another. He will not save one, and forsake the other. He has provided Salvation for all, and he who says that His ways are not straight is "in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity." Such a man has not the love of Christ in his heart, neither has he faith in divine promises, nor anything in which to look forward with joy. (v. 14) As Mormon wrote to Moroni, "He hath neither faith, hope, nor charity," which last is the "pure love of Christ." (Moroni 7:47)

Moro 8 15Verse 15

Moro 8 15Awful is the wickedness...A man who is without love for God and all men, especially little children, is of all men, the most miserable, the most deeply to be pitied; he cannot see, nor can he feel, the rest which is in Christ. He goes about his task, day by day, unmindful of God's presence in every experience of his life. The follies and foolishness of the world, absorb him, and as we have noted before, "Crowd all thoughts of God from his heart." There is no peace to comfort him when faint, there is no joy in living. A state of mental hell awaits every move, and in its wake he curses both God and man. Awful is that hell into which he chooses to go. Awful is the wickedness of him who supposeth "that God saveth one child because of baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism." Baptism of little children is a relic of the Dark Ages when men believed in witches and superstition guided the feet of those who sought Eternal Life.

Moro 8 16Verse 16

Moro 8 16Wo be unto them that pervert the ways of the Lord. Pervert, means to twist, or to turn to error, to cause deviation from the right or true course; to lead astray, or to corrupt. In the manner of baptizing little children, Mormon pronounces wo upon those who insist that they should be. To perish will surely be the lot of them that do not repent; such a fate is possible to him in whom love does not abide. He who twists and turns (perverts) the right ways of the Lord, and corrupts the great saving principles of the Gospel of Christ, destroys himself. If one wants to make himself of no value in God's Kingdom, just break the laws by which it is governed. That is what Mormon meant when he said: "Wo be unto them that pervert the ways of the Lord." There is no surer way to pervert God's holy laws than not to keep them.

Moro 8 16Mormon spoke boldly to his son, because he spoke by the authority of God, and with God at his side, Mormon feared no man. Let the dissidents declaim their beliefs, and the infirm of mind, their indifference, but Mormon, unlike them, had the truth with him and it made him strong. With the Word of God in his mouth, and the God of Truth nearby, Mormon knew no weakness. Fearing only the Lord Who is the Savior of all God's children, he without the restraint of the wicked, proclaimed Salvation through the mercy of Christ to "all little children...and also all they that are without the law." (v. 22)

SCMoro 8 17Moro 8 18Moro 8 19Moro 8 20Moro 8 21Moro 8 22Verses 17-22

SCMoro 8 17Moro 8 18Moro 8 19Moro 8 20Moro 8 21Moro 8 22I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love. We imagine that for the sake of emphasis, Mormon repeated almost in detail, the things he wanted Moroni to declare as the Word of the Lord: That all little children are alike, and partakers of Salvation; God is not a partial God, neither a changeable Being; little children cannot repent, because they cannot sin; they are all alive in Christ because of His mercy; he that saith that little children need baptism setteth at naught the Atonement of Christ, and denieth the power of His Resurrection.

SCMoro 8 17Moro 8 18Moro 8 19Moro 8 20Moro 8 21Moro 8 22Wo, wo, wo, unto such, for they have neither faith, hope, nor charity, which is everlasting love. Of all the self-inflicted woes that occupy the human heart, the wo most bitter and malignant, is in him in whose heart there is no love. We mean by that, a heart like granite; a heart wherein love does not enter, neither does it abound and therefore cannot go out. In such a heart there is no hope of attaining, that which the eye of faith reveals. And if a man has charity, which, we repeat is the pure love of Christ, his aim, like the purpose Christ had in offering His life for the good of mankind, will be to help the helpless and those who have no helper but the Lord. That is charity, which does not mean donations to the Poor Box, alms-giving.

SCMoro 8 17Moro 8 18Moro 8 19Moro 8 20Moro 8 21Moro 8 22The power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law. A great truth which is not understood by the people of the world, but the justice of it is made, known in the love and mercy of God for all His children, is beautifully shown in the simple words of Nephi, who spoke as he was moved upon by the power of the Holy Ghost:

SCMoro 8 17Moro 8 18Moro 8 19Moro 8 20Moro 8 21Moro 8 22"And if they will not repent and believe in His name, and be baptized in His name, and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, has spoken it.

SCMoro 8 17Moro 8 18Moro 8 19Moro 8 20Moro 8 21Moro 8 22"Wherefore, He has given a law; and where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the Atonement; for they are delivered by the power of Him.

SCMoro 8 17Moro 8 18Moro 8 19Moro 8 20Moro 8 21Moro 8 22"For the atonement satisfieth the demands of His justice upon all those who have not the law given to them, that they are delivered from that awful monster, death and hell, and the devil, and the lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment; and they are restored to that God who gave them breath, which is the Holy One of Israel.

SCMoro 8 17Moro 8 18Moro 8 19Moro 8 20Moro 8 21Moro 8 22"But wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state! (II Nephi 9:24-27)

SCMoro 8 23Moro 8 24Moro 8 25Moro 8 26Verses 23-26

SCMoro 8 23Moro 8 24Moro 8 25Moro 8 26Putting trust in dead works. Doing anything not needful is a dead work. Little children need no baptism, therefore to baptize them is a dead work, it availeth nothing. It makes a mockery of the sacred Ordinance, and in doing so, one denies the mercies of the Savior, and the power, of His Holy Spirit unto Salvation. Christ came into the world to save all men, not just a few; and to condemn any or many unto eternal damnation is trusting in dead works, and not in Him Who is alive as are all those who put their trust in Him. "He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless that there can be no more death." (Abinadi, Mosiah 16:8)

SCMoro 8 23Moro 8 24Moro 8 25Moro 8 26Mormon tells his son that this thing ought not to be, or in other words, there should be no contention among the Saints about baptizing little children. For baptism is unto repentance, and repentance is unto those who are under condemnation, because of a broken law. Little children cannot repent because they have broken no law, and are under no condemnation. But it is different with those who know the law and then break it. According to the requirements of the law they have need to repent, that the law may be fulfilled in them, and if their repentance is sincere, have their sins remitted by entering into the waters of baptism.

SCMoro 8 23Moro 8 24Moro 8 25Moro 8 26With the remission of sins come meekness and lowliness of heart. Meekness means complete dependence on God, and lowliness of heart, connotes, loving all men as brothers because we see in them sons of the same Father Who is God. Not pride, nor wealth, or station in life, distinguishes our place, but service to our fellow men.

SCMoro 8 23Moro 8 24Moro 8 25Moro 8 26In serving our fellow men, we serve God. Christ, in serving us condescended to things of a lower estate (not low), so as His followers, is it impossible that we serve them with that same spirit of love, even as He served the children of men?

SCMoro 8 23Moro 8 24Moro 8 25Moro 8 26Lowliness of heart does not even suggest a heart that is low, or one that is dead in trespass and sin, but one that is alive in Christ, and one that may be easily fashioned after that which is just and true. Not a heart of stone, like one of granite. With hearts attuned to the harmonies of Heaven, and spirits aflame with the love of Christ, we remember that to serve Him is the soul's purest happiness, and to worship Him, life's greatest freedom. May we suggest in the spirit of prayer, that which follows: "And when we render Thee our homage, may we also remember that only by obedience to Thy commands, by faithfulness to our duties, by the goodness of our deeds, can we make our worship acceptable to Thee." This, dear reader, is the first expression of meekness and lowliness of heart, and for us to recognize Him in every experience of life, is to put a crown of glory upon the head of meekness, and to exalt the heart that is lowly to heights that are too great for mortals, and to realms of the glorified which to us are real, we having seen them through eyes of faith.

SCMoro 8 23Moro 8 24Moro 8 25Moro 8 26It is then, that the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, fills us "with hope and perfect love" which Mormon says: "Suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things." (7:45) Communion with God through prayer is then the natural desire of His children, and as they grow in years, so will they grow in grace, "and in the knowledge of the glory of Him that created them, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true," (See, Mosiah 4:12) "and this until the end shall come, when all the Saints shall dwell with God."

SCMoro 8 27Moro 8 28Moro 8 29Moro 8 30Verse 27-30

SCMoro 8 27Moro 8 28Moro 8 29Moro 8 30The pride...of the Nephites hath proven their destruction except they repent. Mormon was the Commander-in-Chief of the armies of the Nephites, and as such was at the scene of battle with the Lamanites. His grief was most bitter, not because of the greater number of the enemy for with the Lord's help it did not matter whether few or many, but by reason of the wickedness that abounded everywhere among his people.

SCMoro 8 27Moro 8 28Moro 8 29Moro 8 30Mormon promised that unless he went to battle soon with the Lamanites, he would write further instructions to his son, however, he asked Moroni to continue in prayer "that repentance may come unto them." Mormon was almost despondent for he realized that many times the Lord had rescued his people, but just as many times had they, after showing a sorrow for their iniquity, returned not only to their pride and false ways, but to wickedness, every time more degrading, more debasing, and more depraving, than ever. Mormon saw that his people were abounding in evil, and in that part of the Commonwealth wherein the war raged, they were openly rebelling against "all the power and authority which cometh from God." Not only were they in rebellion against the authority of the government, but also against the authority vested in the Church of God, insomuch so that those who had long relied upon its guidance, now "are denying the Holy Ghost." "I fear," wrote Mormon, "lest the Spirit hath ceased striving with them"; notwithstanding that they had been ministered to by angels from Heaven, and revelations from On High had been their almost constant guide, they, in spite of warnings by holy men rejected further guidance and refused any longer to be led by One Who was mightier than they. In their own might they sought to vanquish the manpower of the Lamanites which was far greater than their own. Although Mormon was their military leader, besides being their spiritual mentor, he saw only destruction awaiting them, for such were the words of the prophets, and even the Savior Himself if they did not repent. Unto the fulfilling of the prophecies, he knew that soon his people would perish.

SCMoro 8 27Moro 8 28Moro 8 29Moro 8 30A fond farewell, and with the added wish, which we may call a prayer, that they shall meet again, was Mormon's petition which we may judge was offered to God in humble supplication.
