Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 7 ( 1961)

Chapter 10

Moro 10 1Verse 1

Moro 10 1I write unto my brethren, the Lamanites. Conforming to the request made by his father, Mormon, which he made of his son in the epistle just recorded (v. 24, Chapter 9), Moroni wrote to the Lamanites concerning Christ, first noting that "more than four hundred and twenty years have passed away since the sign was given of the coming of Christ." Moroni was grieved because in what to him was a very few years, the Lamanites, whom he called "my brethren" had retrogressed from a pinnacle of peace and happiness in the Lord, to a condition of evil servitude. They, he remembered, were once a white and a delightsome people when, in humility, they served God, now they had given their hearts over to all manner of wickedness. The words he wrote were in witness that Christ is; that all good comes of Him, and that through Him Eternal Life may be obtained by all who have "faith, hope, and charity."

SCMoro 10 2Moro 10 3Verses 2-3

SCMoro 10 2Moro 10 3I seal up these records. Moroni expresses his intention, that "after I have spoken a few words by way of exhortation unto you," "I will seal up these records." By "these records" he meant those "few plates" which his father "gave unto my son Moroni," (Mormon 6:6) and also the writings he himself had made, which included his abridgment of King Mosiah's translation of the Twenty-four Plates of Ether.

SCMoro 10 2Moro 10 3When, in the wisdom of the Lord, these Records shall come forth to the knowledge of the Remnant of the Lamanites who endure at that day, he exhorts them to remember "How merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down unto the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts."

SCMoro 10 5Moro 10 4Verse 4

SCMoro 10 5Moro 10 4By the Power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. Moroni here gives us the key that by its use a testimony of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon may be obtained. Prayer is that key. That key is the means whereby will be unlocked the vast store of knowledge and information that lies hidden between its covers. Earnest prayer to the Father in the Name of Christ will reveal the truth of the Sacred Record to the sincere seeker. Not a doubting prayer, wavering betwixt uncertainty and misgiving; not vacillating because of the faults alleged found therein (See, Inspired Preface; Mormon 8:2; 9:30-31), but a prayer seeking neither pretext nor excuse; one of real intent, coming from a thankful heart and a mind open to the promptings of the Holy Ghost, by Whose Power God will make known, or make the truth of the Book of Mormon manifest.

SCMoro 10 5Moro 10 4Not only will the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon be made known to the prayerful seeker after truth, but by that same Power, which is the Power of the Holy Ghost, the truth of all things will be manifest. That Power is as a still small voice which comes from the Father, to lead, and to guide, and to enlighten the way before the one who earnestly searches for truth.

SCMoro 10 6Moro 10 7Verses 6-7

SCMoro 10 6Moro 10 7Whatsoever thing is good is just and true. "All things which are good cometh of God," (Moroni 7:12) and confirming Moroni's words, is the voice of the Lord Himself declaring the source whence springs the realization of our greatest hope, or in other words, the supreme and highest good from which all our blessings come: "Good cometh of none save it be of Me" (Jesus Christ, Ether 4:12). Moroni therefore draws the only logical conclusion, "Whatsoever thing is good is just and true." (v. 6)

SCMoro 10 6Moro 10 7The words of the Lord, spoken by all His holy prophets, are good tidings; they are just and true. Speaking of these words to Moroni, the Lord said: "I am He Who speaketh." (Ether 4:8) Benjamin, one of the great Prophet-Kings of the Nephites, when about to lay aside his mortal clothing, in an address to his much-loved people, said: "There is not any among you...that have not been taught...concerning the records which contain the prophecies which have been spoken by the holy prophets, even down to the time our father, Lehi, left Jerusalem; And also, all that has been spoken by our fathers until now. And behold, also, they spake that which was commanded them of the Lord; therefore, they are just and true." (Mosiah 2:34-35)

SCMoro 10 8Moro 10 9Verses 8-9

SCMoro 10 8Moro 10 9Every good gift cometh of Christ. For the benefit and betterment of His children who seek after Him, God, the Father, has ordained that holy gifts, wrought by His Spirit, should be the portion of the faithful among them. There are some who call these gifts, miracles. They are because we do not understand them. But those who do not believe in Christ, and have no faith in His Power-to excuse their unbelief-deny them. They loosely use the word, accidents. However, let us remember that they are really not so. They are the inspirations of God. His gifts are many, and Moroni says that they are administered in many different ways. God gives His gifts that His children may profit thereby. Surely, to the humble and true, they are almost inspiring, certainly inspiriting. But to the proud and haughty, "and he that shall deny these things, unto him will I show no greater things." (Jesus Christ, Ether 4:8)

SCMoro 10 8Moro 10 9"But to him that believeth these things which I have spoken, him will I visit with the manifestations of My Spirit, and he shall know and bear record. For because of My Spirit he shall know these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good. And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of Me; for good cometh of none save it be of Me...." (Ether 4:11-12)

SCMoro 10 8Moro 10 9Further, the Lord said: "I am the same that leadeth men to all good." (Ibid., 4:12) Wherefore, we conclude that everything that is good, everything that is just and true, witnesseth that Christ is; that He lives, and the knowledge thereof is confirmed to the righteous by the Power of the Holy Ghost. The Power of the Holy Ghost, is also called by Moroni the Power of God (v. 7), which Power he exhorts be not denied, for by it, the Lord manifests the truth of all things even to the working of mighty miracles and in giving His precious gifts to the believer.

SCMoro 10 8Moro 10 9Moroni enumerates many of God's gifts, and assures us that "Every good gift cometh of Christ." (v. 8) Which thought leads us to another in which we can be comforted: "There is enough in revealed and natural religion to establish beyond a doubt the hope in Christ which we cherish. Let us accept His gifts with grateful hearts, and leave the mysteries surrounding them to that day, as we have said before, when the things we know not now, we shall know hereafter. Again, we are comforted by the knowledge that there is a wisdom we cannot fathom; there is a Power we cannot grasp. "For behold, I am God; and I am a God of miracles; and I will show unto the world that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and I work not among the children of men save it be according to their faith." (II Nephi 27:23) The working of miracles is a Heavenly Science, little understood by men. However, the Great Scientist of the Universe knows all, and there is nothing that He does not understand.

SCMoro 10 20Moro 10 21Moro 10 22Moro 10 23Verses 20-23

SCMoro 10 20Moro 10 21Moro 10 22Moro 10 23Faith, hope, and charity. Reference is hereby made to the entire Chapters: Ether 12; Moroni 7; also II Nephi 26:30; 33:7-9; Alma 7:24.

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26Verses 24-26

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26If the day cometh that the Power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief. Unbelief in the Majesty of Christ, robs many otherwise upright people of the knowledge pertaining to "greater things" (Ether 4:4-13) which God has in store for them, if only they repent and turn to Him. When Moroni was in the process of making an abridgment of King Mosiah's translation of the Jaredite Records found upon the Twenty-four Gold Plates of Ether, the Lord in instructing him to seal up the interpretation thereof (King Mosiah's interpretation of the things which in vision the Brother of Jared saw) said: "For they shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord." (Ibid., 4:6)

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26"And in that day that they shall exercise faith in Me, saith the Lord, even as the Brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in Me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the Brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all My revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the Heavens and the Earth, and all things that in them are." (Ibid., 4-7) At the same time, the Lord further said: "Come unto Me, O ye Gentiles, and I will show you greater things, the knowledge which is hid up because of unbelief." (Ibid., 4:13)

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26We can understand more fully the tragedy of the Nephites' destruction, and in it see fulfilled the words of Father Lehi: "Wherefore, I, Lehi, have obtained a promise, that inasmuch as those whom the Lord God shall bring out of Jerusalem shall keep His commandments, they shall be blessed upon the face of this land, and there shall be none to molest them, nor to take away the Land of their Inheritance; and they shall dwell safely forever. But, behold, when the time cometh that they shall dwindle in unbelief, after they have received so great blessings from the hand of the Lord-having a knowledge of the creation of the Earth, and all men, knowing the great and marvelous works of the Lord from the Creation of the World; having power given them to do all things by faith; having all the commandments from the beginning, and having been brought by His infinite goodness into this precious Land of Promise-behold, I say, if the day shall come that they will reject the Holy One of Israel, the true Messiah, their Redeemer and their God, behold, the judgments of Him that is just shall rest upon them." (II Nephi 1:9-10)

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26The Sacred Record shows how literally fulfilled were Lehi's words, as also it reveals that the great things which the Brother of Jared saw on the mount were made known to the Nephites at Christ's command: "And after Christ truly had showed Himself to His people, He commanded that they should be made manifest." (Ether 4:2) That is, the full record.

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26Moroni wrote: "I have written upon these plates the very things which the Brother of Jared saw; and there never were greater things made manifest than those which were made manifest to the Brother of Jared." (Ibid., 4:4)

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26The Nephites had knowledge of these things, we (Latter-day Saints) do not. Nevertheless, and in spite of our present slothfulness wherein is neglect of righteous living, we are promised that they will be made known unto us when in faithfulness we come unto the Lord. (Ibid., 4:6-7) These things which the Brother of Jared saw, were made known to the Nephites when they were righteous, after the visit to them of the Resurrected Redeemer. When the Nephites began to fall away from belief in Him, He took the record of these things from them, and commanded that it be hid up. (Ibid., 4:3) The promise of the Lord is sure. That knowledge will be given to us when our belief in Him, and our faith and our works of righteousness, are like unto the Nephites of that generation.

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26Remember this, God does not show forth His glory nor His might, unto the working of His works, unto men who do not believe that He is. "For if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them...." Also, "And I, Moroni...said...I know that Thou workest unto the children of men according to their faith." (Ibid., 12:29)

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26Wo be unto them that deny and deride the gifts of God, and therein die with that lie on their lips, for they also deny Christ unto Whom they must come or they cannot be saved. (See I Nephi 13:40)

SCMoro 10 24Moro 10 25Moro 10 26The destruction of the Nephites also confirms Moroni's prophetic utterance. Although his words of prophecy were written by him sometime after the Nephites' tragic end we may see in them a warning to us not to let indifference and unbelief rob us of our faith in God, nor let indolence and slothfulness dim our vision wherein we see Everlasting Life and eternal rest in the Kingdom of God. Moroni's words are to us and to all mankind: "And now I speak unto all the ends of the Earth-that if the day cometh that the Power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief. And wo be unto the children of men if this be the case; for there shall be none that doeth good among you, no not one. For if there be one among you that doeth good, he shall work by the Power and gifts of God." (vv. 24-25) In a word, that was the Nephites' transgression. They were destroyed because of unbelief which led to all manner of iniquity.

SCMoro 10 27Moro 10 28Moro 10 29Moro 10 30Moro 10 31Moro 10 32Moro 10 33Moro 10 34Verse 27-34

SCMoro 10 27Moro 10 28Moro 10 29Moro 10 30Moro 10 31Moro 10 32Moro 10 33Moro 10 34God shall show unto you, that that which I have written is true. Moroni's exhortation to remember the things of which he wrote was a gentle reproof, yet a serious one, to those unto whom his words should come, for their unbelief. He urges them to keep in mind his testimony of Christ which will surely stand against them at the last day unless they receive it, and abide it. The time is fast approaching; "It speedily cometh," he says, "that ye shall know that I lie not." And as a witness at the Judgment Bar of God when the Remnant of the Lamanites shall stand before Him to be judged, with nothing under which to hide, they will be forced to admit that the saving grace of Christ was declared unto them by "this man, like as one crying from the dead, even as one speaking out of the dust." Moroni, by the spirit of prophecy, saw the coming forth of his words in the manner that history records of these last days. Out of the Hill Cumorah through the instrumentality of Joseph, the Seer, then to the Remnant of Moroni's brethren, came his words, thus fulfilling Moroni's prophecy herein recorded.

SCMoro 10 27Moro 10 28Moro 10 29Moro 10 30Moro 10 31Moro 10 32Moro 10 33Moro 10 34Moroni's words which he wrote were in fulfillment of the promise made by the Lord, which was recorded by many of the Nephite prophets, that Christ would be preached and His Gospel declared to the Lamanites of the latter days. "For they shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the everlasting God." We can understand more fully Moroni's statement when we remember the Lord's Own words concerning the words of His servants, "For I am He Who speaketh." (Ether 4:8-10; II Nephi 20: 39) Until the end of time, that none shall have an excuse, or as long as "there shall be one man upon the face" of the Earth "to be saved," (Moroni 7:36) the testimony of Christ which Moroni herein bears, which is the spirit of prophecy, "shall hiss forth from generation to generation." (Isaiah uses the word, hiss, in Chapter 5, verse 26 of the Book under his name)

SCMoro 10 27Moro 10 28Moro 10 29Moro 10 30Moro 10 31Moro 10 32Moro 10 33Moro 10 34Moroni again appeals to those unto whom his words shall come, that "Ye would come unto Christ, and lay hold upon every good gift, and touch not the evil gift, nor the unclean thing." (See, Ether 4:11-12; unclean-see concordance of the word listed below)

Moro 10 31Verse 31

Moro 10 31O Jerusalem. Familiar with the prophecies of Isaiah, a copy of which the Nephites had upon the Brass Plates of Laban, and copies of which were widely distributed among them, Moroni herewith recorded a prayerful injunction to the members of the Church of God. He uses Isaiah's phrase, O Jerusalem, to express his beautiful hope that the earthly tabernacle of God's Kingdom should grow, and that no longer would the travails and the pains, and the perplexities of existence, hamper the enlargements "of its borders forever," or in other words, until the kingdoms of the Earth shall become the Kingdom of God. As the Kingdom of God grows in extent, and in strength, and in power, we may look forward to the continuing fulfillment of the "Covenant of the Eternal Father which He hath made unto thee, O House of Israel."

SCMoro 10 32Moro 10 33Verses 32-33

SCMoro 10 32Moro 10 33Yea, come unto Christ. Take upon you the Name of Christ, and by obedience to His commands "be perfected in Him." Follow not any evil inclinations of the flesh, but "Love God with all your might, mind, and strength." Then, in His atoning blood-He doing for us that which we could not do for ourselves- we are made perfect in Him, if we keep the commandments He has given us. Our sins are therein forgiven, and we become perfect in Christ. We stand spotless before His Judgment Seat at the Last Day, and with the knowledge therein imparted, we "Can in nowise deny the Power of God."

Moro 10 34Verses 34

Moro 10 34And now I bid unto all, farewell. Almost alone, with the remains all about him of what once was an enlightened people, but who had gone astray, Moroni, bereaved and destitute of all but the hope he had in Christ, solemnly bids a heartfelt Farewell to those of his brethren who shall live to witness God's mercy and His long-suffering. He enters calmly and even joyously upon the prospect that awaits the faithful, and rejoices therein. "I soon go to rest," he says, "in the Paradise; II Nephi 9:13; IV Nephi 1:14)1 of God, until my spirit and body shall again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing Bar)2 of the Great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead. AMEN."

Moroni

Moroni was the son of Mormon, and the last representative of the Nephite race. He was an officer under his father and commanded a corps of ten thousand men at the battle of Cumorah. He wrote the concluding portions of the Book of Mormon, from the commencement of the 8th chapter of the book bearing his father's name to the end of the volume. This includes the book bearing his own name and his abridgment of the history of the Jaredites known to us as the Book of Ether. He takes up the history of the continent from the time of the slaughter at Cumorah and tells us (400 A.D.) that "the Lamanites are at war one with another and the face of the land is one continued round of murder and bloodshed; and no man knoweth the end of the war." And again, yet later, he writes, "Their wars are exceeding fierce among themselves, and because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ, and I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ, wherefore I wander whithersoever I can, for the safety of mine own life." Such was the sad condition of the Lamanite race in the early part of the fifth century after Christ. There (421 A.D.) the inspired record closes; thenceforth we have nothing but uncertain tradition until the veil was withdrawn by the discovery of America.

In the course of nature Moroni died and in the Lord's due time he was resurrected. The sacred records and other holy things, buried in Cumorah, still remained in his care. On him the duty fell to watch that no unsanctified hands disturbed their rest. When the time set in the councils of heaven for their translation came he delivered them to the instrument chosen by the Holy Ones, Joseph Smith, the prophet, who, when he had accomplished his work, returned them to Moroni, who still keeps ward and watch over these treasures.

But was there any fear that the records would be disturbed by unholy hands? I believe there was. It must not be forgotten that the Lamanites of the days of Moroni were not the benighted savages of earlier centuries. They were not the pure blood of Laman and his associates. They were dissenters from the Nephites, apostates from the true church; and they were as well acquainted with the fact that the records existed as the prophet himself. In the days of Mormon he removed the plates from the hill Shim, for the very reason that he feared the Lamanites would get hold of and destroy them. There was the same reason for fear should they discover their resting place in Cumorah.

The tradition of the existence of these records remained for long ages with the Lamanites; undoubtedly growing fainter and fainter and more confused as the centuries rolled by, but still not entirely extinguished. Indeed the remembrance is not utterly obliterated in the minds of some of Lehi's children to this very day.

So strong was this recollection in earlier days, that we are told of a time when a council of wise men, with royal consent, made an attempt to rewrite them. How successful they were we have no means of telling; but this we know, that when the Spaniards conquered Mexico the land was full of sacred books. These so much resembled the Bible of the Christians that the Catholic priests came to the conclusion that it was a trick of the devil to imitate the holy scriptures, and in this way lead the souls of the Indians to perdition. In their bigoted zeal they burned every copy of these books or charts that they could find, and inflicted abominably cruel punishments upon those who were found concealing them. In this way almost every copy of these valuable works was destroyed.

Though the original records were hidden by the power of God, it is quite possible that many copies of the scriptures remained in the hands of the Lamanites when the Nephites were destroyed. In the Book of Mormon frequent reference is made to the abundance of these copies. No doubt in the last desolating wars between the Nephites and Lamanites but little care was taken of these scriptures. Both peoples had sunken deep in iniquity; they cared nothing for the word of God, and probably, as we may infer from Mormon's apprehensions, the Lamanites destroyed all the copies of the holy books that they found. Still, it is not improbable that some few of these works remained untouched; and when the Lamanites had gotten over their first overwhelming bitterness and aversion to everything Nephite, and again began to grow in civilization, they would search for these records, if for nothing else than as valued curiosities; though we think they sometimes prized them much more highly.

The plates having been guarded by the power of God, were translated by the same power. No book was ever translated more accurately; none, by human wisdom, as faultlessly as the Book of Mormon.

Joseph Smith, the youth whom God honored by making him the instrument in His hands of restoring these precious records to the knowledge of mankind, was born in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, on the 23rd of December, 1805. When about ten years of age his parents, with their family, moved to Palmyra in the State of New York, in the vicinity of which place he lived for about eleven years; the later portion of the time in a village called Manchester. Joseph helped his father on the farm, hired out at day-work, and passed his years very much after the manner common to young men in the rural districts. His advantages for obtaining anything beyond the rudiments of education were exceedingly small: he could read without much difficulty, write an imperfect hand, and had but a very limited understanding of arithmetic.

The circumstances attending Joseph's first vision in the early spring of 1820, when he saw the Father and the Son, have been so often published, and must necessarily be so familiar to our readers, that with this bare reference to the fact we will pass them by. It is sufficient for the purpose of our present research to know that this marvelously important event did happen. Then and there the cornerstone was laid of the vast fabric to God's glory of which Joseph was the master builder, when mortal beings alone are considered.
