FAITH AND REPENTANCE.

     Article 4.--We believe that the first principles and ordinances
     of the Gospel are (1) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; (2)
     Repentance; ...

FAITH.

1. Nature of Faith.--The predominating sense in which the term faith is used throughout the scriptures is that of full confidence and trust in the being, purposes, and words of God. Such trust, if it be implicit, will remove all doubt concerning things accomplished or promised of God, even though such things be not apparent to or explicable by the ordinary senses of mortality; hence arises the definition of faith given by Paul: "Now faith is the substance [i.e. confidence, or assurance] of things hoped for, the evidence
  [i.e. the demonstration or proof] of things not seen."[268] It is
  plain that such a feeling of trust may exist in different persons
  in varying degrees; indeed, faith may manifest itself from the
  incipient feeble state which is little more than mere belief,
  scarcely free from hesitation and fear, to the strength of abiding
  confidence that sets doubt and sophistry at defiance.

  [268] Heb. xi, 1.

2. Belief, Faith, and Knowledge, while intimately related and ofttimes regarded as one, are in reality not identical. The terms faith and belief are sometimes used as synonyms, nevertheless each of them has a specific and definite meaning in our language, although in early English there was virtually no distinction between them, and therefore the words are used interchangeably in the ancient scriptures. Belief may consist in a merely intellectual assent, whilst faith implies such confidence and conviction as will impel to action. Dictionary authority justifies us in drawing a distinction between the two, according to present usage in English; and this authority defines belief as a simple assent to the truth or actuality of anything, excluding however the moral element of responsibility through such assent, which is embraced by faith. Belief is in a sense passive,--a mental agreement or acceptance only; faith is active and positive,--such a reliance and confidence as will lead to works. Faith in Christ comprises belief in Him, combined with trust in Him. One cannot have faith without belief; yet he may believe and still lack faith. Faith is vivified, vitalized, living belief.

3. Certainly there is a great difference in degree, even if no essential distinction in kind be admitted between the two. As shall be presently demonstrated, faith in the Godhead is requisite to salvation; it is indeed a saving power, leading its possessor in the paths of godliness; surely a mere belief in the existence and attributes of Deity is no such power. Mark the words of the Apostle James.[269] In his general epistle to the Saints, he chided his brethren for certain empty professions. Said he in effect:--You take pride and satisfaction in declaring your belief in God; you boast of being distinguished from the idolaters and the heathen because you accept one God; you do well to so profess, and so believe; but, remember, others do likewise; even the devils believe; and so firmly that they tremble at thought of the fate which that belief makes plain to them.--What, do devils believe in Christ? Aye, their belief amounts to certain knowledge, as to who He is, and as to what constitutes His part, past, present, and to come, in the Divine plan of human existence and salvation. Call to mind the case of the man possessed by evil spirits, in the land of the Gadarenes; a man so grievously tormented as to be a terror to all who came near him; he could be neither tamed nor bound; people were afraid to approach him; yet when he saw Christ, he ran to Him and worshiped, and the wicked spirit within him begged for mercy at the hands of that Righteous One, calling Him "Jesus, Son of the Most High God."[270] Again, an unclean spirit in the synagogue at Jerusalem implored Christ not to use His power, crying in fear and agony, "I know thee, who thou art, the Holy One of God."[271] And then, we are told that Christ was once followed by a multitude made up of people from Idumæa and Jerusalem, from Tyre and Sidon; among them were many who were possessed of evil spirits, and these, when they saw Him, fell down in the attitude of worship, exclaiming: "Thou art the Son of God."[272] Was there ever mortal believer who confessed more unreservedly a knowledge of God and His Son Jesus Christ than did these same followers of Satan? The evil one knows God and Christ; remembers, perchance, somewhat concerning the position which he once occupied as a Son of the Morning[273]; yet with all such knowledge he is Satan still. Neither belief nor its superior,--actual knowledge,--is efficient to save; for neither of these is faith. Belief may be a product of the mind, faith is of the heart; belief is founded on reason; faith largely on intuition.

  [269] See James ii, 19.

  [270] See Mark v, 1-18; also Matt. viii, 28-34.

  [271] See Mark i, 24.

  [272] Mark iii, 8-11. See "Jesus the Christ," pp. 181, 310-312.

  [273] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 25-27.

4. We frequently hear it said that faith is imperfect knowledge; that the first disappears as the second takes its place; that now we walk by faith but some day we will walk by the sure light of knowledge. In a sense this is true; yet it must be remembered that knowledge may be as dead and unproductive in good works as is faithless belief. Those confessions of the devils, that Christ was the Son of God, were founded on knowledge; yet the great truth which they knew did not change their evil natures. How different was their acknowledgment of the Savior from that of Peter, who, to the Master's question "Whom say ye that I am?" replied in practically the words used by the unclean spirits before cited, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God."[274] Peter's faith had already shown its vital power; it had caused him to forsake much that had been dear, to follow his Lord through persecution and suffering, and to put away worldliness with all its fascinations, for the sacrificing godliness which his faith made so desirable. His knowledge of God as the Father, and of the Son as the Redeemer, was perhaps no greater than that of the unclean spirits; but while to them that knowledge was but an added cause of condemnation, to him it was a means of salvation.

  [274] Matt. xvi, 15-16; see also Mark viii, 29; Luke ix, 20.

5. The mere possession of knowledge gives no assurance of benefit therefrom. An illustration may perhaps be here allowed. During an epidemic of cholera in a large city, a scientific man proved to his own satisfaction, by chemical and microscopical tests, that the water supply was infected, and that through it contagion was being spread. He proclaimed the great truth throughout the city, and warned all against the use of unboiled water. Many of the people, although incapable of comprehending his methods of investigation, far less of repeating such for themselves, had faith in his warning words, followed his instructions, and escaped the death to which their careless and unbelieving fellows succumbed. Their faith was a saving one. To the man himself, the truth by which so many lives had been spared was a matter of knowledge. He had actually seen, under the microscope, the death-dealing germs in the water; he had tested their virulence; he knew of what he spoke. Nevertheless, in a moment of forgetfulness he drank of the unpurified water, and soon thereafter died a victim to the plague. His knowledge did not save him, complete though it was; yet others, whose reliance was only that of faith in the truth which he declared, escaped the threatening destruction. Truly he had knowledge; but, was he wise? Knowledge is to wisdom what belief is to faith; one an abstract principle, the other a living application. Not possession merely, but the proper use of knowledge constitutes wisdom. Of belief compared with faith it may be said, as it has been taught of knowledge and wisdom:--

    "Knowledge and wisdom, far from being one,
    Have oft-times no connection....
    Knowledge, a rude unprofitable mass,
    The mere material with which wisdom builds,
    Till smoothed and squared and fitted to its place,
    Does but encumber whom it seems to enrich."

6. The Foundation of Faith.--In a theological sense, we understand by faith as already outlined, a living, inspiring confidence in God, and an acceptance of His will as our law, and of His words as our guide, in life. Faith in God is possible only as we come to know, or at least to believe, that He exists, and moreover, that He is a Being of worthy character and attributes. The grounds upon which man founds his belief or knowledge respecting the existence of God, have been examined in a previous lecture;[275] some of the Divine attributes, as made known through God's dealings with mankind, have been likewise specified. A restatement of the principal facts relating to the character of the Supreme Being may be in place here, inasmuch as some knowledge concerning the attributes of Deity is essential to the exercise of faith in Him. Let us adopt the summary of facts as set forth by the prophet, Joseph Smith; he presents, on the testimony of scripture, the following statements respecting the character of God.

  [275] Lecture II, page 28.

"(1.) That He was God before the world was created, and the same God that He was after it was created.

"(2.) That He is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness, and that He was so from everlasting, and will be to everlasting.

"(3.) That He changes not, neither is there variableness with Him; but that He is the same from everlasting to everlasting, being the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever; and that His course is one eternal round, without variation.

"(4.) That He is a God of truth and cannot lie.

"(5.) That He is no respecter of persons; but in every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of Him.

"(6.) That He is love."[276]

  [276] Doc. and Cov., Lectures on Faith, iii, 13-18.

7. A knowledge of these comprehensive features of the Divine nature will enable one to exercise rational and intelligent faith in God. And upon such knowledge of God's existence, the worthiness of His character, and the perfection of His attributes, is man's faith in Him established. Faith then cannot be exercised in the absence of all knowledge; yet even the benighted heathen show some of the fruits of faith; but they have at least the conviction that arises from man's natural intuition regarding a supreme power, which has been described as a common heritage of humanity. In every human soul, even in that of the savage, there is some basis for faith, however limited and imperfect the darkness of heredity or of wilful sin may have made it. Every child of God is born with the capacity for faith inherent within his own nature; and all yearn in some degree for the strength and aid which only faith can give. We shall yet learn:--

                "That in all ages
    Every human heart is human;
    That in even savage bosoms
    There are longings, yearnings, strivings,
    For the good they comprehend not.
    That the feeble hands and helpless,
    Groping blindly in the darkness,
    Trust God's right hand in that darkness,
    And are lifted up and strengthened."[277]

  [277] Longfellow.

The heathen's faith may be imperfect and weak, for his ability to recognize the evidence upon which belief in God depends may be small. While the first promptings of faith toward God may be the result of natural intuition,--a faint echo of the songs of praise which were so common during the state of primeval childhood,--the later development will be largely the result of unprejudiced and prayerful investigation and search for truth.

8. From trustworthy evidence, rightly interpreted, true faith will spring; from false evidence, only distorted and misplaced faith can arise.[278] Our conclusions concerning any question under test will be governed largely by the number and credibility of the witnesses, if it so be that we cannot investigate the alleged facts for ourselves; and in either case, by the amount and quality of the evidence obtainable. Now, however improbable a declaration may appear to us, if the truth of it be affirmed by witnesses in whom we have confidence, we are led to admit the statement, at least provisionally, as true. If many credible witnesses testify, and moreover, if collateral evidence suggest itself through facts in our possession, we may consider the statement as proved; although we would be unable to affirm the truth of it on the strength of our personal knowledge, until we had seen and heard for ourselves, until in fact each of us had become a competent witness through personal observation. To illustrate: of the citizens of this country but a comparative few perhaps have visited the seat of government; the masses know nothing by actual observation of the Capitol, the executive mansion, and other buildings of national interest and importance; very few have personally met the President who resides there. How does any one of the multitudes who have not seen for themselves, know of the city of Washington, of the Capitol, and of the President? Solely through the testimony of others. He may have among his acquaintances one or many who have been in the capital of our country and whose statements he accepts as true; assuredly he has heard or read of those who do know for themselves. Then he hears of laws being framed there, and of edicts issuing from the nation's headquarters; his studies in school, his use of maps and books, and many other incidents add to the evidence which soon becomes decisive. His inferences multiply, and develop into a positive conviction. He acquires a faith in the existence of a center of national government, and a regard for the laws which emanate therefrom.

  [278] See Note 1.

9. Let us take another illustration: Astronomers tell us that the earth is of a kind with certain of the stars; that it is one of a family of planets which revolve about the sun in concentric orbits; and that some of those planets are many times the size of our globe. We may not be skilled in astronomers' methods of observation and calculation, and may therefore be unable to test the truth of these statements for ourselves; but we find such a mass of evidence resulting from the united testimony of those in whose skill as scientific workers we have confidence, that the conclusions are accepted by us as fully proved.

10. So too concerning the existence, authority, and attributes of God, the testimonies of many holy men in ancient and modern times,--prophets whose credibility is established by the fulfillment of their predictions,--have come to us in united declaration of the solemn truths, and nature furnishes corroborative testimony on every side. To reject without disproving such evidence is to ignore the most approved methods of investigation and research known to man. The development of faith from evidence is illustrated in the scenes of a certain memorable Pentecost celebration, on which occasion thousands of Jews, imbued with a preconceived prejudice that Jesus was an impostor, heard the apostles' testimonies, and witnessed the attendant signs: three thousand of them were convinced of the truth and became followers of the Son of God, their prejudice giving place to belief, and their belief developing into faith with its accompanying works.[279] The foundation of faith in God then is a sincere belief in or knowledge of Him, as sustained by evidence and testimony, tested and proved by earnest, prayerful search.

  [279] See Acts ii.

11. Faith a Principle of Power.--In its widest sense, faith,--the assurance of things for which we hope, and the evidence of things not discernible through our senses,--is the motive principle that impels men to resolve and to act. Without its exercise, we would make no exertion the results of which are future: without faith that he may gather in the autumn, man would not plant in the spring; neither would he essay to build, did he not have confidence that he would finish the structure and enjoy its use; had the student no faith in the possibility of successfully following his studies, he would not enter upon his courses. Faith thus becomes to us the foundation of hope, from which spring all our aspirations, ambitions, and confidences for the future. Remove man's faith in the possibility of any desired success, and you rob him of the incentive to strive. He would not stretch forth his hand to seize did he not believe in the possibility of securing that for which he reaches. This principle becomes therefore the impelling force by which men struggle for excellence, oftentimes enduring vicissitudes and suffering that they may achieve their purposes. Faith is the secret of ambition, the soul of heroism, the motive power of all effort.

12. The exercise of faith is pleasing unto God, and thereby His interposition may be secured. It was through faith that the Israelites in their exodus from Egypt followed their dauntless leader into the bed of the sea; and through the protecting agencies of God, which that faith drew forth, they were saved, while the Egyptians met destruction in attempting to follow.[280] With full confidence in the instructions and promises of God, Joshua and his intrepid followers laid siege to Jericho; and the walls of that city of sin fell before the faith of the besiegers without the use of battering rams, or other engines of war.[281] By the same power Joshua gained the assistance of the luminaries of heaven, in his work of victory over the Amorites.[282] Paul cites[283] us also to the instances of Gideon,[284] Barak,[285] Samson,[286] Jephthah,[287] David,[288] Samuel,[289] and the prophets, "who, through faith, subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong." It was by faith that Alma and Amulek were delivered from captivity, while the prison walls which had previously held them were rent and demolished.[290] By faith, Nephi and Lehi[291] the sons of Helaman were protected from their Lamanite foes, even by fire, though they were not burned; and a still greater work was wrought in the hearts of their persecutors, for they became enlightened, and accepted the testimony of truth. Through the operation of faith even the waves of the sea may be subdued,[292] trees are subject to the voice of Him who commands by faith;[293] mountains may be removed for the accomplishment of righteous purposes,[294] the sick may be healed,[295] evil spirits may be cast out,[296] and the dead may be raised to life.[297] All things are wrought through faith.[298]

  [280] Exo. xiv, 22-29; Heb. xi, 29.

  [281] Josh. vi, 20; Heb. xi, 30.

  [282] Josh. x, 12.

  [283] Heb. xi, 32-34; Doc. and Cov., Lecture i, 20.

  [284] Judges vi, 11.

  [285] Judges iv, 6.

  [286] Judges xiii, 24.

  [287] Judges xi, 1; xii, 7.

  [288] I Sam. xvi, 1, 13; xvii, 45.

  [289] I Sam. i, 20; xii, 20.

  [290] Alma xiv, 26-29; Doc. and Cov., Lecture on Faith, i, 19.

  [291] Helaman v, 20-52; Doc. and Cov., Lecture on Faith, i, 19.

  [292] Matt. viii, 23-27; Mark iv, 36-41; Luke viii, 22-25; Matt.
  xiv, 24-32; Mark vi, 47-51, John vi, 17-21.

  [293] Matt. xxi, 17-21; Mark xi, 12-13, 20-24; Book of Jacob iv,
  6.
  [294] Matt. xvii, 20; Mark xi, 23-24; Ether xii, 30; Jacob iv, 6;
  Doc. and Cov., Lecture on Faith, i, 19.

  [295] Luke xiii, 11; xiv, 2; xvii, 11; xxii, 50; Matt. viii, 2, 5,
  14, 16, etc.

  [296] Matt. viii, 28; xvii, 18; Mark i, 23.

  [297] Luke vii, 11-16; John xi, 43-45; I Kings xvii, 17-24.

  [298] Matt. xvii, 20; Mark ix, 23; Eph. vi, 16; I John v, 4.

13. But, it may be argued that faith of itself is not a source of power; that its effect is due to an external interposition of Divine aid, which faith merely secured; and the skeptic may add that an omniscient God, if truly loving and kind, would act independently and give without waiting to be invoked through faith or prayer. A sufficient answer is found in the abundant proof furnished by the scriptures, that the Almighty operates in accordance with law; and that arbitrary and capricious action is foreign to His nature. However the laws of heaven may have been formulated, the application of their beneficent provisions to humanity is dependent on the faith and obedience of the mortal subjects. Consider the defeat of Israel by the men of Ai; a law of righteousness had been violated, and things that were accursed had been introduced into the camp of God's people this transgression stopped the current of Divine help, and until the people had sanctified themselves, the power was not renewed unto them.[299] Christ was influenced, and to some extent controlled in His miracles among men by the faith or lack of faith of the people. The common benediction, "Thy faith hath made thee whole," with which He announced the healing interposition, is evidence of the fact. Then we learn that in His own country He could do no mighty work, being restrained by the unbelief of the people.[300]

  [299] Joshua vii-viii.

  [300] Matt. xiii, 58; Mark vi, 5 6.

14. A Condition of Living Faith.--A condition essential to the exercise of a living, growing, sustaining faith in Deity, is the consciousness on man's part that he is at least endeavoring to live in accordance with the laws of God as he has learned them. A knowledge that he is wilfully and wantonly sinning against the truth will deprive him of sincerity in prayer and faith, and will surely estrange him from his Father. He must feel that the trend of his life's course is acceptable to God, that with due allowance for mortal weakness and human frailty he is in some measure approved of the Lord, or he can never approach the throne of grace with confidence. The consciousness of earnest effort toward godly walk and conduct is a power of itself, strengthening its possessor in sacrifice and under persecution, and sustaining him in all good works. It was this knowledge of assured communion with God that enabled the saints of olden time to endure as they did, though their sufferings were appalling. Of them we read that some "were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth."[301] As in former days so in the present, the saints have been sustained through all their sufferings by the sure knowledge of Divine approval; and the faith of righteous men has ever grown through a consciousness of their good endeavors.

  [301] Heb. xi, 35-38; see also Doc. and Cov., Lectures on Faith,
  vi.

15. Faith Essential to Salvation.--Inasmuch as salvation is attainable only through the mediation and atonement of Christ, and since this is made applicable to individual sin only in the cases of those who obey the laws of righteousness, faith in Jesus Christ is indispensable to salvation. But no one can believe in Jesus Christ, and at the same time doubt the existence and authority of either the Father or the Holy Ghost; therefore faith in the entire Godhead is essential to salvation. Paul declares that without faith it is impossible to please God, "for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him."[302] The scriptures abound in assurances of salvation to those who exercise faith in God, and obey the requirements which that faith makes plain. Christ's words on the matter are conclusive, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned;"[303] and again, "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life, and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him."[304] And similar doctrines did His apostles teach after His death all the days of their ministry.[305] A natural result of implicit faith in the Godhead will be a growing confidence in the scriptures as containing the word of God, and in the words and works of His authorized servants, who speak as the living oracles of heaven.

  [302] Heb. xi, 6.

  [303] Mark xvi, 16.

  [304] John iii, 36. See also John iii, 15; iv, 42; v, 24; xi, 25;
  Gal. ii, 20; I Nephi x, 6, 17; II Nephi xxv, 25; xxvi, 8; Enos i,
  8; Mos. iii, 17; III Nephi xxvii, 19; Hel. v, 9; Doc. and Cov.
  xiv, 8.

  [305] Acts ii, 38; x, 42; xvi, 31; Rom. x, 9; Heb. iii, 19; xi, 6;
  I Pet. i, 9; I John iii, 23; v, 14.

16. Faith a Gift of God.--Though within the reach of all who diligently strive to gain it, faith is nevertheless a Divine gift, and can be obtained only from God.[306] As is fitting for so priceless a pearl, it is given to those only who show by their sincerity that they are worthy of it, and who give promise of abiding by its dictates. Although faith is called the first principle of the gospel of Christ, though it be in fact the foundation of all religion, yet even faith is preceded by sincerity of disposition and humility of soul, whereby the word of God may make an impression upon the heart.[307] No compulsion is used in bringing men to a knowledge of God; yet, as fast as we open our hearts to the influences of righteousness, the faith that leads to life eternal will be given us of our Father.

  [306] Matt. xvi, 17; John vi, 44, 65; Eph. ii, 8; I Cor. xii, 9;
  Rom. xii, 3; Moroni x, 11.

  [307] See Rom. x, 17.

17. Faith and Works.--Faith in a passive sense, that is, as mere belief, is inefficient as a means of salvation. This truth was clearly set forth both by Christ and the apostles, and the vigor with which it was declared may be an indication of the early development of a most pernicious doctrine,--that of justification by belief alone. The Savior taught that works were essential to the validity of profession and the efficacy of faith. Mark his words:--"Not every one that sayeth unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven."[308] "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him."[309] The instructions of the Apostle James are particularly explicit:--"What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit? Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works."[310] And to this may be added the words of John:--"And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him."[311]

  [308] Matt. vii, 21.

  [309] John xiv, 21.

  [310] James ii, 14-18.

  [311] I John ii, 3-5.

18. To these teachings may be added many inspired utterances from Nephite scriptures[312] and from modern revelation,[313] all affirming the necessity of works, and denying the saving efficacy of mere belief. Yet in spite of the plain word of God, sectarian dogmas have been promulgated to the effect that by faith alone man may achieve salvation, and that a mere profession of belief shall open the doors of heaven to the sinner.[314] The scriptures cited and man's inherent sense of justice furnish a sufficient refutation of these false teachings.

  [312] See I Nephi xv, 33; II Nephi xxix, 11; Mosiah v, 15; Alma
  vii, 27; ix, 28; xxxvii, 32-34; xli, 3-5.

  [313] Doc. and Cov. throughout.

  [314] See Note 2.

REPENTANCE.

19. Nature of Repentance.--The term repentance is used in the scriptures with several different meanings, but, as representing the duty required of all who would obtain forgiveness for transgression, it indicates a godly sorrow for sin, producing a reformation of life, and embodies (1) a conviction of guilt; (2) a desire to escape the hurtful effects of sin; and (3) an earnest determination to forsake sin and to accomplish good. Repentance is a result of contrition of soul, which springs from a deep sense of humility, and this in turn is dependent upon the exercise of an abiding faith in God. Repentance therefore properly ranks as the second principle of the gospel, closely associated with and immediately following faith. As soon as one has come to recognize the existence and authority of God, he feels a respect for Divine laws, and a conviction of his own unworthiness. His wish to please the Father, whom he has so long neglected, will impel him to forsake sin; and this impulse will acquire added strength from the sinner's natural and commendable desire to escape, if possible, the dire results of his own waywardness. With the zeal inspired by fresh conviction, he will crave an opportunity of showing by good works the sincerity of his newly developed faith; and he will regard the remission of his sins as the most desirable of blessings. Then he will learn that this gift of mercy is granted on certain specific conditions only.[315] The first step toward the blessed state of forgiveness consists in the sinner confessing his sins; the second, in his forgiving others who have sinned against him; and the third in his showing his acceptance of Christ's atoning sacrifice by obeying the Divine requirements.

  [315] See Note 3.

20. (1.) Confession of Sins is essential, for without it repentance is incomplete. The Apostle John tells us, "If we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."[316] We read also, "He that covereth his sins shall not prosper, but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy."[317] And unto the Saints in this dispensation the Lord has said, "Verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, forgive sins unto those who confess their sins before me and ask forgiveness, who have not sinned unto death."[318] And that this act of confession is included in repentance is shown by the Lord's words: "By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins: Behold he will confess them and forsake them."[319]

  [316] I John i, 8-9; see also Psalms xxxii, 5; xxxviii, 18; Mosiah
  xxvi, 29-30.

  [317] Prov. xxviii, 13.

  [318] Doc. and Cov. lxiv, 7.

  [319] Doc. and Cov. lviii, 43.

21. (2.) The Sinner Must be Willing to Forgive Others, if he hopes to obtain forgiveness. Surely his repentance is but superficial if his heart be not softened to the degree of tolerance for the weaknesses of his fellows. In teaching His hearers how to pray, the Savior instructed them to supplicate the Father: "Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors."[320] He led them not to hope for forgiveness if in their hearts they forgave not one another: "For," said He, "if ye forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses."[321] And forgiveness between man and man, to be acceptable before the Lord, must be unbounded. In answering Peter's question, "Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him--till seven times?" the Master said, "I say not unto thee, until seven times; but until seventy times seven;" clearly intending to teach that man must ever be ready to forgive. On another occasion He taught the disciples, saying, "If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him."[322]

  [320] Matt. vi, 12; see also Luke xi, 4.

  [321] Matt. vi, 14-15; III Nephi xiii, 14-15.

  [322] Luke xvii, 3-4.

22. Illustrating further the Divine purpose to mete unto men the measure they mete unto their fellows,[323] the Savior put forth to His disciples a parable of a king, to whom one of his subjects owed an enormous sum of money, ten thousand talents; but when the debtor humbled himself and pleaded for mercy, the compassionate heart of the king was moved and he forgave his servant the debt. But the same servant, going out from the presence of the king, met a fellow-servant who was indebted to him in a paltry sum; forgetting the mercy so recently shown unto himself, he seized his fellow-servant and cast him into prison till he would pay the debt. Then the king, hearing of this, sent for the wicked servant, and, denouncing him for his lack of gratitude and consideration, handed him over to the tormentors.[324] The Lord will not listen to petitions nor accept an offering from one who has bitterness in his heart toward others; "First be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift."[325] In His revealed word to the Saints in this day, the Lord has placed particular stress upon this necessary condition: "Wherefore I say unto you that ye ought to forgive one another, for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses, standeth condemned before the Lord, for there remaineth in him the greater sin;"[326] and to remove all doubt as to the proper subjects for human forgiveness, it is added:--"I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men."

  [323] Matt. vii, 2; Mark iv, 24; Luke vi, 38.

  [324] Matt. xviii, 23-35. See "Jesus the Christ," pp. 392-395.

  [325] Matt. v, 23-24: III Nephi xii, 23-24.

  [326] Doc. and Cov. lxiv, 9-10.

23. (3.) Confidence in Christ's Atoning Sacrifice constitutes the third essential condition in obtaining remission of sins. The name of Christ is the only name under heaven whereby men may be saved;[327] and we are taught to offer our petitions to the Father in the name of His Son. Adam received this instruction from the mouth of an angel,[328] and the Savior personally instructed the Nephites to the same effect.[329] But no person can truthfully profess faith in Christ, and refuse to obey His commandments; therefore obedience is essential to remission of sin; and the repentant sinner will eagerly seek to learn what is further required of him.

  [327] Pearl of Great Price: Moses vi, 52.

  [328] Pearl of Great Price: Moses v, 6-8.

  [329] III Nephi xxvii, 5-7.

24. Repentance, to be worthy of its name, must comprise something more than a mere self-acknowledgment of error; it does not consist in lamentations and wordy confessions, but in the heart-felt recognition of guilt, which carries with it a horror for sin, and a resolute determination to make amends for the past and to do better in the future. If such a conviction be genuine, it is marked by that godly sorrow which, as Paul has said, "worketh repentance to salvation, not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world worketh death."[330] Apostle Orson Pratt has wisely said:--"It would be of no use for a sinner to confess his sins to God, unless he were determined to forsake them; it would be of no benefit to him to feel sorry that he had done wrong, unless he intended to do wrong no more; it would be folly for him to confess before God that he had injured his fellow-man, unless he were determined to do all in his power to make restitution. Repentance, then, is not only a confession of sins, with a sorrowful, contrite heart, but a fixed, settled purpose to refrain from every evil way."

  [330] II Cor. vii. 10.

25. Repentance Essential to Salvation.--This evidence of sincerity, this beginning of a better life, is required of every candidate for salvation. In the obtaining of Divine mercy, repentance is as indispensable as faith, it must be as extensive as sin. Where can we find an absolutely sinless mortal? Sagely did the Preacher of old declare "There is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good and sinneth not."[331] Who, therefore, has no need of forgiveness? who is exempt from the requirements of repentance? God has promised forgiveness unto those who truly repent before Him, it is unto such that the advantages of individual salvation, through the atonement of Christ, are extended. Isaiah thus admonishes to repentance, with assuring promises of forgiveness: "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon."[332]

  [331] Eccl. vii, 20; see also Rom. iii, 10; I John i, 8.

  [332] Isa. iv, 6-7; see also II Nephi ix, 24; Alma v, 31-36,
  49-56; ix, 12; Doc. and Cov. i, 32-33; xix, 4; xx, 29; xxix, 44;
  cxxxiii, 16.

26. The burden of inspired teachers in every age has been the call to repentance. To this effect was heard the voice of John crying in the wilderness, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."[333] And the Savior followed with "Repent ye and believe the gospel,"[334] for "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish."[335] So too proclaimed the apostles of old, that God "commandeth all men everywhere to repent."[336] And in the present dispensation has come the word, "We know that all men must repent, and believe on the name of Jesus Christ ... or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God."[337]

  [333] Matt. iii, 2.

  [334] Mark i, 15.

  [335] Luke xiii, 3.

  [336] Acts xvii, 30.

  [337] Doc. and Cov. xx, 29.

27. Repentance, a Gift from God.--Repentance is a means of pardon, and is therefore one of God's great gifts to man. It is not to be had for the careless asking; it may not be found upon the highway, it is not of earth, but a treasure of heaven, and is given with care, yet with boundless liberality unto those who have brought forth works that warrant its bestowal.[338] That is to say, all who prepare themselves for repentance will, by the humbling and softening influence of the Holy Spirit, be led to the actual possession of this great gift. When Peter was charged by his fellow-worshipers with a breach of law in that he had associated with Gentiles, he told his hearers of the Divine manifestations he had so recently received; they believed and declared "Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life."[339] Paul also, in writing to the Romans, teaches that repentance comes through the goodness of God.[340]

  [338] Matt. iii, 7-8; Acts xxvi, 20.

  [339] Acts xi, 18.

  [340] Rom. ii, 4; see also II Tim. ii, 25.

28. Repentance not always Possible.--The gift of repentance is extended to men as they humble themselves before the Lord, it is the testimony of the Spirit in their hearts; if they hearken not unto the monitor it will again leave them, for the Spirit of God strives not ever with man.[341] Repentance becomes more difficult as the sin is more wilful; it is by humility and contrition of the heart that sinners may increase their faith in God, and so obtain from Him the priceless gift of repentance. As the time of repentance is procrastinated, the ability to repent grows weaker; neglect of opportunity in holy things brings a forfeit of the chance. In giving commandment to Joseph Smith, in the early days of the present Church, the Lord said, "For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven, and he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received, for my Spirit shall not always strive with man saith the Lord of Hosts."[342]

  [341] Gen. vi, 3; Doc. and Cov. i, 33.

  [342] Doc. and Cov. i, 31-33.

29. Repentance Here and Hereafter.--The Nephite prophet, Alma, described the period of earthly existence as a probationary state, granted unto man for repentance;[343] yet we learn from the scriptures that repentance may be obtained, under certain conditions, beyond the vail of mortality. Between the times of His death and resurrection, Christ "preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah;"[344] these the Son visited, and unto them He preached the Gospel, "that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it."[345]

  [343] Alma xii, 24; xxxiv, 32; xiii, 4.

  [344] I Peter iii, 19-20.

  [345] Doc. and Cov. lxxvi, 73-74. See "Jesus the Christ," ch.
  xxxvi.

30. Yet no soul is justified in postponing his efforts to repent because of this assurance of God's long-suffering and mercy. We know not on what terms repentance will be obtainable in the hereafter, but it is unreasonable to suppose that the soul who has wilfully rejected the opportunity of repentance in this life will find it easy to repent there. To procrastinate[346] the day of repentance is to deliberately place ourselves in the power of the adversary. As Amulek taught and admonished the multitude of old: "For behold this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God, ... therefore I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance unto the end.... Ye cannot say when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world. For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance, even until death, behold ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his."[347]

  [346] Alma xxxiv, 33.

  [347] Alma xxxiv, 32-35.

NOTES.

     1. Example of False Faith.--"When Europeans first began their
     explorations in the New World, the Indians whom they met were
     much amazed at the power and explosive properties of gun-powder,
     and asked many questions respecting the manner in which it was
     produced. The Europeans, taking advantage of the ignorance of the
     savages, and seeing an opportunity to increase their wealth by
     the deception, told the Indians that it was the seed of a plant
     which grew in the lands they had come from, and doubtless it
     would thrive in their land also. The Indians, of course, believed
     this statement, and purchased the supposed seed, giving in
     exchange for it large quantities of gold. In implicit faith they
     carefully planted the supposed seed, and anxiously watched for
     its sprouting and the appearance of the plant; but it never came.
     They had faith in the statements made to them by the Europeans,
     but as these statements were false, and therefore the evidence on
     which the Indians based their belief untrue, their faith was
     vain."--Orson Pratt.

     2. The Sectarian Dogma of Justification by Faith alone has
     exercised an influence for evil since the early days of
     Christianity. The idea upon which this pernicious doctrine was
     founded was at first associated with that of an absolute
     predestination, by which man was fore-doomed to destruction, or
     to an utterly undeserved salvation. Thus, Luther taught as
     follows:--"The excellent, infallible, and sole preparation for
     grace is the eternal election and predestination of God." "Since
     the fall of man, free-will is but an idle word." "A man who
     imagines to arrive at grace by doing all that he is able to do,
     adds sin to sin, and is doubly guilty." "That man is not
     justified who performs many works; but he who without works has
     much faith in Christ." (For these and other doctrines of the
     so-called "Reformation," see D'Aubigné's History of the
     Reformation, vol. i, pp. 82, 83, 119, 122.) In Miller's Church
     History (vol. iv, p. 514) we read: "The point which the reformer
     [Luther] had most at heart in all his labors, contests, and
     dangers, was the justification by faith alone." Melanchthon
     voices the doctrine of Luther in these words: "Man's
     justification before God proceeds from faith alone. This faith
     enters man's heart by the grace of God alone;" and further, "As
     all things which happen, happen necessarily according to the
     divine predestination, there is no such thing as liberty in our
     wills" (D'Aubigné, vol. iii, p. 340). It is true that Luther
     strongly denounced, and vehemently disclaimed responsibility for,
     the excesses to which this teaching gave rise, yet he was not
     less vigorous in proclaiming the doctrine. Note his words:--"I,
     Doctor Martin Luther, unworthy herald of the gospel of our Lord
     Jesus Christ, confess this article, that faith alone without
     works justifies before God; and I declare that it shall stand and
     remain forever in despite of the emperor of the Romans, the
     emperor of the Turks, the emperor of the Persians,--in spite of
     the pope and all the cardinals, with the bishops, priests, monks,
     and nuns,--in spite of kings, princes, and nobles, and in spite
     of all the world and of the devils themselves; and that if they
     endeavor to fight against this truth they will draw the fires of
     hell upon their heads. This is the true and holy gospel, and the
     declaration of me, Doctor Luther, according to the teachings of
     the Holy Ghost" (D'Aubigné, vol. i, p. 70).

     Fletcher (End of Religious Controversy, p. 90) illustrates the
     vicious extreme to which this evil doctrine led, by accusing one
     of its adherents with having said, "Even adultery and murder do
     not hurt the pleasant children, but rather work for their good.
     God sees no sin in believers, whatever sin they may commit.... It
     is a most pernicious error of the schoolmen to distinguish sins
     according to the fact, and not according to the person. Though I
     blame those who say, let us sin that grace may abound, yet
     adultery, incest, and murder, shall upon the whole, make me
     holier on earth, and merrier in heaven."

     A summary of the mediæval controversy regarding the means of
     grace, including the doctrines of Luther and others, is presented
     in Roberts' Outlines of Ecclesiastical History, part iii,
     section ii, to which the student is referred. The quotations
     given above are incorporated therein.

     3. Forgiveness not always Immediate.--"On account of the
     magnitude of sins committed, repentance is not always followed by
     forgiveness and restoration. For instance, when Peter was
     preaching to the Jews, who had slain Jesus and taken His blood on
     themselves and their children, he did not say, repent and be
     baptized for the remission of sins; but, 'Repent ye therefore,
     and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the
     times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and
  [when] He shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto
  you; whom the heaven must receive until the times of the
  restitution of all things' (Acts iii, 19-21). That is, repent now,
  and believe in Jesus Christ, that you may be forgiven when He whom
  you have slain shall come again in the days of the restitution of
  all things; and prescribe to you the terms on which you may be
  saved."--Compendium, p. 28.
