“He [Joseph Smith] has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded him, and as your Lord and your God liveth it is true.” (D&C 17:6.)

“[God] gave him power from on high, by the means which were before prepared, to translate the Book of Mormon;

“Which contains a record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also;

“Which was given by inspiration, and is confirmed to others by the ministering of angels, and is declared unto the world by them—

“Proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old;

“Thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever. …

“And those who receive it in faith, and work righteousness, shall receive a crown of eternal life.” (D&C 20:8–12, 14.)

“And again, the elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel.” (D&C 42:12.)

“I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book.” (History of the Church, 4:461.)

“I translated the record by the gift and power of God.” (History of the Church, 4:537.)

“Let us take the Book of Mormon, which a man took and hid in his field, securing it by his faith, to spring up in the last days, or in due time; let us behold it coming forth out of the ground, which is indeed accounted the least of all seeds, but behold it branching forth, yea, even towering, with lofty branches, and Godlike majesty, until it, like the mustard seed, becomes the greatest of all herbs. And it is truth, and it has sprouted and come forth out of the earth, and righteousness begins to look down from heaven, and God is sending down His powers, gifts and angels, to lodge in the branches thereof.” (History of the Church, 2:268.)

“When the Book of Mormon was first printed, it came to my hands in two or three weeks afterwards. … I examined the matter studiously for two years before I made up my mind to receive that book. I knew it was true, as well as I knew that I could see with my eyes, or feel by the touch of my fingers, or be sensible of the demonstration of any sense. Had not this been the case, I never would have embraced it to this day.” (Journal of Discourses, 3:91.)

“The Lord has been operating for centuries to prepare the way for the coming forth of the contents of that Book from the bowels of the earth, to be published to the world, to show to the inhabitants thereof that he still lives, and that he will, in the latter days, gather his elect from the four corners of the earth.” (Discourses of Brigham Young, selected by John A. Widtsoe, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954.)

“The Gospel in the Book of Mormon and the Gospel in the Bible both agree: the doctrines in both books are one. The historical part differs only: the one gives the history of an Asiatic, the other of an American people. … It is true, and we know it.” (Journal of Discourses, 5:240–41.)

“Do not trust in yourselves, but study the best books—the Bible and Book of Mormon—and get all the information you can, and then cleave to God and keep yourselves free from corruption and pollution of every kind, and the blessings of the Most High will be with you.” (Journal of Discourses, 12:398.)

“As I did so [begin to read the Book of Mormon] the spirit bore witness that the record which it contained was true. I opened my eyes to see, my ears to hear, and my heart to understand. I also opened my doors to entertain the servants of God.” (As quoted in Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors, Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1964.)

“I felt much of the spirit of God bearing witness to the Book of Mormon. I believed it was light out of darkness and truth out of the ground.” (Wilford Woodruff’s journal, entry dated December 31,1833. Located in Church archives.)

“I read these—the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and I regard them as eternal truths. … [They] contain the words of eternal life unto this generation.” (Journal of Discourses, 22:146,335.)

“I am one that has received from the Lord the strongest revelation concerning the truth of this work [the restoration, including the Book of Mormon]. That manifestation was with me powerfully for hours and hours; and whatever circumstances may occur in my life, as long as my memory lasts this perfect knowledge will remain with me.” (General Conference, October 1900.)

“The Book of Mormon … cannot be disproved, for it is true. There is not a word of doctrine, of admonition, of instruction within its lids, but what agrees in sentiment and veracity with those of Christ and His Apostles, as contained in the Bible. Neither is there a word of counsel, of admonition or reproof within its lids, but what is calculated to make a bad man a good man, and a good man a better man, if he will hearken to it. It bears the mark of inspiration from beginning to end, and carries conviction to every honest-hearted soul.” (Journal of Discourses, 25:99–100.)

“In relation to reading the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants, … no man can be an efficient missionary of this church unless he is familiar with these books. And the more familiar he is with them, the more capable will he be to discharge the duties of his ministry.” (Letter from Joseph F. Smith to his son Joseph Fielding Smith, in From Prophet to Son: Advice of Joseph F. Smith to His Missionary Sons, compiled by Hyrum M. Smith and Scott G. Kenney, Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1981.)

“I have rejoiced during the past six or seven weeks in reading carefully through, at the rate of about ten pages a day, with a prayerful heart, the Book of Mormon. I do not think that I have ever before enjoyed that book so much. I do not think the wonderful testimonies contained in it regarding the divine mission of the Savior, have ever made a more profound impression upon my heart and soul than they have made this last time that I have read the Book of Mormon. I remember, and have often spoken of the fact of reading it in my youthful days, and how there came into my heart an abiding testimony that the book was true, that it was in very deed exactly what it purports to be—the sacred history of the forefathers of the American Indian. I could not as a child or as a young man, comprehend and understand as fully as today the splendid discourses regarding the divine mission of the Savior. His wonderful teachings to the people upon this continent, the wonderful inspired teachings of Alma and Abinadi and many others, as contained in that book. But I am thankful beyond expression that I did read the book in my boyhood days and that the assurance came into my heart that it was in very deed the truth, and that I fell in love with the character of Nephi. …

“I rejoice in the increased testimony that has come into my heart and soul regarding the divinity of the Book of Mormon, in the reading that I have just completed.” (General Conference, April 1924.)

“The Book of Mormon is a sacred record containing information that is found in no other book. The Lord has commanded us to divide with all his children the truths of the everlasting Gospel that have been revealed to prepare them for a place in the Celestial kingdom. …

“It fills my heart with joy to know that every man who will read it [the Book of Mormon] prayerfully, every man who will desire to know whether it be of God or not has the promise, not of Joseph Smith or any living being, but the promise of our Heavenly Father that they shall know of a surety that it is of God. …

“These two books [the Book of Mormon and the Bible] hand in hand teach us all where we came from, why we are here, where we may go, and they both contain the advice, the loving advice of our Heavenly Father intended to inspire us to do that which will enrich our lives here and prepare us for eternal happiness.” (General Conference, April 1936.)

“I testify to you that the Book of Mormon is truly the Word of God, that communication between earth and heaven has been opened up again, and that the true way of the Lord has been revealed to men on earth, showing the means by which all needful knowledge and blessings may be received by every true believer in Christ.” (Instructor, October 1952, p. 318.)

“[The Book of Mormon] is a wonderful book. It is one of the vital cornerstones of the restored Church.” (Improvement Era, November 1960.)

“I started to read the Book of Mormon before I was old enough to be a deacon, and I have been reading it ever since, and I know that it is true. … It seems to me that any member of this Church would never be satisfied until he or she had read the Book of Mormon time and time again, and thoroughly considered it so that he or she could bear witness that it is in very deed a record with the inspiration of the Almighty upon it, and that its history is true. …

“These records [the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price] are priceless. … Through their teachings we are permitted to come nearer unto God, get a better understanding of our Heavenly Father and his Son Jesus Christ, become closer acquainted with them and to know more in regard to the wonderful plan of salvation which they have given unto us and unto the world if it will receive the plan that will exalt us in the kingdom of God to become his sons and his daughters, receiving the fulness of that kingdom. …

“I want to bear testimony to you … that I know that the Book of Mormon is true; that Joseph Smith received it from the hand of God through an angel that was sent to reveal it, the same angel who, while living in this world, finished the record and sealed it up to come forth in this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.” (Improvement Era, December 1961.)

“In this day when the Bible is being downgraded by many who have mingled philosophies of the world with Bible scriptures to nullify their true meaning, how fortunate that our eternal Heavenly Father, who is always concerned about the spiritual well-being of His children, has given to us a companion book of scriptures, known as the Book of Mormon, as a defense for the truths of the Bible that were written and spoken by the prophets as the Lord directed. …

“By this second witness we may know more certainly the meaning of the teachings of the ancient prophets and, indeed, of the Master and His disciples as they lived and taught among men. This should inspire all who would be honest seekers after truth to put these two sacred scriptures together and study them as one book, understanding, as we do, their true relationship.” (Ye Are the Light of the World, Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1974.)

“May I tell you of a great adventure? As I traveled to a weekend assignment, I took with me an unusual book which was my constant companion. I could lay it down only to sleep, eat, and change trains. It fascinated me, captivated me, and held me spellbound with its irresistible charm and engaging interest. I have read it many times.

“As I finished it, I closed the book and sat back, absorbed as I relived its contents. Its pages held me, bound me, and my eyes were riveted to them. I knew the book was factual. …

“It is the word of God. It is a powerful second witness of Christ. …

“In the final chapter of the book is the never-failing promise that every person who will read the book with a sincere, prayerful desire to know of its divinity shall have the assurance. …

“My beloved friends, I give to you the Book of Mormon. May you read it prayerfully, study it carefully, and receive for yourselves the testimony of its divinity.” (Improvement Era, June 1963.)
