As Preston Temple President, I had been advised to spend as much time as possible with the

patrons. I found this to be a particularly pleasant aspect to my duties and was very

fortunate that my very special counsellors allowed me that privilege.

On one occasion I spent a few moments with two elderly patrons who were quietly relaxing

before engaging in an endowment session. As we spoke, I asked one of these men what he

was called to in the Church. His name is Eric and this is his story.

“I was called to a meeting with the Stake President. In my heart I knew that I was to be

interviewed for a new call to serve. I had no inspiration as to the nature of the call and

attended the meeting without any apprehension.

“When I left the Stake President’s office, I was quite dejected. Somehow the call - which I had

accepted - had left me feeling flat, and wondering ‘Why me?’ I had been called to be a Prison

Visitor. I returned home wondering how I could possibly fulfil this call.”

Eric made arrangements to visit the prison to receive instructions for his future visits.

“As I made my way to the prison, still feeling dejected and confused, I heard a voice, quite

clear and distinct, it entered my mind and my heart… ‘Eric, I gave my life for them.’

I was stopped in my tracks. The realisation of these words filled my heart. ‘Eric, I gave my

life for them.’ As much for them, as for me. Tears welled up in my eyes. I became very

emotional and found a quiet area, away from public gaze.

“After a few moments of quiet contemplation, I made my way into the prison to receive my

instruction and begin my Prison Visitor experience.

“I remained a Prison Visitor for 34 years. I learned so much from my experience with these

special members of our society. From within my soul, I learned so much about how to love.”

From my experience with Eric, I have been inspired to serve more diligently, even at times

when my heart was not at peace. Through Eric, I have heard that voice remind me, “Eric, I gave my life for them.”
