Robert L. Millet, Within Reach ( 1995)

Preface

On one occasion Jesus set forth the sobering principle that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a man or woman who trusts in riches to enter into the kingdom of God. "When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?" (Matthew 19:24-25).

Indeed, who can be saved? Or rather, who will be saved? Are there but few who will make it? Is heaven reserved for the prophets and the little children who died before the age of accountability? Will the bulk of humankind fall short of the glory of God and spend an eternity racked with the gnashing realization of what could have been? And what of the Latter-day Saints? How many will be exalted? On the other hand, how many will receive the gospel, participate in the ordinances of salvation, and then qualify for something less than eternal life?

These are questions I have pondered for many years. In our efforts to assure faithful endurance to the end, we speak frequently of the difficulty of navigating the strait and narrow path and of the dangers associated with the precarious climb to celestial glory. In our eagerness to maintain a tight grip on the iron rod, we focus on the justice of God, on the immutable decree that the Holy One "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance" (D&C 1:31), and on the proclamation that "no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom" (3 Nephi 27:19). I suppose that such teachings do much to keep us in line and to plant in our hearts the fear of God's wrath and the torment of disappointment that will surely follow on the heels of missed opportunities. It is no doubt the case that occasionally nothing brings people to repentance "save it [be] exceeding harshness, preaching and prophesying . . . , and continually reminding [the Saints] of death, and the duration of eternity, and the judgments and the power of God, and all these things—stirring them up continually to keep them in the fear of the Lord." That is, those in authority must often use "exceedingly great plainness of speech" in order to keep the people "from going down speedily to destruction" (Enos 1:23).

And yet the gospel of Jesus Christ is good news, news that is intended to liberate us, lift our spirits, and lighten our burdens; it is the glad tidings "that he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness; that through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him" (D&C 76:41-42). The gospel is the "power of God unto salvation" (Romans 1:16), a supernal power that leads to the peaceful assurance that we can make it. No one of us is outside the pale of saving mercy and grace; there is room in heaven for every person who believes in Christ, enters into covenant with him, and does his or her best to keep that covenant.

Joseph Smith penetrated the veil and opened the heavens. He saw God and Jesus Christ. In the process, he came to know something of everlasting import: that the Almighty God is in very deed our Heavenly Parent, the Father of our spirits, that he loves us perfectly and completely, and that he yearns to bless us here and exalt us hereafter. Through his Only Begotten Son he has made available the very powers of godliness, enabling us as mortals not only to be with God once again, but also to be like him. Nothing would bring our Eternal Father greater happiness than for his children to return to that divine presence they once enjoyed. Such knowledge fosters hope; it engenders joy and rejoicing.

In a modern revelation the Lord explained through the Prophet Joseph Smith that the gifts of the Spirit "are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do" (D&C 46:9; emphasis added). In that same book of scripture we are instructed: "If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation" (D&C 6:13; emphasis added). The transcendent blessings of exaltation in the celestial kingdom will come not to those who were perfect and absolutely free from sin in this life, for only Jesus our Savior would qualify according to that high standard. Rather, those who are bound for glory are those who do their best, who try their hardest, who learn to repent quickly and honestly, who learn to pray as if everything depended on the Lord and work as if everything depended on the Lord! Jesus Christ is the Hope of Israel. He is our Savior. As we learn to trust in and rely on his mighty arm, he will deliver us from death and sin and place eternal life within our reach. Of this I testify. For this I am immeasurably grateful.

In the preparation of this work I am indebted to many people—students, teachers, friends, and faculty colleagues—who have challenged me in my study to stretch and reach for deeper understanding. I express special thanks to Lori Soza, a capable and conscientious secretary and assistant, who has done much to prepare the manuscript of this book for publication. The nucleus of this book was an address delivered to the religious education faculty at Brigham Young University entitled "Are You a Saved Mormon?" Feedback in terms of suggestions, corrections, and broadened perspective were enthusiastically offered and gratefully received. Specifically, Professors Larry E. Dahl and Randy L. Bott provided the needed stimulus and valuable references. I thank Sheri Dew and Ronald Millett from Deseret Book for their encouragement to expand the talk into a short book, and Jay Parry for his keen and helpful editorial eye. In spite of so much help from others, however, I alone am responsible for the conclusions drawn from the evidence cited; this book is a private endeavor and not an official publication of either The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or Brigham Young University.

When I was first ordained and set apart as a bishop in 1980, the stake president gave me a remarkable blessing. He offered wise and sound counsel, but none was more meaningful than the words, "Give to the people of your ward a vision of eternal life. Help them know they can make it."

Since that time I have served in numerous capacities in the Church, including three stake presidencies and again as bishop. I have become painfully aware of sin and error, of serious and soul-threatening mistakes of judgment, and of the agony and alienation known only to those who have left the strait and narrow path and lost the light they once had. I have witnessed families torn apart by selfishness, pride, and abuse. I have looked on almost helplessly as individual Latter-day Saints have chosen to follow alternate voices, leave the fellowship of the Church, and in time become enemies to that which they once loved. I have labored for long hours with members who have struggled with issues of morality, the Word of Wisdom, or tithing.

And yet amid it all, the commission of my beloved leader—"Give to the people a vision of eternal life"—comes back to my mind again and again. They are haunting words, words that point up the need to have hope, to rejoice, to hold on in spite of difficulties and distress. I do think we can make it, make it to the celestial kingdom, make it to where God and Christ are. We cannot go there unclean or while harboring unrepentant sins, but I have complete confidence that through the person and powers of our Savior we can put off our sins, put on Christ, and become a people of promise. In the words of President Howard W. Hunter, "We must know Christ better than we know him; we must remember him more often than we remember him; we must serve him more valiantly than we serve him. Then we will drink water springing up unto eternal life and will eat the bread of life" (That We Might Have Joy, p. 5).

Are We Qualified for the Celestial Kingdom?

I tried as a bishop to provide this vision to the members of my ward, and I have tried to do the same thing since then with students, neighbors, and family members. Many times while in temple recommend interviews, I have taken occasion to teach a lesson that I think has had an impact on at least some of my brothers and sisters. Let me set the scene. After all of the questions had been asked and answered properly, I frequently said: "Now, Brother (or Sister) Scott, you have done well. You have given the right answers to the questions I have been asked to pose to members of the Church before they go into the temple. You're fine. You can go to the temple. Now, off the record, just between you and me, let me ask you one final question: If you were to die this minute, drop dead right here in the office, and you were allowed to skip the spirit world experience, where would you go? What kingdom of glory would you qualify for?" After they sensed I was serious, that I sincerely wanted them to ponder the answer to my query, at least seven out of ten persons would sheepishly respond: "I don't know. I suppose the terrestrial kingdom?"

Then, if it seemed appropriate, I would push them a little. I would come back with, "Brother Scott, have you been lying to me?"

He would get a horrified look on his face and say: "Lying? Me? No, Bishop, why do you say that?"

"Brother Scott, do you really live the law of chastity, or have you been unfaithful to your wife and family?"

"Bishop," he would answer, "I really am trying to be morally clean."

"Then you must be lying about the Word of Wisdom or tithing. John, are you misrepresenting your financial situation before the Lord?"

"Heavens no, Bishop," he would say. "I honestly and faithfully pay my tithing."

"Then let me get this straight," I would say. "You have a testimony of God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost. You have a witness of the truthfulness of the restored gospel and sustain the leadership of the Church. You live the law of chastity and the Word of Wisdom, and you are seeking to be honest in your dealings with your fellow beings. You are striving to keep your temple covenants. But you plan to go to the terrestrial kingdom?"

"Well, it's not that I plan to go there," the member would say. "It's just probably where I will end up."

"Why will you end up in the terrestrial kingdom?" I then inquired.

The answer, nine times out of ten, was as follows: "Well, Bishop, I'm not perfect. I make mistakes."

And then came the moment that mattered—a sacred teaching moment. "Brother Scott," I would say, gently but firmly, "I know you are not perfect and that you make mistakes. You are mortal. You are human. But I know also that you are trying to keep your covenants, not only with deeds but with your whole heart. You truly love God and want to please him. You qualify to hold a temple recommend. These are not things to be dismissed lightly. They place you in a remarkable minority in this world. They are an indication to you, to me, and to your Heavenly Father that you are on course, that you are on the path. At the end of that path is eternal life. Hold on. Hope on. We're going to make it."

Resisting the Pull of Discouragement

Isn't such an approach risky? Aren't there those in the Church who will take advantage of this line of reasoning and then seek to rationalize their indifference, negligence, and even disobedience? Yes, I suppose there will always be those who want to take license in gospel liberty. But I feel keenly that there is a greater risk: that those who are really trying to do their best but falling short will yield to discouragement and conclude that they are simply not cut out for eternal glory. Bruce C. Hafen has written: "The person most in need of understanding the Savior's mercy is probably one who has worked himself to exhaustion in a sincere effort to repent, but who still believes his estrangement from God is permanent and hopeless. . . . I sense that an increasing number of deeply committed Church members are weighed down beyond the breaking point with discouragement about their personal lives. When we habitually understate the meaning of the Atonement, we take more serious risks than simply leaving one another without comforting reassurances—for some may simply drop out of the race, worn out and beaten down with the harsh and untrue belief that they are just not celestial material" (The Broken Heart, pp. 5-6).

In short, if Satan cannot get us to throw it all away through massive sin, or if he cannot make subtle but serious inroads against our character through his unrelenting assaults on goodness and decency, then perhaps he will tempt us to conclude things about ourselves that simply are not true—that we are somehow spiritually deficient, defective, or even depraved. Our attitude becomes one of: "I have tried and tried and tried to be perfect and I just can't do it. Why worry about it anymore? I quit!"

These are lies, vicious lies, spawned by the father of lies. To be sure, we can't do it alone, by ourselves, but with divine assistance and through a careful reexamination of how far we have already come, along with a rethinking of the truths pertaining to salvation and eternal life, we can reach the point where we have hope, what the scriptures call "hope in Christ" (see, for example, 1 Corinthians 15:19 and Jacob 2:19). That hope is more, far more, than willy-nilly wishing for happiness in the great beyond; it is a peaceful assurance, a sweet expectation, and a grand anticipation here of eternal reward hereafter, all because of our active and living faith in Jesus Christ.

No one has been sent to earth to fail. No one has come into this second estate who does not have the capacity to return to God honorably and, with him, enjoy peace and glory everlastingly. We simply must keep our bearings, keep our eyes on the Light and the Life, keep ourselves focused on the promise and hope of exaltation. Like Simon Peter, who walked on the water, we are able to defy the odds, accomplish the miraculous, and navigate the strait and narrow without permanent detour only when we keep our eyes riveted on Jesus Christ. In the words of a modern prophet, "It is my firm belief that if, as individual people, as families, communities, and nations, we could, like Peter, fix our eyes on Jesus, we too might walk triumphantly over the swelling waves of disbelief and remain unterrified amid the rising winds of doubt. But if we turn away our eyes from him in whom we must believe, as it is so easy to do and the world is so much tempted to do, if we look to the power and fury of those terrible and destructive elements around us rather than to him who can help and save us, then we shall inevitably sink in a sea of conflict and sorrow and despair.

"At such times when we feel the floods are threatening to drown us and the deep is going to swallow up the tossed vessel of our faith, I pray we may always hear amid the storm and the darkness that sweet utterance of the Savior of the world: 'Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid' (Matt. 14:27)" (Howard W. Hunter, That We Might Have Joy, p. 20).

Christ is our only hope, our way back to the safe harbor. Because of who he is and what he has done, there is no obstacle to eternal life too great to overcome. Because of him, our minds can be at peace. Our souls may rest.
