Robert L. Millet, Within Reach ( 1995)

CHAPTER 1

Who Will Be Saved?

In the fall of 1976 I gathered with about four or five hundred other teachers from the Church Educational System for an evening with Elder Bruce R. McConkie. We met in a chapel at the institute of religion adjacent to the University of Utah in Salt Lake City. Because of our admiration and respect for his gospel scholarship, as well as the meaningful occasions we had enjoyed with him before, we came to the meeting prepared to be filled. We were not disappointed. He spoke for about half an hour on the implications of the recent reorganization of the First Quorum of the Seventy. He spoke of priesthood, keys, and succession. At that point, without warning, he invited questions from the group. Some of the questions related to our seminary course of study for the year, while others were about doctrinal matters in general. One question and the answer that followed changed my life; they affected the way I thereafter understood God, the plan of salvation, and how the gospel should be taught.

A young seminary teacher in the back of the chapel asked, in essence, "Elder McConkie, as you know, we are studying the New Testament in seminary this year. How do we keep our students from being discouraged (and how do we avoid discouragement ourselves) when we read in the scriptures that strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads to life and few there be that find it?" I will never forget the way the answer came. Elder McConkie stood there at the pulpit and said, "You tell your students that far more of our Father's children will be exalted than we think!" The chapel erupted in guarded but animated chatter among the teachers. The seminary teacher came to his feet again and followed up: "Could you please explain what you mean?" "I'd be pleased to," Elder McConkie said.

Billions of Saved Beings

What followed was one of the most enlightening and eye-opening discussions I have ever experienced. In thinking back, I suppose it lasted for twenty or thirty minutes. After this many years, it is obviously impossible to recall the exact words that were spoken, but I remember as if it were yesterday many of the important ideas that Elder McConkie sought to convey, and, more particularly, what I felt. In substance and thought content, and certainly in spirit, this is what was said:

Indeed, the scriptures speak often of a strait and narrow path that leads to eternal life, and stress is frequently placed on the fact that few of the sons and daughters of God will find their way to the end of that path. But these are scriptural passages that must be viewed in proper perspective. In the long run, we must ever keep in mind that our Father and God is a successful parent, one who will save many, many of his children. Let us reason for a moment.

In comparison to the number of wicked souls at any given time, perhaps the numbers of faithful followers seem small. But what of the children who have died before the age of accountability—billions of little ones from the days of Adam to the time of the Second Coming, whom the scriptures affirm are "saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven" (D&C 137:10)? What of those through the ages who never had opportunity to hear the message of the gospel in this life but who (because of the yearnings in their heart for light and truth) will receive it in the postmortal spirit world?

In the years since 1976 I have come across prophetic support for this idea. In speaking of our ancestors in the spirit world, President Wilford Woodruff said at the April 1894 conference: "There will be very few, if any, who will not accept the Gospel. Jesus, while his body lay in the tomb, went and preached to the spirits in prison, who were destroyed in the days of Noah. After so long an imprisonment, in torment, they doubtless gladly embraced the Gospel, and if so they will be saved in the kingdom of God. The fathers of this people will embrace the Gospel. . . . I tell you when the prophets and apostles go to preach to those who are shut up in prison, and who have not received the Gospel, thousands of them will there embrace the Gospel. They know more in that world than they do here" (as cited in Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple, pp. 203, 206).

And, we might ask, what of the hosts of the righteous who qualified for exaltation from Enoch's city, Melchizedek's Salem, the golden era of the Nephites, or other holy societies of which we have no record? What of the countless billions of those children to be born during the glorious millennial era—during a time when disease and death and sin as we know it have neither sting nor victory over humankind? This will be that time of which the revelations speak, when "children shall grow up without sin unto salvation" (D&C 45:58). We agreed that it may well be that more persons will live on the earth during the thousand years of our Lord's reign—persons who are of at least a terrestrial nature—than the combined total of all who have lived during the previous six thousand years of the earth's temporal existence. Indeed, Elder McConkie asked us, who can count the number of saved beings in eternity? Our God, who is triumphant in all battles against the forces of evil, will surely be victorious in the numbers of his children who will be saved.

Charting a Course of Righteousness

At the point where we as a congregation were riding a spiritual high, Elder McConkie popped our balloon momentarily with this comment: "But all of that doesn't have much to do with you and me, does it?" We sheepishly nodded in agreement and came back to earth. And then he explained that all faithful Latter-day Saints—those who chart their course toward eternal life, receive the ordinances of salvation, and strive with all their hearts to be true to their covenants—will gain eternal life. Even though they are certainly not perfect when they die, if they have sought to stay on course, in covenant, in harmony with the mind and will of God, they will be saved in the highest heaven. He said that we ought to have hope, that we needed to be positive and optimistic about attaining that glory. Then he startled us by saying, "I would suppose, for example, that I am now looking out upon a group of men and women who will all go to the celestial kingdom."

We left the chapel both electrified and sobered. I lay awake that night pondering what I had heard. I reflected on it again and again in the days and weeks that followed. Shortly thereafter, I sat down at the end of a very full and tiring Sabbath and turned on the television with the intention of watching a Brigham Young University devotional. To my surprise, the address was by Elder Bruce R. McConkie. It was a rebroadcast of a fireside he had delivered to the students, entitled "Jesus Christ and Him Crucified." After discussing the plan of salvation, the greatest truths and heresies in all eternity, and the vital role of Jesus Christ as Redeemer, Elder McConkie said: "As members of the Church, if we chart a course leading to eternal life; if we begin the processes of spiritual rebirth, and are going in the right direction; if we chart a course of sanctifying our souls, and degree by degree are going in that direction; and if we chart a course of becoming perfect, and, step by step and phase by phase, are perfecting our souls by overcoming the world, then it is absolutely guaranteed—there is no question whatever about it—we shall gain eternal life. Even though we have spiritual rebirth ahead of us, perfection ahead of us, the full degree of sanctification ahead of us, if we chart a course and follow it to the best of our ability in this life, then when we go out of this life we'll continue in exactly that same course. We'll no longer be subject to the passions and the appetites of the flesh. We will have passed successfully the tests of this mortal probation and in due course we'll get the fulness of our Father's kingdom—and that means eternal life in his everlasting presence" ("Jesus Christ and Him Crucified," 1976 Devotional Speeches of the Year, pp. 400-401).

Again I was touched and found myself pondering the implications of these things for my own life, as well as that of my wife and family, and I wondered how I should change my approach to teaching the gospel.

When the October 1976 general conference came, Elder McConkie spoke on death, life beyond the grave, and the need for us to endure faithfully to the end. Among other things, he said: "All the faithful Saints, all of those who have endured to the end, depart this life with the absolute guarantee of eternal life.

"There is no equivocation, no doubt, no uncertainty in our minds. Those who have been true and faithful in this life will not fall by the wayside in the life to come. If they keep their covenants here and now and depart this life firm and true in the testimony of our blessed Lord, they shall come forth with an inheritance of eternal life.

"We do not mean to say that those who die in the Lord, and who are true and faithful in this life, must be perfect in all things when they go into the next sphere of existence. There was only one perfect man—the Lord Jesus whose Father was God. . . .

"But what we are saying is that when the saints of God chart a course of righteousness, when they gain sure testimonies of the truth and divinity of the Lord's work, when they keep the commandments, when they overcome the world, when they put first in their lives the things of God's kingdom: when they do all these things, and then depart this life—though they have not yet become perfect—they shall nonetheless gain eternal life in our Father's kingdom; and eventually they shall be perfect as God their Father and Christ His Son are perfect" (in Conference Report, October 1976, pp. 158-59).

Less than four years later, Elder McConkie delivered an address at Brigham Young University in which he identified as one of the "seven deadly heresies" the idea that we must be perfect in order to be saved. "If we keep two principles in mind," he observed, "we will thereby know that good and faithful members of the Church will be saved even though they are far from perfect in this life. These two principles are (1) that this life is the appointed time for men to prepare to meet God—this life is the day of our probation; and (2) that the same spirit which possesses our bodies at the time we go out of this mortal life shall have power to possess our bodies in that eternal world.

"What we are doing as members of the Church is charting a course leading to eternal life. There was only one perfect being, the Lord Jesus. If men had to be perfect and live all of the law strictly, wholly, and completely, there would be only one saved person in eternity. The prophet [Joseph Smith] taught that there are many things to be done, even beyond the grave, in working out our salvation.

"And so what we do in this life is chart a course leading to eternal life. That course begins here and now and continues in the realms ahead. We must determine in our hearts and in our souls, with all the power and ability we have, that from this time forward we will press on in righteousness; by so doing we can go where God and Christ are. If we make that firm determination, and are in the course of our duty when this life is over, we will continue in that course in eternity" ("The Seven Deadly Heresies," 1980 Devotional Speeches of the Year, pp. 78-79).

I have taken the time to quote rather extensively from one General Authority of the Church for two reasons. First, it is worthwhile to note the consistency in Elder McConkie's plea and invitation for us to have hope, to hold on, and to approach our challenges and vicissitudes optimistically. Second, I focused on Elder McConkie because of who he is. Latter-day Saints who are at least distantly acquainted with his sermons and writings, who know him as one of the significant doctrinal voices of this dispensation, also know him to be one who is firm, steadfast, and straightforward in his declaration of the plan of salvation and of what it takes for men and women to be saved. Few of us would be prone to accuse him of being too loose, too lax, too liberal on the divinely established standards for peace and joy here and for exaltation in eternity.

Visions of the Multitudes of the Saved

There is no ceiling on the number of saved beings in eternity, no cap, no quota by which the Father of us all must and will be governed. Like any parent, he surely desires that all of his sons and daughters receive the message of salvation, work righteousness, and return to him honorably. Not all will, it is true. But many will—a great many.

Father Lehi, as a part of his dream/vision, beheld men and women from all walks of life (see 1 Nephi 8). In what might well be called the Parable of the Paths, Lehi saw how people, four groups of people, respond to truth and to what degree they are attracted to the good and the holy. This Parable of the Paths, like the Parable of the Soils in Matthew 13, is a study of spiritual receptivity. Lehi saw one group who obtained passage on the strait and narrow path but who, because of the mists of darkness or temptations of the devil, wandered off the path and were lost. A second group pressed forward to the end of the path and partook of the fruit. They were then lured away from further participation in gospel living because of embarrassment, which resulted from the taunting and ridicule of the worldly wise in a large and spacious building. A third group never made it to the path but instead blindly felt their way toward the large and spacious building.

Finally, Lehi "saw other multitudes pressing for ward; and they came and caught hold of the end of the rod of iron; and they did press their way forward, continually holding fast to the rod of iron, until they came forth and fell down and partook of the fruit of the tree" (1 Nephi 8:30). And what became of them? We suppose they stayed faithful and endured to the end. They were saved. And how many were there? Multitudes.

In a similar way President Joseph F. Smith, who was blessed to behold in vision the postmortal spirit world only six weeks before his own death and entrance therein, remarked: "As I pondered over these things which are written"—the epistles of Peter—"the eyes of my understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great. And there were gathered together in one place"—we know it as paradise—"an innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality. . . . All these had departed the mortal life, firm in the hope of a glorious resurrection, through the grace of God the Father and his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ" (D&C 138:11-14; emphasis added).

John the Revelator also had a vision of saved beings when he saw into heaven—meaning the celestial kingdom—"and I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne . . . and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands" (Revelation 5:11). John saw 100 million angels surrounding the throne of God, plus "thousands of thousands" of others. What a multitude there are in the celestial kingdom!

It has been my privilege to associate with good men and women most of my life, men and women of faith and character, men and women who have received the gospel of Jesus Christ and are striving to abide by its precepts. They are people who are earnestly seeking to please the Lord, to serve the sheep of his fold, and to make a difference for good in a world that is in desperate need of goodness. They are people of covenant, people who have come out of the world and yearn to put off the natural man and come unto Christ. But they are not perfect. They make mistakes, feel regret, and often wonder about their standing before God.

Satan works tirelessly to lead us into major transgression. But he also strives to discourage us whenever we fall short of the standards we and God have set for ourselves. We simply must not let Satan discourage us.

I have a witness, burned into my soul as though by fire, that God is mindful of his children, that he has established a divine plan for the ultimate transformation of individuals and society. I also know that we can make it, make it to the celestial kingdom, if we stay on the gospel path, trust in and rely upon him who is mighty to save, press on, and never, ever give up.
