Robert L. Millet, Within Reach ( 1995)

CHAPTER 2

Redeemed Here and Hereafter

It is often the case that the scriptures may be understood on many levels. Words and phrases and doctrinal concepts may mean a number of things, depending on the context, the audience, and the need at the time. For this reason, it is seldom wise to be overly zealous about exclusive definitions, singular interpretations, and formulas when it comes to comprehending holy writ. This principle is illustrated in Moroni's recitation to Joseph Smith of Malachi's prophecy concerning the coming of Elijah. In the midst of quoting numerous passages from the Old and New Testaments, Moroni quoted Malachi 4:5-6 quite differently from how it appears in the King James version. Did this new rendition invalidate the old one? Are the renderings in our present Bibles inaccurate, or does Moroni's account simply represent another dimension of the prophecy? Knowing full well what Moroni had said in 1823, in 1842 the Prophet Joseph wrote an epistle to the Church in which he quoted the Malachi passage directly from the King James version. "I might have rendered a plainer translation to this," he said, "but it is sufficiently plain to suit my purpose as it stands" (D&C 128:18).

I have begun to notice in myself that when my study of the scriptures becomes wholly an intellectual endeavor, when it becomes more definitional than devotional, I have taken a detour. Twenty years ago I heard a noted Latter-day Saint scholar present a special lecture on a rather complex doctrinal matter. In the question-and-answer portion of the meeting a woman said, "Brother Jones, several times in your talk you used the word sanctify. Do you mean by that purify?" His response was rather unsettling to me: "Oh no, we must never confuse those two words. They are referring to two separate and distinct processes!" I shook my head in disbelief and wondered what possible good could come from drawing a distinction without a difference. Since then I have thought a good deal about doctrinal definitions. There is certainly some value to be derived from knowing what a concept means, but we must be careful not to limit the Lord or his prophets to one way of speaking or one avenue of meaning.

Becoming Pure in Heart

An illustration may be helpful. It seems to me that one of the most significant things we can do in this life is to become pure in heart. We are sent to earth to gain a body, to have experiences, and to learn to overcome the flesh and submit to the will of the Spirit. We are here to become good, to become noble, to become Christlike. We come into the true Church, receive the ordinances of salvation, enter the temple and establish eternal family units, and strive to serve one another and overcome the world—all in an effort to become Christlike, to become pure in heart, to qualify one day to be with God and to be like God. I don't completely understand how it is that a heart can begin to be softened and turned to the things of the Spirit, how it is exactly that our sins are remitted and filth and dross are burned out of our souls as though by fire. I know that it is done by virtue of the blood of Christ and through the medium of the Holy Ghost, but the particulars, the means, the specifics are not always clear to me. But God is merciful, and he wants us to grasp and appreciate to some degree what is taking place within us. And so he speaks through his servants, the prophets. He makes known many sacred things through these chosen messengers, including the process of human regeneration. They may approach a given doctrine from different perspectives, but they all teach the same message.

One prophet-leader says, in essence: "To me, having my sins remitted and becoming pure in heart is like being born again. It is like rising from spiritual death to life." Another prophet responds: "Yes, that certainly is true, but I see the process as much more practical, much more fundamental. Becoming pure in heart is being converted, being turned wholly to the ways and works of the Lord." A third Church leader adds his testimony: "I suppose I bring more of my legal background to this discussion than the others of you, but for me becoming pure in heart is being justified—exonerated, pronounced innocent, declared clean." A fourth covenant spokesman adds, "I like all that has been said, but my own experience testifies that becoming pure in heart is like a baptism by fire."

The question is, which of the prophetic voices best describes becoming pure in heart? Is it a rebirth, a conversion, justification, or baptism by fire? The obvious answer is, yes—it is all of them. Each of these perspectives adds something to our understanding, and each of them provides insight into that which is inexplicable to unillumined man.

Being Redeemed

In addition to what we have already said, it is worth noting that many words have both present and ultimate meaning. For example, let us consider the word redeem. We all know that the ultimate form of redemption is salvation or exaltation in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom. Abinadi taught that Christ has redeemed us in that he has "granted salvation unto his people" (Mosiah 15:18). At the same time, he stated that such redemption was conditional: "The Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; . . . that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them. . . . For salvation cometh to none such; for the Lord hath redeemed none such; yea, neither can the Lord redeem such" (Mosiah 15:26-27).

In another vein, all men and women are redeemed in the sense that the spirit and the body of every mortal shall be inseparably joined. We know that "through the redemption which is made for [us] is brought to pass the resurrection from the dead. And the spirit and the body are the soul of man. And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul. And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth all things" (D&C 88:14-17).

Moroni testified that God had "created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man. And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord." Now note Moroni's broad definition of redemption, one in which all men and women have part: "Yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; . . . and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is a temporal death" (Mormon 9:12-13; emphasis added—see also Helaman 14:17). Further, the sons of perdition are "the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath" (D&C 76:38), meaning they are the only ones who shall be resurrected but not redeemed unto a kingdom of glory.

But what of our being redeemed in this life? Simply stated, forgiveness of sin entails redemption from sin. Christ came to redeem us from sin by virtue of his atoning blood, which blessing we obtain through the medium of the Holy Spirit as we experience a mighty change of heart and as we receive sacred ordinances (see Mosiah 5:2, 8; Alma 5:21; 9:27). Just prior to his death, father Lehi exulted: "The Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell; I have beheld his glory, and I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love" (2 Nephi 1:15). That is, Lehi had been forgiven of his sins, had through the atonement put off the natural man and put on Christ, and had come to know the supernal and sanctifying power of divine love.

Christ came into the world, as Lehi explained to Jacob, to "redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil" (2 Nephi 2:26). Because of the knowledge and faith of the brother of Jared, he was redeemed from the Fall and brought back into the presence of Jehovah (see Ether 3:13). After three days of darkness and anguish of soul, Alma the Younger declared, "I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit" (Mosiah 27:24). When men and women are born again, when they are changed from their carnal and fallen state to a state of righteousness, when they come alive and are quickened in regard to the spiritual realm—when they experience these things, they are redeemed of the Lord, here, in this life. That redemption reaches also to those who die without law (see Moroni 8:22).

On the other hand, Amulek observed: "And [Christ] shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else. Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death" (Alma 11:40-41). In a like manner, Mormon taught that where faith is insufficient among the people to call down the signs and wonders of heaven, "they are as though there had been no redemption made" (Moroni 7:38). Truly, "only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption" (Alma 34:16; see also 42:13). The Savior cannot redeem his people in their sins, only from them (see Alma 11:34-37; Helaman 5:9-10).

Entering the Rest of the Lord

Another expression with multiple meanings is entering the rest of the Lord. By reading Alma 13 in context—as a part of a larger sermon—we begin to see that the idea of entering the rest of the Lord is a central theme. The word rest is mentioned in each of the final four verses of the preceding chapter. It is mentioned five times in chapter 13. It would appear that Alma is trying to point out that it is through the atoning blood of Christ and by the power of the holy priesthood that individuals and congregations are prepared and made ready to enter the rest of God.

In its ultimate sense, a person enters the rest of God when he or she begins to dwell in his presence (see Alma 57:36; 60:13). (We will talk more about that meaning shortly.) But in the present, in the here and now, we enter God's rest when we gain a testimony of the gospel and are brought out of worldly confusion into the peace and security that comes only from God.

As a young missionary in the Eastern States Mission I learned something about being at peace and entering into the rest of the Lord. My companion and I had moved into a small town in New Jersey, only to find that the local Protestant ministers had prepared their parishioners for our coming. At almost every door we approached, we were met by a smiling face and the words, "Oh, you must be the Mormons. This is for you." They would then hand us an anti-Mormon tract. We saved the pamphlets, stacked them in the corner of the living room of our apartment, and soon had a rather substantial pile of material. Out of sheer curiosity we began to read the stuff during lunchtime. I can still recall the dark and empty feelings that filled my soul as we encountered question after question about selected doctrines and specific moments in the history of the Church. My senior companion was no different; he was as unsettled as I was.

For weeks we did our work, but our hearts weren't in it. We went through the motions but, without saying much to each other, sensed that we couldn't do this indefinitely. I broke the ice at lunch one afternoon with the rather brutal query, "Elder Dyreng, what if the Church isn't true?"

His response: "I don't know."

I followed up: "What if the Baptists are right?" (There was a strong contingent of Baptists in the area.)

He said, "I just don't know."

Third question: "What if the Catholics are right? What if they have had the authority all along?"

His response: "I've been wondering the same thing." Then, presumably in an effort to cheer me up, he asked, "Elder Millet, do you think we are doing anything wrong? I mean, even if we are not a part of the true church, are we hurting anyone?" I sheepishly replied that we were probably not doing anything destructive. "Then," he concluded, "maybe we should keep working."

I asked with much pain in my voice, "Is that supposed to make me feel better? If so, it doesn't." He indicated that under the present circumstances it was the best he could do.

I am ashamed to admit that prior to this time I had never prayed intently about my testimony. I was raised in the Church. Mom and Dad had a testimony, and I knew that they knew. That always seemed adequate. But now I was up against the wall of faith, and suddenly what they knew did not seem sufficient to settle my troubled heart. I prayed and I pleaded. I begged the Lord for light, for help, for anything! These vexations of the soul went on for about a month. I had actually concluded (though I had not confided it to my companion) that if relief were not forthcoming shortly, I would pack my bags and go home. It did not seem proper to be engaged seriously in a cause about which I could not bear testimony.

We came home for lunch a few days later, and my companion set about the task of making the soup and preparing the peanut butter. I collapsed in a large chair in the living room, removed my shoes, and loosened my tie. As I began to reflect once more on my testimony problem, my heart ached. My feelings were close to the surface at this point, and I yearned for deliverance from my pain. For some reason I reached to a nearby lamp table and picked up a copy of the pamphlet Joseph Smith Tells His Own Story. I began reading the opening lines. I came to the Prophet's statement that he was born on 23 December 1805 in Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, and I was suddenly and without warning immersed in the most comforting and soothing influence I had ever known. It seemed at the time as if I were being wrapped in a large blanket as I began to be filled with the warmth of the Holy Spirit from head to toe. I wept as the spirit of conversion encompassed me and as I came to know assuredly that what we were doing was right and true and good. I did not hear specific words, but the feelings on that occasion seemed to whisper, "Of course it's true. You know that now, and you've known it for a long time."

At the same time, I had another feeling, which is particularly pertinent to the discussion of this chapter. The feeling was that the answers to my doctrinal and historical concerns were beyond my present capacity to comprehend. In time, I felt, the answers would come, answers that would be as satisfying to the mind as they were soothing to the heart. The answers did come, in fact, within a matter of months, and I then marveled at how something so simple could have been so problematic before.

The Spirit touched my heart and told me things my mind did not yet understand. He helped me move into a position where I could proceed confidently with my work until my head caught up with my heart. Before this experience I was in agony, was not at peace, and was subject to the nagging and uncomfortable power of doubt and uncertainty. Afterwards, I was at peace, at rest, secure in the knowledge that my faith was well founded. Truly, the rest of God is "the spiritual rest and peace which are born from a settled conviction of the truth in the minds of [individuals]." To enter into God's rest here is to enter into "the knowledge and love of God, having faith in his purpose and in his plan, to such an extent that we know we are right, and that we are not hunting for something else, we are not disturbed by every wind of doctrine, or by the cunning and craftiness of men who lie in wait to deceive." The rest of the Lord that we gain in this life is thus "rest from doubt, from fear, from apprehension of danger, rest from the religious turmoil of the world" (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 126, 58). God's rest is to know the peace of the Spirit, to enjoy the blessing of the Comforter. It is what Jesus promised to disciples when he said, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest" (Matthew 11:28).

There is a second meaning to this phrase. Spirits enter the rest of God when they enter paradise, the abode of the righteous in the postmortal spirit world at the time of death. Alma explained to Corianton, "Then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow" (Alma 40:12; emphasis added). Indeed, it is a place and a condition wherein men and women "expand in wisdom, where they have respite from all their troubles, and where care and sorrow do not annoy" (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 448). "The Lord suffereth the righteous to be slain," Captain Moroni wrote to Pahoran, "that his justice and judgment may come upon the wicked; therefore ye need not suppose that the righteous are lost because they are slain; but behold, they do enter into the rest of the Lord their God" (Alma 60:13).

A third dimension of "the rest of the Lord" is that which follows the resurrection and judgment, as we enter the celestial kingdom and receive exaltation. It is interesting that Mormon, speaking to the members of the Church in his day, uses rest in at least two ways. "Wherefore," he said, "I would speak unto you that are of the church, that are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord"—meaning here in mortality—"from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in heaven" (Moroni 7:3). Abiding in the rest of the Lord in this life is in anticipation of the ultimate rest and peace to be had in eternal glory.

There is yet another sense in which the word rest is used in scripture:

"And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

"Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

"And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

"For without this [the power of godliness] no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

"Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

"But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

"Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also" (D&C 84:19-25; emphasis added).

This is a significant scriptural statement. Alma's invitation for the people of Ammonihah to enter into the rest of the Lord is built upon the notion that ancient Israel provoked God and proved unworthy of this blessing (see Alma 12:36-37). Moses desired to make available the highest privilege of the priesthood to Israel—the privilege of seeing the face of God, of coming directly into the divine presence. Of the Israelites, Jehovah said, "I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage" (JST Exodus 34:2; emphasis added). Here the rest of the Lord is equated with being received into the personal presence of the Lord while the recipients are still mortal.

Receiving Eternity's Blessings in Mortality

As we will see in the remainder of this book, many scriptural terms that describe life hereafter also describe a dimension of life here. We need not wait until the resurrection to enjoy redemption in Christ; we may be redeemed here and now, in the present, through repentance, forgiveness, rebirth, and divine submission. We long for that glorious day when we will be received into the highest heaven, but we rejoice in the fact that the sacred and settling peace we know as the rest of God may be experienced during our days of probation.

Amulek meant what he said when he taught that this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God (see Alma 34:32). Redemption here prepares us for redemption hereafter. Rest and peace here are harbingers of the glory that is to be.
