Robert L. Millet, Within Reach ( 1995)

CHAPTER 3

Approved of the Lord

The scriptures are consistent in their declaration that "no unclean thing can enter into [God's] kingdom" (3 Nephi 27:19). In theory, there are two ways by which men and women may inherit eternal life. The first is simply to live the law of God perfectly, to make no mistakes. To do so is to be justified—pronounced innocent, declared blameless—by works or by law. If we were to keep the commandments completely (including receiving the ordinances of salvation), never deviating from the strait and narrow path throughout our mortal lives, then we would qualify for the blessings of the obedient. Then, through the redemption wrought by the Son of God, including his power to raise us from the dead and bring us back into his presence for judgment, we would qualify to dwell in celestial glory.

And yet we are very much aware of the terrible truth that all are unclean as a result of sin (see Romans 3:23). All of us have broken at least one of the laws of God, and therefore we have disqualified ourselves for justification by law. Moral perfection may be a possibility, but it is certainly not a probability. Jesus alone trod that path. "Therefore," Paul observed, "by the deeds of the law"—meaning the law of Moses, as well as any law of God—"there shall no flesh be justified in his sight" (Romans 3:20; compare 2 Nephi 2:5).

The second way to be justified is by faith; it is for the sinner to be pronounced clean or innocent through trusting in and relying upon the merits of Him who was perfect, clean, and innocent (see Romans 10:4; 2 Nephi 2:6-7). Jesus owed no personal debt to justice; the Holy One thus claims of the Father "his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men" (Moroni 7:27). Because we are guilty of transgression, no amount of good deeds on our part, no nobility independent of divine intercession, could make up for the loss. Truly, "since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself" (Alma 22:14).

Thus He who loved us first (see 1 John 4:10, 19) reaches out to the lost and fallen, to the disinherited, and proposes a marriage. The Infinite One joins with the finite, the Finished with the unfinished, the Whole with the partial, the Perfect with the imperfect. Through covenant with Christ and thus union with the Bridegroom, we place ourselves in a condition to become fully formed, whole, finished.

"The Great Exchange"

The means by which the Savior justifies us is wondrous indeed. It entails what might be called "the great exchange." It is certainly true that Jesus seeks through his atoning sacrifice and through the medium of the Holy Spirit to change us, to transform us from fallen and helpless mortals into "new creatures in Christ." But there is more. Jesus offers to exchange with us.

In his epistle to the Philippians, Paul speaks of his own eagerness to forsake the allurements of the world in order to obtain the riches of Christ. "I count all things but loss," he said, "for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ"—and now note this important addition—"and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith" (Philippians 3:8-9; emphasis added).

Paul's point is vital: justification comes by faith, by trusting in Christ's righteousness, in his merits, mercy, and grace (see Romans 10:1-4; compare 2 Nephi 2:3; Helaman 14:13; D&C 45:3-5). Though our efforts to be righteous are necessary, they will forevermore be insufficient. Paul teaches a profound truth—that as we come unto Christ by the covenant of faith, our Lord's righteousness becomes our righteousness. He justifies us in the sense that he imputes (or credits) his goodness to our account and takes our sin. This is the great exchange.

To the Corinthians Paul explained that "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. . . . For he [God the Father] hath made him [Christ the Son] to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him" (2 Corinthians 5:19, 21; emphasis added). As Paul explained elsewhere, Christ "hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us" (Galatians 3:13; compare Hebrews 2:9).

One Protestant theologian, John MacArthur, has written: "Justification may be defined as an act of God whereby he imputes to a believing sinner the full and perfect righteousness of Christ, forgiving the sinner of all unrighteousness, declaring him or her perfectly righteous in God's sight, thus delivering the believer from all condemnation. . . . It is a forensic reality that takes place in the court of God" (The Gospel According to Jesus, p. 197).

MacArthur also explained: "Justification is a divine verdict of 'not guilty—fully righteous.' It is the reversal of God's attitude toward the sinner. Whereas He formerly condemned, He now vindicates. Although the sinner once lived under God's wrath, as a believer he or she is now under God's blessing. Justification is more than simple pardon; pardon alone would still leave the sinner without merit before God. So when God justifies He imputes divine righteousness to the sinner. . . . Justification elevates the believer to a realm of full acceptance and divine privilege in Jesus Christ." The harsh reality is that "the law demands perfection. But the only way to obtain perfect righteousness is by imputation—that is, being justified by faith" (Faith Works: The Gospel According to the Apostles, pp. 89-90, 103).

Since "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" (Romans 3:23), we are "justified only by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus," or in other words, "justified by faith alone without the deeds of the law" (JST Romans 3:24, 28). The comforting message of the gospel is that Jesus the Messiah has, "according to his mercy," offered to save us, "by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly . . . ; that being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life" (Titus 3:5-7).

Those who enter the gospel covenant and thereafter seek to do their duty and endure to the end the Lord holds "guiltless" (3 Nephi 27:16; compare D&C 4:2). It is not that they are guiltless in the sense of having never done wrong; rather, the Holy One removes the blame and imputes—accounts or decrees to the repentant sinner, the one who comes unto Christ by covenant—His righteousness. "For as by one man's disobedience"—the fall of Adam—"many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one"—Jesus Christ—"shall many be made righteous" (Romans 5:19).

Justification in Mortality

In one sense—in the present, in the here and now—we are justified as our sins are forgiven. Whenever we repent or turn away from our evil ways (the Hebrew connotation of repentance); whenever we repent or change our thoughts, attitudes, and desires (the Greek connotation of repentance), we are justified—pronounced clean and free from sin and the demands of divine justice.

To be justified by God is to be made clean in spite of one's inability to repay the Master, to be made innocent in spite of one's lack of moral perfection. It is to be acquitted from sin through one's faith in Christ, faith which manifests itself in the works of righteousness (see Romans 2:6-7, 13; Galatians 5:6; Titus 3:8, 14). The Lord Jesus compensates for the chasm between man's simple striving and God's immutable standards of perfection, between where a man really is and where he must eventually be.

Justification is both a journey and a destination, a process as well as a condition. Sidney Sperry thus spoke of justification as not only a matter of "acquittal" from guilt and sin but also of "being regarded as righteous in a future divine judgment." "A comparison may be made," Brother Sperry noted, "by reference to a man on an escalator. We anticipate that he will reach a given floor if he stays on the escalator. So a person will eventually be justified"—meaning fully entitled to enter the Lord's presence—"but may be regarded as being so now, if he retains a remission of sins (Mosiah 4:26) and continually shows his faith in God" (Paul's Life and Letters, p. 176).

Another way of saying this is that when we come unto Christ by covenant, the Lord Jesus justifies or exonerates us in the here and now; he treats us now as if we were fully qualified to inherit eternal life. In process of time and as we remain "in Christ," meaning in covenant, the Holy Ghost, the sanctifier, works and labors with our soul, ridding us of filth and dross, transforming our actions and our desires.

In short, for the present God justifies or ratifies our actions, and the way we know we are approved of God is that he sends forth his Spirit upon us. We enjoy the peaceful assurance that he is pleased with our offering (see D&C 59:23). In time, and after we have been proven and tried, we are justified in the sense that our lives, our covenants, and our ordinances receive the ratifying and certifying approval of heaven.

I have met Latter-day Saints all over the Church who are faithful, diligent, and God-fearing individuals. They work hard, they pray hard, and they serve tirelessly. They live in a constant state of repentance and improvement, and they hope that some day they will become the kind of stuff out of which a celestial kingdom will be made. Many of them, however, feel anxiety about their standing before God and wonder whether their course in life is pleasing to the heavens. And yet Inotice that they seem to enjoy the gifts of the Spirit in their lives; they teach and speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; and they have sufficient faith to be healed when they are ill. I notice too that they tend to be kind, gentle, meek, and charitable. All of these things are evidence that they are on course, that they are in the line of their duty, that God is pleased. These people are walking in proper paths; at the end of the path is eternal reward. We are justified when we remain in covenant.

I remember walking down the crowded streets of New York City as a young missionary. My companion was a warm and gentle giant of a man, one who had been raised on a farm in Idaho and knew the meaning of hard work. He was humble, teachable, and delightfully congenial. I felt at home and at peace with him. One day I asked him, "Elder Carter, do you suppose you will ever make it to the celestial kingdom?"

I was startled at how quickly he shot back at me with an answer. "You bet, I will," he said. "Where else is there?"

My first reaction was to suppose pride on his part, but I knew that such was not part of his sweet nature. I wondered if maybe he simply didn't sense the significance of my question, but I knew him well enough to realize that he was neither ignorant nor naive. The certitude in his answer bespoke a quiet confidence, one born of the Spirit, one that I could not comprehend at the time but that makes perfect sense to me now.

I sat with Elder Carter over twenty years later in his home in Idaho. A speaking assignment in the area had brought me into contact with him once again. He asked me and my daughter to come to his home for lunch and spend the afternoon with his family. It proved to be a most memorable four-hour block of time. Elder Carter had returned from his mission, returned to the farm, and returned to the hard work of keeping body and soul together. He had married a lovely young woman, raised a large family, and kept the same simple perspective about life—about God and his plan, about obedience and covenants and ordinances, and about making it to the celestial kingdom—that he had as a twenty-one-year-old. As he walked me and my daughter to the car at the end of an afternoon together, he said, "Bob, I'm so pleased with what you have been able to do with your life. I'm excited about the education you have been able to receive. Ienvy you."

At this point my emotions were close to the surface. I looked into his weather-beaten but gentle face, that Christian countenance, and said, "No, my friend, I envy you. You have something really special here. Believe me." As we drove away, I turned to Rebecca and commented, "Now there's a real son of God."

Idon't know whether Elder Carter would have been able to discuss at length what it means to be justified by the Spirit, but the peace of heaven was in his home and in his heart. Theology may underlie his daily walk, but religion is his bread and butter. Others may debate in gospel doctrine class what it means to be sealed up to eternal life, but he has slowly and almost imperceptibly acquired the divine nature. He is possessed of the sacred confidence that derives from a life well lived—one, I am certain, that was not flawless but was lived faithfully. He has surely made mistakes along the way, but his trust and his reliance are on the Master. He knows that there is much room for improvement, but he holds tenaciously to the promises of the Lord. The Lord loves him, and it shows.

Maintaining a Justified State

King Benjamin spoke of the need for retaining a remission of sins from day to day. That is, he encouraged his people (and us as readers) to labor to maintain our justified, sin-free condition.

"And again I say unto you as I have said before, that as ye have come to the knowledge of the glory of God, or if ye have known of his goodness and have tasted of his love, and have received a remission of your sins, which causeth such exceedingly great joy in your souls, even so I would that ye should remember, and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith of that which is to come, which was spoken by the mouth of the angel.

"And behold, I say unto you," Benjamin continued, "that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true" (Mosiah 4:11-12; emphasis added).

Humility, meaning acceptance of our own limitations and inabilities coupled with an absolute acceptance of the power of God and a willing submission to his will, is what will enable us to remain in a justified state, to retain a remission of sins from day to day.

Benjamin spoke of another requirement that helps to prepare the people of God to live in a state of justification: "And now, for the sake of these things which I have spoken unto you—that is, for the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants" (Mosiah 4:26; emphasis added—see also Alma 4:13-14).

Though justification comes to us by the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (see D&C 20:30), we indicate our willingness to abide in Christ, to remain in covenant with the Master, by doing the work of the Master, by extending ourselves in service to his sheep.

As we seek to save a sinner from the error of his or her ways, we hide a multitude of sins, namely our own (see James 5:20). As we are true to the Restoration and thus bear testimony to all the world of the sacred things revealed to the Latter-day Saints, we are forgiven of our sins (see D&C 84:61); as we embark in the service of the Lord and serve with all our heart, might, mind, and strength, we are justified and thereby stand blameless before God (see D&C 4:2). Truly, charity prevents a multitude of sins, in ourselves as well as in others (see JST 1 Peter 4:8).

The Prophet Joseph Smith thus declared that "to be justified before God we must love one another: we must overcome evil; we must visit the fatherless and the widow in their affliction, and we must keep ourselves unspotted from the world: for such virtues flow from the great fountain of pure religion, strengthening our faith by adding every good quality that adorns the children of the blessed Jesus" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 76; compare James 1:27).

Sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise—in Mortality

This principle of receiving blessings in mortality also holds for being sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. In one sense—in the present, in the here and now—a young couple can go into the temple to be married for eternity, and if they approach that sacred covenant and ordinance reverently and worthily, it could appropriately be said of them that their marriage has been sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise.

That is, the Holy Spirit of Promise, meaning the Holy Spirit promised to the Saints, the Holy Ghost, was present to manifest his approval and to place a type of ratifying seal upon what took place. That seal is maintained and made sure as the couple remain faithful to their covenants and endure to the end through dedicated service, through trust in and reliance upon Jesus Christ. "An act that is justified by the Spirit is one that is sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, or in other words, ratified and approved by the Holy Ghost" (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 408; see also Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:333-36).

Our revelations thus speak of the candidates for exaltation as those who "overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true" (D&C 76:53).

Sanctification in Mortality

We are sanctified when the Holy Ghost cleanses and renews our souls. Whereas justification is a decreed change of standing, sanctification is a change of state. "Sanctification is the work of God," one theologian has written, "whereby he sets the believer apart from sin. Sanctification is a practical reality, not simply a legal declaration. Sanctification involves a change in the sinner's character, not just a new standing before God" (MacArthur, The Gospel According to Jesus, p. 198). Also: "Justification frees us from the guilt of sin, sanctification from the pollution of sin. . . . God not only frees us from sin's penalty (justification), but He frees us from sin's tyranny as well (sanctification)" (MacArthur, Faith Works, pp. 109, 121; emphasis in original).

Elder Orson Pratt wrote of this purifying process as follows: "Without the aid of the Holy Ghost, a person . . . would have but very little power to change his mind, at once, from its habituated course, and to walk in newness of life. Though his sins may have been cleansed away, yet so great is the force of habit, that he would, without being renewed by the Holy Ghost, be easily overcome, and contaminated again by sin. Hence, it is infinitely important that the affections and desires should be, in a measure, changed and renewed, so as to cause him to hate that which he before loved, and to love that which he before hated: to thus renew the mind of man is the work of the Holy Ghost" ("The Holy Spirit," in Orson Pratt: Writings of an Apostle, p. 57).

What is true in regard to being justified is equally true in regard to being sanctified. We may in this life be sanctified in regard to certain sinful enticements. We may come to abhor sin (see 2 Nephi 9:49; Jacob 2:5; Alma 13:12), shake at its appearance (see 2 Nephi 4:31), and even have no more disposition to do evil (see Mosiah 5:2). But sanctification is a process, one that goes on minute by minute, day by day, and year by year. Of a chain smoker who had after baptism lost all desire for tobacco, it could appropriately be said that he had been sanctified in regard to that particular temptation. Of the divorced woman who had been abused by her former husband, but who had through the intercession of divine powers had bitterness and vengeance burned out of her soul, it could rightly be said that she had been sanctified in regard to her feelings. Of the promiscuous man who had come unto Christ and forsaken his past life, and who after conversion was no longer driven by lust, it could be said that in that thing he had been sanctified.

Sanctification comes in time to those who yield their hearts to God (see Helaman 3:35), to those whose minds are single to the glory of God (see D&C 88:67-68), to those who trust in and seek after the redeeming grace of Him who calls his people to holiness.

In one sense, we will never be completely freed from the pull and tug of sin in this life. "Will sin be perfectly destroyed?" President Brigham Young asked. "No, it will not, for it is not so designed in the economy of heaven. . . . Do not suppose that we shall ever in the flesh be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates. . . . I think we shall more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death" (Journal of Discourses 10:173).

Through Christ we become new creatures of the Holy Ghost, but we are creatures who are called to live in a fallen world. That is, we are "redeemed but wrapped in grave clothes of unredeemed flesh. We are like Lazarus, who came forth from the grave still wrapped from head to foot in his burial garments" (MacArthur, Faith Works, p. 117).

Sanctification may be a condition, but it is also a process. "Those who go to the celestial kingdom of heaven," Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained to BYU students in 1976, "have to be sanctified, meaning that they become clean and pure and spotless. They've had evil and sin and iniquity burned out of their souls as though by fire. . . . It is a process. Nobody is sanctified in an instant, suddenly. But if we keep the commandments and press forward with steadfastness after baptism, then degree by degree and step by step we sanctify our souls until that glorious day when we're qualified to go where God and angels are" ("Jesus Christ and Him Crucified," 1976 Devotional Speeches of the Year, p. 399).

Each of us longs for the day when we can stand before our Savior confidently and comfortably, worthy and prepared to be with him and go where he goes. But the assurance that we are on course need not be a distant realization; we can know by the quiet but certain witness of his Spirit that our lives are approved of God. We can be at peace.
