Robert L. Millet, Within Reach ( 1995)

CHAPTER 4

Becoming Perfect in Our Generation

I remember the Sunday afternoon I turned to my wife and made a very serious commitment. We had been married but a few months and were very happy. In a sincere moment I indicated that I had every intention of being perfect by the age of thirty. She smiled kindly and wished me well, and the matter was dropped. I really believed in what I was doing. I determined to read and study and pray and labor for the next several years, and then, after attaining the notable plateau, I would work to help others reach the same spiritual height.

I suppose it isn't necessary to admit at this point that my goal was never quite achieved. Oh, I think I was a better man at thirty than I was at twenty-three, but I certainly wasn't perfect. Now almost twenty years after passing my initial goal, I still am not perfect in the sense I had originally intended to be, but I think I understand the process a little better now.

I supposed, in my naivete, if I just held my tongue, squelched my bitter feelings, blocked my thoughts, gritted my teeth, pushed myself to do my duty, and gripped the rod of iron white-knuckled-like for a sufficient time, that eventually such things would become quite natural and second nature to me. And I admit that many of what were once quite labored actions are now a bit more spontaneous. Over the years, however, I came to know that perfection in this life is not only difficult but impossible, at least as we usually define perfection.

It is one thing to attend all my church meetings, pay a full tithing and generous offerings, live the Word of Wisdom, and visit my home teaching families regularly. In a sense, I suppose, we can keep these laws perfectly if we simply do them and do them for the right reason. But at what point in my progression will I be able through sheer willpower to love my neighbor perfectly, evidencing in my attitudes and my actions such fruits of the Spirit as patience, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, kindness, and the pure love of Christ? Where along the road to perfection will I no longer take offense, blame others, or harbor bitterness? One need not ponder on these matters for a lifetime before it becomes clear that becoming Christlike is a continuing pursuit that we simply cannot accomplish on our own.

Jesus' call to a higher righteousness, as embodied in the Sermon on the Mount, contained the penetrating and poignant statute: "Ye are therefore commanded to be perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (JST Matthew 5:50). Many months later that same Lord, now resurrected and glorified, commanded his Saints in the western hemisphere, "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Nephi 12:48). The directive has been given, the standard set. Nothing short of the ideal can possibly suffice: a being of absolute perfection could ask nothing less of his people.

Perfection in This Life

"Finite perfection," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written, "may be gained by the righteous saints in this life. It consists in living a God-fearing life of devotion to the truth, of walking in complete submission to the will of the Lord, and of putting first in one's life the things of the kingdom of God" (Mormon Doctrine, p. 567; emphasis in original).

Only Jesus of Nazareth maintained a perfect walk in this life in the sense that he navigated the strait and narrow path without moral detour or transgression; he alone achieved moral perfection and completed mortality without flaw or error. But others have achieved perfection in the sense that they sought to do all that was commanded them, in the sense that they gave themselves wholly to the accomplishment of the will of the Lord. The scriptural record attests that "Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God, as did also his three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth" (Moses 8:27; emphasis added—compare Genesis 6:9). The same is said of Seth, the son of Adam (see D&C 107:43). Further, "there was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil" (Job 1:1; emphasis added).

What do the scriptures mean when they speak of a person being "perfect in his generation"? President Brigham Young declared that "we all occupy diversified stations in the world, and in the kingdom of God. Those who do right, and seek the glory of the Father in heaven, whether their knowledge be little or much, or whether they can do little or much, if they do the very best they know how, they are perfect. . . .

"'Be ye as perfect as ye can,' for that is all we can do tho' it is written, 'Be ye perfect as your Father who is in heaven is perfect.' To be as perfect as we possibly can according to our knowledge, is to be just as perfect as our Father in heaven is. He cannot be any more perfect than he knows how, any more than we. When we are doing as well as we know how, in the sphere, and station which we occupy here, we are justified. . . . We are as justified as the angels who are before the throne of God" (Journal of Discourses 2:129-30).

Other than the Lord Jesus, who is the prototype of all perfect and saved beings, the standard of perfection against which we measure our own lives is within us. Though we may admire the lives of the apostles and prophets, though we may be deeply impressed by the examples of those who appear to do so well what they are called to do, we are seldom benefited by comparing ourselves with others. Comparisons of this sort are usually misleading and inappropriate, for we who so often see only the exterior (and thus what appears to be) cannot know of the inner trials, the hidden battles of the soul, the less visible crosses that are borne. And so it is that we are called upon to do our best in the circumstances in which we may be placed. Just as members of the Church are never assigned to magnify another person's calling, so we are not expected to measure ourselves against another's life.

In highlighting some of the challenges we face in this modern world, Elder Boyd K. Packer spoke of the "moral pollution" all about us. "It is a great challenge," he stressed, "to raise a family in the darkening mists of our moral environment. We emphasize that the greatest work you will do will be within the walls of your own home (see Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, April 1973, p. 130; or Ensign, July 1973, p. 98), and that 'no other success can compensate for failure in the home' (see David O. McKay, in Conference Report, April 1935, p. 116; quoting J. E. McCulloch, Home: The Savior of Civilization [Washington, D.C.: The Southern Co-operative League, 1924], p. 42).

"The measure of our success as parents, however, will not rest solely on how our children turn out. That judgment would be just only if we could raise our families in a perfectly moral environment, and that now is not possible.

"It is not uncommon for responsible parents to lose one of their children, for a time, to influences over which they have no control. They agonize over rebellious sons and daughters. They are puzzled over why they are so helpless when they have tried so hard to do what they should." And then comes this marvelous ray of hope: "It is my conviction that those wicked influences one day will be overruled" (in Conference Report, April 1992, p. 94).

These comforting remarks not only provide hope for families torn asunder by the pulls of the world, but they also set forth an important principle—that the God of heaven only expects us to do the best we can in our given circumstances. When we have made an offering that is acceptable (and he can and will let us know when it is acceptable), then we must be willing to step back, let go, and let God; we must be willing to cast our burdens on him and trust in his eternal wisdom and omnipotence. There is consummate comfort to be had in this form of surrender.

A careful search of holy writ affirms that there are certain activities, certain labors, certain blessings from God that move men and women toward finite perfection in this life and on toward that perfection that prevails among the gods hereafter. Paul explained that the Church of Jesus Christ—the organization, offices, councils, and ordinances—had been established "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ" (Ephesians 4:12; see also JST Hebrews 6:1-2). Paul wrote to Timothy that "all Scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works" (JST 2 Timothy 3:16-17). Paul also taught that those who have gone before us—who were denied access to the gospel covenant because it was unavailable to them—cannot be made perfect without us, without our vicarious assistance; neither can we be made perfect without the appropriate ties between ancestry and posterity, between roots and branches (see Hebrews 11:40; D&C 128:15). In addition, the prophets have taught that patience (see James 1:4) and suffering (see Hebrews 2:10; 5:8; 1 Peter 5:10) mold men and women toward that perfection that allows them to feel confidence in the presence of Him who is the embodiment of wholeness and completion.

God has provided through the Holy Ghost the precious gifts and fruit of the Spirit that help to move us along the strait and narrow path toward perfection. As the Revelator, the Holy Ghost helps us to know and feel heavenly things and in time to gain "the mind of Christ" (1 Corinthians 2:16), to think as he thinks, feel as he feels, act as he would act. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; i.e., those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow unto the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 151; emphasis added).

In process of time, the Sanctifier purges and purifies the human heart, welds our souls to principles and practices of godliness, and prepares us for association with holy beings. Mormon therefore taught that charity, the pure love of Christ, is bestowed upon the true followers of Jesus Christ, not only to motivate them to serve others (as important as that is), but also that they "may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure" (Moroni 7:48; emphasis added).

The gifts and fruit of the Spirit "are given by Him for the perfection of His people," President George Q. Cannon observed, "that in this vale of tears, shut out as we are from his presence, a veil of darkness having been drawn, as it were, between us and Him, those who will exercise faith in His promises and will keep His commandments may receive the aid that is necessary to enable them to walk before Him and to enjoy His power. . . .

"How many of you, my brethren and sisters, are seeking for these gifts that God has promised to bestow? How many of you, when you bow before your Heavenly Father in your family circle or in your secret places, contend for these gifts to be bestowed upon you? How many of you ask the Father, in the name of Jesus, to manifest Himself to you through these powers and these gifts? Or do you go along day by day like a door turning on its hinges, without having any feeling upon the subject, without exercising any faith whatever; content to be baptized and be members of the Church, and to rest there, thinking that your salvation is secure because you have done this?

"I say to you, in the name of the Lord, as one of His servants, that you have need to repent of this. You have need to repent of your hardness of heart, of your indifference, and of your carelessness. There is not that diligence, there is not that faith, there is not that seeking for the power of God that there should be among a people who have received the precious promises we have. . . .

"I say to you that it is our duty to avail ourselves of the privileges which God has placed within our reach. . . .

"I feel to bear testimony to you, my brethren and sisters, . . . that God is the same today as He was yesterday; that God is willing to bestow these gifts upon His children. . . . If any of us are imperfect, it is our duty to pray for the gift that will make us perfect. Have I imperfections? I am full of them. What is my duty? To pray to God to give me the gifts that will correct these imperfections. If I am an angry man, it is my duty to pray for charity, which suffereth long and is kind. Am I an envious man? It is my duty to seek for charity, which envieth not. So with all the gifts of the Gospel. They are intended for this purpose. No man ought to say, 'Oh, I cannot help this; it is my nature.' He is not justified in it, for the reason that God has promised to give strength to correct these things, and to give gifts that will eradicate them. If a man lack wisdom, it is his duty to ask God for wisdom. The same with everything else. That is the design of God concerning His Church. He wants His Saints to be perfected in the truth. For this purpose He gives these gifts, and bestows them upon those who seek after them, in order that they may be a perfect people upon the face of the earth, notwithstanding their many weaknesses, because God has promised to give the gifts that are necessary for their perfection" ("Discourse," Millennial Star 56 [1894]: 260-61; emphasis added—see also Gospel Truth, pp. 154-55).

Becoming Perfect in Christ

"Infinite perfection is reserved for those who overcome all things and inherit the fulness of the Father in the mansions hereafter. It consists in gaining eternal life, the kind of life which God has in the highest heaven within the celestial world" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 567; emphasis in original).

Though you and I cannot enjoy infinite perfection in the present, in the here and now, we can be perfect in the sense that we do the best we can and then rely wholly upon the merits and mercy of our Redeemer (see 2 Nephi 31:19; Moroni 6:4). That is, we can be "perfect in Christ" (Moroni 10:32). It is not that we must become sin-free in this life in order to be saved, though we ever press toward that glorious eventuality. Rather, it is expected that after we sin we return quickly to the light through godly sorrow and repentance.

In one sense, to be perfect is to be complete, whole, mature, fully focused. We become perfect in Christ in the sense that we yield to the will of Christ, become one with him through the Holy Spirit, and become whole, fully formed, and complete. God declares us perfect in the here and now. If we remain in covenant, if we strive to be faithful to our promises throughout our lives, we will in time or eternity become fully perfect. In my colleague Stephen Robinson's words, "In the new covenant of faith, perfect innocence is still required, but it is required of the team or partnership of Christ-and-me, rather than of me alone. Because Christ and I are one in the gospel covenant, God accepts our combined total worthiness, and together Christ and I are perfectly worthy" (Believing Christ, p. 43). As it is with being justified, and as it is with being sanctified, perfection is both a process and a condition. But whether we speak of a person being "perfect in his generation" or of that ultimate perfection that comes hereafter, we speak of something that is brought to pass only through the intervention of God. Man cannot justify himself. He cannot sanctify himself. And he certainly cannot perfect himself. The transformations from a fallen nature to a spiritual nature, from worldliness to holiness, from corruption to incorruption, and from imperfection to perfection are accomplished because divine powers bring them to pass. They are acts of grace.

The Apostle Paul wrote to the early Christians: "Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever" (Hebrews 13:20-21; emphasis added).

The chief Apostle warned the Saints late in the first century: "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you" (1 Peter 5:8-10; emphasis added). More specifically, people are made "perfect in Christ Jesus" (Colossians 1:28); they become "just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood" (D&C 76:69). It would never be appropriate to lower the lofty standard held out to followers of Christ. Nor are our actions or attitudes approved of God if we suggest that the Savior did not mean what he said when he called us to the transcendent state of perfection. Our task is not to water down the ideal, nor to dilute the directive. Rather, we must view our challenge with perspective, from an eternal perspective, from the perspective provided by the unified message of all scripture.

"The command Be ye perfect is not idealistic gas," C. S. Lewis remarked. "Nor is it a command to do the impossible. He is going to make us into creatures that can obey that command. He said (in the Bible) that we were 'gods' and He is going to make good His words. If we let Him—for we can prevent Him, if we choose—He will make the feeblest and filthiest of us into a god or goddess, dazzling, radiant, immortal creature. . . . The process will be long and in parts very painful; but that is what we are in for. Nothing less. He meant what He said" (Mere Christianity, pp. 174-75).
