Robert L. Millet, Within Reach ( 1995)

CHAPTER 5

A Saved Mormon

Let me reconstruct a scene that is rather familiar to most of us. We attempt to explain the message of the Restoration to a member of a Protestant church only to have them remark: "Thank you, but I'm a saved Christian." We recoil, turn off, or, I suppose in some cases, even try to argue with them about what they mean. Or we may respond as my father did so many times: "Yes, of course you are saved; you are saved from the grave." But that's obviously not what they intended.

In like fashion, when a Protestant asks us, "Are you a saved Christian?" we stumble over our words and wonder about how to respond. Generally, even if we do not voice our feelings, we want to stress that one is not saved until he or she endures to the end of their mortal life.

It is unfortunate that a topic like being saved carries with it so much emotional baggage (and thus so many barriers between us and others of our Father's children) that we are not in a position to communicate even our differences appropriately. Over the years as I have spoken openly with friends or colleagues from other faiths, I have come to appreciate a little better what they are saying. Some mean that they have received in their hearts a witness that Jesus is the Christ, that the Savior has forgiven their sins and they are now willing to turn their lives over to him, and that they are now in a saved condition in regard to happiness here and eternal reward hereafter. For them, to be converted to Christ is to be saved. It is to have what we might call the assurance of eternal life.

I have no reason to doubt their sincerity or the reality of their witness of Christ; the influence of the Holy Ghost is real, available, and the source of the testimony of Jesus. I know there are people out there who feel that once they profess Jesus with their lips they are saved forevermore and that what they do thereafter with their lives in terms of goodness and morality is immaterial. Yes, there are such people, but I don't know many of them. Most of the Protestants I grew up with—and most of the ministers and theologians I have encountered since—really do see a close tie between their saved condition and a righteous, God-fearing life. Those who are serious students of the New Testament understand the central message of the second chapter of James—that good works flow from the regenerate heart, that righteousness evidences true faith. Clearly, other Christian churches have much truth.

I know without any equivocation that there was an apostasy, a loss of plain and precious truths, a loss of priesthood authority. I know that God began the restoration of truths and powers through Joseph Smith and will continue that restoration into and through the Millennium. There's no question in my mind about any of that.

But to say that the Baptists or the Methodists or the Pentecostals do not possess the authority to act in the name of God is not to say that they have no truth or that any scriptural interpretation from them is automatically incorrect or corrupt. Though the fulness of the gospel is to be found only in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, remnants of truth, elements of enlightenment, and aspects of the faith of the former-day saints may be found throughout modern Christianity.

One example of this is the doctrine of "being saved," which we generally consider to be a Protestant idea. I would like to propose a sense in which Latter-day Saint theology encompasses the notion of being saved, here and now, in this life.

None of us has a problem speaking of a worthy couple married in the temple as having been sealed, or having had their union sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. We know that the sealing is contingent or conditioned upon faithful observance of their covenants, but we do not hesitate to speak of John and Mary having been sealed in the temple.

And yet we are nervous as kittens about this matter of being saved. It is not unlike a situation I found myself in many years ago. Before leaving on a mission I approached one of my priesthood leaders with the question, "What does it mean to be saved by grace?" Having been raised in the southern states and in the Bible Belt, I had heard the phrase many times from my Protestant friends.

My priesthood leader—a powerful preacher of the gospel and one who knew the doctrines of the gospel quite well—responded quickly: "We don't believe in that."

I asked further: "We don't believe in salvation by grace? Why not?"

His comeback: "Because the Baptists do!" That response speaks volumes.

I don't expect that many of us will adopt the terminology of many modern Christians or of those who believe they were saved at the time they received Jesus into their hearts. Nor do I think we should. But it certainly wouldn't hurt us to better understand them.

Are There Saved Mormons?

We know, in the words of Joseph Smith, that to be saved is to be placed beyond the power of all our enemies (see Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 301, 305). He taught further that "salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him." To be saved, then, is to be conformed into the image of Christ, to become like unto the prototype of all saved beings (Lectures on Faith, 7:9, 16).

Obviously salvation can also have a more limited dimension—meaning salvation from the grave, salvation from physical death. All mortals will be resurrected and thus enjoy this aspect of salvation. With but few exceptions, however, when the prophets speak of salvation they are referring to the highest of eternal rewards hereafter. (Examples of these exceptions include D&C 76:43-44, 88; 132:17; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 12.) Salvation is redemption, exaltation, eternal life, and eternal lives; each of these terms means the same thing, but each lays stress on a particular aspect of the saved condition. And so, in the ultimate meaning, to be saved is to qualify for exaltation in the celestial kingdom—to be endowed with a fulness of the glory of the Father and to enjoy a continuation of the family unit into eternity (see D&C 132:19).

But now to the question: Do Latter-day Saints believe that men and women may enjoy the benefits of salvation only in the world to come? Is there no sense in which we may be saved in the present, in the here and now?

Though I quickly acknowledge that most scriptural references to salvation seem to point toward that which comes in the next life, we do have within our theology principles and doctrines that suggest a form of salvation in this life. Perhaps the most obvious illustration is when a member of the Church makes his or her calling and election sure. As Joseph Smith taught, when we exercise saving faith and demonstrate our willingness to serve God at all hazards, we eventually, in this life or the next (see D&C 14:7; 50:5; 58:2), receive the assurance of eternal life (see Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 149-50).

If the more sure word of prophecy, the knowledge that we are sealed up unto eternal life (see D&C 131:5), comes to us in this life, then our salvation is secure, or we might say, fairly secure. In fact, there is never a time in this life when faithful endurance to the end is not required. The scriptures teach that a man or woman may fall from grace and depart from the living God, that even the sanctified must take heed lest they fall (see D&C 20:30-34; 124:124), that those who were once enlightened and have tasted the heavenly gift may fall away (see Hebrews 6:4-6). Those who have been sealed to eternal life are no doubt fully aware of the fact that they must stay faithful to the end, yet they also know with full assurance that if they do so endure, they will be exalted, whether they die today or in a century.

Thus they are saved, or, to put it another way, they are living in a saved condition. That may not be exactly what our Protestant brothers and sisters have in mind when they speak of being saved, but it's not far removed. Thus there is indeed a condition or state you and I may attain unto in this mortal life in which salvation hereafter is promised here; the day of judgment has essentially been advanced.

But is there any way to know we are saved other than receiving the more sure word of prophecy? I think there is. That same Holy Spirit of Promise that searches the hearts of men and women, that ratifies and approves and seals ordinances and lives, that same Holy Spirit serves, as Paul indicates, as the "earnest of our inheritance" (Ephesians 1:14).

Though this passage refers specifically to being sealed up unto eternal life, I believe the principle is also true in regard to our qualifying for and cultivating the gift and influence of the Holy Ghost. That is, the Lord sends to us "the earnest of the Spirit" (2 Corinthians 1:21-22; 5:5) as an evidence that our lives are in order. The Lord's "earnest money" on us, his down payment, his indication to us that he will save us, is the Holy Spirit. We know that we are on course when we have the companionship of the Spirit. We know that our lives are approved of God when we have the companionship of the Spirit. We know that we are in Christ, in covenant, when we have the companionship of the Spirit. And we know, I suggest, that we are saved when we truly have the constant companionship of the Spirit.

If we live in such a way that we can take the sacrament worthily, hold and utilize a current temple recommend, maintain the gift and gifts of the Spirit (including the greatest gifts of faith, hope, and charity), and in all things yield our hearts to God (see Helaman 3:35; D&C 20:31), then we are in the line of our duty; we are approved of the heavens, and if we were to die suddenly, we would go into paradise and eventually into the celestial kingdom.

Repentance to Stay in the Path

The King James Version of 1 John 3:9 states: "Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin." The problem is, as you know and I know, that those who have been born again are not free from sin. But they repent quickly (see D&C 109:21). They move rapidly from the darkness back into the light. They live always in a spirit of repentance.

President Brigham Young gave this important explanation regarding living in a constant state of worthiness: "I do not recollect that I have seen five minutes since I was baptized that I have not been ready to preach a funeral sermon, lay hands on the sick, or to pray in private or in public. I will tell you the secret of this. In all your business transactions, words, and communications, if you commit an overt act, repent of that immediately, and call upon God to deliver you from evil and give you the light of His Spirit. . . . If I commit an overt act, the Lord knows the integrity of my heart, and, through sincere repentance, He forgives me" (Journal of Discourses 12:103; emphasis added).

I had an experience that helps to illustrate the idea of "immediate repentance." I had come home from work after a very long day, a day in which everything that could have gone wrong had gone wrong (or so it seemed). I was physically exhausted and emotionally spent. I sat in my recliner and had begun to doze off when my wife Shauna came into the room; her mood seemed much too happy for what I had experienced in the previous twelve hours. "How was your day, honey?" she asked. Without catching myself, I sat up in my chair and sarcastically responded that she wouldn't understand if I took the time to explain. I immediately saw the pain in her eyes as she quickly made her way to another part of the house.

I was disgusted with myself. I sensed that she had been trying to be nurturing and loving, to lift my spirits. I grieved over my indiscretion against charity and found myself thinking: "Oh, no! Now it will take me three days to get the Spirit of the Lord back." In less than one minute I found myself responding to the first feeling: "Oh, no, it won't! I'm going deal with this right now."

I hopped out of the chair, went into the bedroom, and said to her: "It's been a miserable day. The walls have been crashing down all day long. But that's no reason to react meanly to you. I'm sorry. Will you forgive me?" She readily nodded and hugged me. I went back to my chair, silently asked the Lord to forgive me, and immediately felt the peace of the Spirit return. I was back in the light.

Obviously, more serious sins require more time, deeper repentance, and a period of appropriate godly sorrow. But when we are honest, truly honest with ourselves and with the Lord, we quickly acknowledge that most of our sins are inadvertent sins against charity.

"When men truly and heartily repent," President Young taught, "and make manifest to the heavens that their repentance is genuine by obedience to the requirements made known to them through the laws of the Gospel, then are they entitled to the administration of salvation, and no power can withhold the good Spirit from them" (Journal of Discourses 10:18).

The Joseph Smith Translation of 1 John 3:9 reads as follows: "Whosoever is born of God doth not continue in sin; for the Spirit of God remaineth in him; and he cannot continue in sin, because he is born of God, having received that holy Spirit of promise" (emphasis added).

If we have the Holy Spirit, he will bring with him a spirit of peace. A modern revelation attests: "But learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23). Indeed, we might liken to ourselves the words the Lord said to Oliver Cowdery: "If you desire a further witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things. Did I not speak peace to your mind . . . ? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:22-23; emphasis added).

The Promise of Present Salvation

We've talked about the presence of the Spirit in our lives being an indicator of our status before God. There is another measurement I would suggest. I believe that we are living in a saved condition to the extent that we are living in the light, living according to our spiritual privileges, and living in harmony with the knowledge and the blessings we have received to that point in our lives. The following is an intriguing statement from President Brigham Young:

"If a person with an honest heart, a broken, contrite, and pure spirit, in all fervency and honesty of soul, presents himself and says that he wishes to be baptized for the remission of his sins, and the ordinance is administered by one having authority, is that man saved? Yes, to that period of time. Should the Lord see proper to take him then from the earth, the man has believed and been baptized, and is a fit subject for heaven—a candidate for the kingdom of God in the celestial world, because he has repented and done all that was required of him to that hour. . . .

"It is present salvation and the present influence of the Holy Ghost that we need every day to keep us on saving ground. When an individual refuses to comply with the further requirements of Heaven, then the sins he had formerly committed return upon his head; his former righteousness departs from him, and is not accounted to him for righteousness: but if he had continued in righteousness and obedience to the requirements of heaven, he is saved all the time, through baptism, the laying on of hands, and obeying the commandments of the Lord and all that is required of him by the heavens—the living oracles. He is saved now, next week, next year, and continually, and is prepared for the celestial kingdom of God whenever the time comes for him to inherit it.

"I want present salvation. I preach, comparatively, but little about the eternities and Gods, and their wonderful works in eternity; and do not tell who first made them, nor how they were made; for I know nothing about that. Life is for us, and it for us to receive it today, and not wait for the Millennium. Let us take a course to be saved today, and, when evening comes, review the acts of the day, repent of our sins, if we have any to repent of, and say our prayers; then we can lie down and sleep in peace until the morning, arise with gratitude to God, commence the labors of another day, and strive to live the whole day to God and nobody else" (Journal of Discourses 8:124-25; emphasis added).

I am concerned that far too many Latter-day Saints wrestle with feelings of inadequacy, struggle with hopelessness, and in general are much too anxious about their standing before God. It is important to keep the ultimate goal of exaltation in our minds, but it seems so much more profitable to focus on fundamentals and on the here and now—staying in covenant, being true to our promises, cultivating the gift of the Holy Ghost.

"I am in the hands of the Lord," President Young pointed out, "and never trouble myself about my salvation, or what the Lord will do with me hereafter" (Journal of Discourses 6:276). As he said on another occasion, our work "is a work of the present. The salvation we are seeking is for the present, and sought correctly, it can be obtained, and be continually enjoyed. If it continues today, it is upon the same principle that it will continue tomorrow, the next day, the next week, or the next year, and, we might say, the next eternity" (Journal of Discourses 1:131; emphasis added).

It has been my privilege for many years to work with the youth of the Church as a seminary teacher, an institute director, and a professor of religion at Brigham Young University. I have no question but that God has reserved many of his noblest sons and daughters for this final dispensation. They are indeed a generation of excellence as well as a generation of destiny. They will do much to prepare the earth for the second coming of the Son of Man. I know them well enough to know that on the whole they want the message of the gospel straight and undiluted, that gospel games and entertainment, though fun for a brief season, soon lose their appeal to these youth. I believe this generation of youth are more pointed to Christ and the plan of redemption than any other group of young people in history. I sense keenly that they need a vision of the distant goal toward which to point themselves.

But they also need spiritual reinforcement and the fruits of their faith in the here and now. It is one thing to be able to promise a priest or a Laurel that if they remain morally clean and obey God's other laws they will be worthy of the celestial kingdom; it is another thing to assure them that if they live God's laws, including the law of chastity, they will enjoy peace and happiness and the endowments of the Holy Ghost in this life.

Pride or Hope?

We must guard against all forms of pride or self-assurance, but we must also avoid the kind of false modesty or doubt that is antithetical to faith. As Joseph Smith taught, doubt—which certainly includes a constant worry as to our standing before God or our capacity to go where Christ is—cannot coexist with saving faith. Fear and doubt "preclude the possibility of the exercise of faith in [God] for life and salvation" (Lectures on Faith 4:13; see also 3:20-21; 6:12).

If indeed "happiness is the object and design of our existence" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 255), then happiness is something to be enjoyed in the present, in the here and now, not something reserved for the distant there and then. "If we are saved," President Young declared, "we are happy, we are filled with light, glory, intelligence, and we pursue a course to enjoy the blessings that the Lord has in store for us. If we continue to pursue that course, it produces just the thing we want, that is, to be saved at this present moment. And this will lay the foundation to be saved forever and forever, which will amount to an eternal salvation" (Journal of Discourses 1:131; emphasis added).

Living in a state of salvation does not entail an inordinate self-confidence, but rather a hope in Christ. To hope in our modern world is to wish—or perhaps to worry or fret about some particular outcome. In the scriptures, however, hope is expectation, anticipation, and assurance. Faith in Christ, true faith, always gives rise to hope in Christ.

"And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal" (Moroni 7:41).

To have faith in Christ is to have the assurance that as we rely wholly upon his merits and mercy, as we trust in his redeeming grace, we will make it (see 2 Nephi 31:19; Moroni 6:4). He will not only bridge the chasm between the ideal and the real, and thus provide that final spiritual boost into eternal life, but he will also extend to us that marvelous enabling power so essential to daily living, a power that enables us to conquer weakness and acquire the divine nature.

Living in a state of salvation is living in the quiet assurance that God is in his heaven, that Christ is the Lord, and that the plan of redemption is real and in active operation in our personal lives. It is not to be totally free of weakness, but to proceed confidently in the Savior's promise that in him we shall find strength to overcome, in him we shall find rest and peace, both here and hereafter.
