Robert L. Millet, Within Reach ( 1995)

CHAPTER 6

All Are Alike unto God

Our Heavenly Father loves all of his children and is no respecter of persons. He does not love those who guide the destiny of the Church any more than he loves those who constitute the rank and file of the Church. The gifts of God, including the gift of salvation or eternal life, are freely available to all of us.

Let me share a personal experience that illustrates how much the Lord is personally interested in each of us. While serving as a bishop a number of years ago, I came upon a problem that caused me much unrest. My elders quorum president was moving. My Primary president was moving. My Relief Society president had served faithfully and well for a time and needed to be released to spend more time with her family. My Young Women president was pregnant, and because she had had so much difficulty with previous pregnancies (spending weeks in bed), she felt it would be wise to be released.

One Saturday morning I jumped in the car and set out for a city some four hours away. I was traveling to a church in that area where I would meet with seminary students and teachers for an all-day Church Education System activity.

After listening to general conference tapes and to the Tabernacle Choir for about two hours, I decided to spend some time pondering about how to reorganize and staff the ward. I reflected on how faithful my leaders had been and how much I would miss their strength and commitment. I smiled as I reminisced about the call of the Young Women president. It had been a real arm-wrestling match to get Betty Johnson to accept the call. She had said to us (the bishopric) at the time we extended the call that she was not a "youth person," that she had a young family, that she would rather do just about anything than this. More than an hour later she finally agreed to try it for a few months. As I looked back, I saw that she truly had done a remarkable job during the year she had served.

I found myself talking aloud to the Lord in prayer. "Let's start with the Relief Society. Who is it that thou hast prepared to serve as the Relief Society president?" A thought came into my mind, "You must call Betty Johnson." I shook my head, frowned, and said "No. Let's try this again. Who should be called as the president of the Relief Society?" And as quick as a flash the thought returned, this time with a bit more oomph, "You are to call Betty Johnson." I knew at that point that my connection with the Lord was out of whack and that my good intentions of getting some Church work done on the trip were about to come to naught. I dropped the whole matter and put the tapes back on.

After a very long day I headed home; it was nearly midnight. I decided to try my hand with the Lord again; if nothing else it might help me stay awake for the long drive. I asked, "Heavenly Father, who should be called as president of the Relief Society?" For the third time I heard the words, "You are to call Betty Johnson." By now I sensed that I was pressing my luck and that maybe I shouldn't ask again. My mind raced. Betty had been the Young Women president for a year. She had requested a release because of health problems during pregnancy. She needed the time. But in spite of rational objections the feelings were strong. I tossed and turned in bed during much of the short night after I got home.

After the block of Sunday meetings the next day, I found myself in the outer office with my financial clerk, Fred Johnson, Betty's husband. After we had completed our work with the tithing, I walked out into the foyer and sat on the couch next to Betty. She was waiting for Fred. She sweetly smiled, reached over and squeezed my hand, and said, "Bishop, thanks for being sensitive about my situation. I know it isn't easy to make a change like this, but I deeply appreciate your willingness to release me."

I looked into her eyes, tried to smile, and uttered a weak, "You're welcome." I ached inside. I sensed that something needed to be done, in spite of existing problematic circumstances. I walked to the outside door of the church with the couple and found myself saying to her, "Betty, would you please do something for me?"

"Of course."

"Would you pray about what the Lord would now have you do in the ward? And when you receive a revelation, would you call me?"

She laughed aloud. "Bishop, I don't get revelations like that. I'm just a simple member of the Church."

"I know you feel that way," I answered, "but if you do receive a revelation, will you call me?"

She nodded. The look in her eyes made me feel rotten; I felt as though I were playing "Guess What's on My Mind."

I didn't think much about her situation the rest of that day. The phone rang early the next morning. It was for me. "Bishop, this is Betty. I need to see you right away." She then uttered a sentence in which she used a word I don't think I've ever heard before. She said, "I've had an unearthing night." I agreed to meet her at the institute building at 1:00 p.m.

She knocked on my door a few minutes early. Betty was a very lovely person who was always dressed impeccably. But now she stood in the framework of the door with a disheveled look—hair in her eyes, mascara stains on her face, wearing jeans and sweatshirt—holding her journal under her arm. After she had come into my office and sat down, she glared at me with an almost venomous look and said, "You did that, didn't you?"

"I don't understand what you mean. What did I do?" I asked.

"You made me have that dream."

"What dream?"

Betty then described a dream in which she found herself in our stake high council room, sitting opposite the stake president, his first counselor, and me. In the dream she was called to serve in a particular position in the ward.

"What was the calling?" I inquired.

"I don't want to talk about it!" she shot back.

After two more attempts to get her to admit what the calling was, I said, "You were being called as the ward Relief Society president, weren't you?"

She nodded and then wept. "Bishop Millet, you know this is the only way I could have been persuaded to accept this heavy responsibility, don't you?"

I nodded. "Will you do it?" I asked.

Betty answered that she would do the best she could. She then asked me why I was sitting with the stake presidency in the dream, and I stated that I supposed the dream was merely an indication that she was being called by those in authority.

A few days after Betty was sustained (and after she had calmed down appreciably), she commented to me: "You know, I have always considered myself to be an average member of the Church. I have a testimony of the gospel. I know that the Lord guides the Church and its leaders, and I have always believed that visions or dreams are real but basically reserved for the apostles and prophets. It feels good to know that the Lord can even work through simple people like Betty Johnson."

Betty was a remarkable Relief Society president and had very few problems with her pregnancy. She gained the respect of the sisters very quickly. Though shy by nature, she spoke with a confidence born of a conviction that she had been called of God. By the way, as part of "the rest of the story," it is interesting to note that, just as Betty had seen in her dream, I was called to serve as a counselor to the stake president several weeks later!

God loves Betty Johnson and all of the Betty Johnsons throughout the earth, and there is no reward reserved for prophets that is not available to each one of us. We can make it.

Eager to Accept Our Offerings

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum of the Twelve has written of another example of God's love, patience, and eagerness to accept the offerings of the weak and the simple:

"The Brethren used to announce at general conference the names of those who had been called on missions. Not only was this the way friends and neighbors learned of the call, but more often than not it was the way the missionary learned of it as well. One such prospect was Eli H. Pierce. A railroad man by trade, he had not been very faithful in the Church. . . . His mind had been given totally to what he demurely called 'temporalities.' He said he had never read more than a few pages of scripture in his life, that he had spoken at only one public gathering (an effort that he says 'was no credit' to himself or those who heard him), and he used the vernacular of the railroad and barroom with a finesse born of long practice. He bought cigars wholesale—a thousand at a time—and he regularly lost his paycheck playing pool. . . .

"Well, the Lord knew what Eli Pierce was and he knew something else. He knew what Eli Pierce could become. When the call came that October 5, 1875, Eli wasn't even in the Tabernacle. He was out working on one of the railroad lines. A fellow employee, once he had recovered from the shock of it all, ran out to telegraph the startling news. Brother Pierce writes: 'At the very moment this intelligence was being flashed over the wires, I was sitting lazily thrown back in an office rocking chair, my feet on the desk, reading a novel and simultaneously sucking on an old Dutch pipe just to vary the monotony of cigar smoking. As soon as I had been informed of what had taken place, I threw the novel in the waste basket, the pipe in the corner (and have never touched either to this hour). I sent in my resignation . . . to take effect at once, in order that I might have time for study and preparation. I then started into town to buy [scripture].'

"Then Eli wrote these stirring words: 'Remarkable as it may seem, and has since appeared to me, a thought of disregarding the call, or of refusing to comply with the requirement, never once entered my mind. The only question I asked—and I asked it a thousand times—was: How can I accomplish this mission? How can I, who am so shamefully ignorant and untaught in doctrine, do honor to God and justice to the souls of men, and merit the trust reposed in me by the Priesthood?'

"With such genuine humility fostering resolution rather than defeating it, Eli Pierce fulfilled a remarkable mission. His journal could appropriately close on a completely renovated life with this one line: 'Throughout our entire mission we were greatly blessed.' But I add one experience to make the point.

"During the course of his missionary service, Brother Pierce was called in to administer to the infant child of a branch president whom he knew and loved. Unfortunately the wife of the branch president had become embittered and now seriously objected to any religious activity within the home, including a blessing for this dying child. With the mother refusing to leave the bedside and the child too ill to move, the humble branch president with his missionary friend Eli retired to a small upper room in the house to pray for the baby's life. The mother, suspecting just such an act, sent one of the older children to observe and report back.

"There in that secluded chamber the two men knelt and prayed fervently until, in Brother Pierce's own words, 'we felt that the child would live and knew that our prayers had been heard.' Arising from their knees, they turned slowly only to see the young girl standing in the partially open doorway gazing intently into the room. She seemed, however, quite oblivious to the movements of the two men. She stood entranced for some seconds, her eyes immovable. Then she said, 'Papa, who was that man in there?' Her father said, 'That is Brother Pierce. You know him.' 'No,' she said matter-of-factly, 'I mean the other man.' 'There was no other, darling, except Brother Pierce and myself. We were praying for the baby.' 'Oh, there was another man,' the child insisted, 'for I saw him standing [above] you and Brother Pierce and he was dressed in white.' Now if God in his heavens will do that for a repentant old cigar-smoking, inactive, stern-swearing pool player, don't you think he'll do it for you? He will if your resolve is as deep and permanent as Eli Pierce's. In the Church we ask for faith, not infallibility" (However Long and Hard the Road, pp. 7-9).

Blessings for "Common People"

Elder Boyd K. Packer once spoke of a man who, though not directly related to me, demonstrated a principle that touches my soul: "Whenever we seek for true testimony we come, finally, to ordinary men and women and children. Let me quote from the diary of Joseph Millett, a little-known missionary of an earlier time.

"Joseph Millett, with his large family, was suffering through very, very difficult times. He wrote in his journal: 'One of my children came in and said that Brother Newton Hall's folks was out of bread, had none that day. I divided our flour in a sack to send up to Brother Hall. Just then Brother Hall came. Says I, "Brother Hall, are you out of flour?" "Brother Millett, we have none." "Well, Brother Hall, there is some in that sack. I have divided and was going to send it to you. Your children told mine that you was out." Brother Hall began to cry. He said he had tried others, but could not get any. He went to the cedars and prayed to the Lord, and the Lord told him to go to Joseph Millett. "Well, Brother Hall, you needn't bring this back. If the Lord sent you for it you don't owe me for it."'

"That night Joseph Millett recorded a remarkable sentence in his journal: 'You can't tell me how good it made me feel to know that the Lord knew there was such a person as Joseph Millett.' The Lord knew Joseph Millett. And He knows all those men and women like him, and they are many. Theirs are the lives that are most worth recording" (in Conference Report, April 1980, p. 84).

As I have counseled over the years with many members of the Church, good people who hope against hope that one day they might somehow qualify for a kingdom of glory, I sense among some of them the feeling that they must either be called to high position or perform some extraordinary service in order to be saved. This is simply not true. As President Joseph F. Smith taught, "To do well those things which God ordained to be the common lot of all mankind, is the truest greatness" (Gospel Doctrine, p. 285). Quietly living the gospel, rearing a family, teaching them the gospel, magnifying our callings in the Church, reaching out to others in quiet acts of Christian service, letting the Spirit of Christ shape our basic nature and direct our steps—these are the things out of which a celestial character is molded and the things that prepare us for entrance into everlasting life with Gods and angels.

"[You] don't need to get a complex," Elder Bruce R. McConkie declared, "or get a feeling that you have to be perfect to be saved. You don't. . . . What you have to do is get on the straight and narrow path—thus charting a course leading to eternal life—and then, being on that path, pass out of this life in full fellowship. I'm not saying that you don't have to keep the commandments. I'm saying you don't have to be perfect to be saved. If you did, no one would be saved. . . . If you're on that path and pressing forward, and you die, you'll never get off the path. There is no such thing as falling off the straight and narrow path in the life to come, and the reason is that this life is the time that is given to men to prepare for eternity. Now is the time and the day of your salvation, so if you're working zealously in this life—though you haven't fully overcome the world and you haven't done all you hoped you might do—you're still going to be saved. You don't have to do what Jacob said, 'Go beyond the mark.' You don't have to live a life that's truer than true. You don't have to have an excessive zeal that becomes fanatical and becomes unbalancing. What you have to do is stay in the mainstream of the Church and live as upright and decent people live in the Church. . . . If you're on that path when death comes—because this is the time and the day appointed, this is the probationary estate—you'll never fall off from it, and, for all practical purposes, your calling and election is made sure" ("The Probationary Test of Mortality," pp. 12-13).

A Cause for Rejoicing

We must have hope. We must have rejoicing. If any people in all the wide world have reason to be positive, to rejoice and exult in blessings unmeasured and graces abounding, it is the Latter-day Saints. If any religious body in all of creation ever had reason to look forward to the future, to prepare with joyful anticipation for that which is yet to be, it is the members of the restored Church. I am convinced that much of the discouragement that exists in the hearts and minds of many Latter-day Saints may be traced to their inability to rely on the Lord and trust in his mercies.

To be sure, we need to do all we can to prove ourselves worthy of the Lord's goodness (and to keep our part of the gospel covenant). But we must also accept the revealed verity that when we have done all we can—when we have stretched to the limit, have placed our offerings on the altar of faith, no matter how meager they may seem to us at the time—we then have done what was asked of us and we will come to know that the Lord is pleased with us. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell has counseled us, "We can allow for the reality that God is still more concerned with growth than with geography" (Notwithstanding My Weakness, p. 11). The Lord's gentle commendation to a little-known man named Oliver Granger is equally applicable to us: "When he falls he shall rise again, for his sacrifice shall be more sacred unto me than his increase, saith the Lord" (D&C 117:13).

Jesus is our Savior, and he not only can save us but he yearns to do so. He loves us, one and all. This I know. While the father of all lies seeks to dissuade and discourage, Christ our Lord extends his arm of mercy to us all the day long. He seeks to seal us to him everlastingly. I am persuaded that we not only can make it but that we will make it, if we stay on course, stay in covenant, and stay in tune with the Spirit of the Lord. "And may the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless, that ye may at last be brought to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the holy prophets who have been ever since the world began, having your garments spotless even as their garments are spotless, in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out" (Alma 7:25).
