Robert L. Millet, Within Reach ( 1995)

Epilogue

Early in this work I shared an experience I had in 1976 while listening to Elder Bruce R. McConkie. His words to Church educators—"You tell your students that far more of our Father's children will be exalted than we think!"—sent my mind reeling then, and the deeper implications of that message drive much of what I feel, do, and teach today.

No one who reads this small book should misunderstand what I am trying to say. I do not believe men and women will be exalted who come into the Church and then set at naught the counsels of God or ignore the prophetic direction of the living oracles. I do not believe the celestial kingdom will have people within it who with malicious intent violate the laws of God and trample under their feet spiritual things. But I do believe that the children of God who receive the ordinances of salvation and then seek with all their might to keep their promises and remain in covenant—even though they may have been far from perfect along the way and as they passed through death—will go into paradise, continue to progress and develop and improve, and eventually enjoy celestial, resurrected glory.

I am deeply moved by some of the lessons from the lives of great people of scripture. In the Book of Mormon, for example, Nephi, son of Lehi, was consummately righteous, a person of unusual faith. "My soul delighteth in the things of the Lord," he wrote, "and my heart pondereth continually upon the things which I have seen and heard." Now that's the Nephi we all know and love, the man without guile, the solid, steadfast defender of the truth. But notice what follows: "Nevertheless, notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord, in showing me his great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth: O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities. I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me" (2 Nephi 4:16-18; emphasis added). Wait a minute! we shout. What happened to our hero? What happened to the holy man who delights in the things of God? Answer: The same Nephi who communed with God regularly, had visions and dreams, and penetrated the veil often—that same Nephi wrestled with the flesh, with his humanness, with a fallen mortal nature.

Let's take a second case study, this from the opening chapters of the book of Mosiah. The people of Benjamin were summoned to a great covenant-renewal ceremony to receive a benedictory address from their remarkable king. They are described as being "a diligent people in keeping the commandments of the Lord" (Mosiah 1:11). We assume they were members of the Church, were what we would call good and faithful people. They listened as King Benjamin introduced his son Mosiah as his successor and then as he answered to the people for his stewardship with a clear conscience. Benjamin spoke of the importance of serving one another and taught the timeless lesson that when we are in the service of our fellow beings we are only in the service of our God. Benjamin then quoted extensively from the words of an angel concerning the coming condescension of Jehovah, the Lord God Omnipotent; of the sufferings, death, and resurrection of the Holy One as an atoning sacrifice for all; and of the need to put off the natural man and put on Christ (Mosiah 2:3).

"And now, it came to pass that when king Benjamin had made an end of speaking the words which had been delivered unto him by the angel of the Lord, that he cast his eyes round about on the multitude, and behold they had fallen to the earth, for the fear of the Lord had come upon them." And now note this unusual statement about this diligent people: "And they had viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth" (Mosiah 4:1-2; emphasis added). What? A diligent and faithful people began to see themselves as less than the dust of the earth? How so? Before we answer, let's consider another case.

As my final example, I'd like us to take a look at one of my favorite Book of Mormon personalities, Mahonri Moriancumr, known to most of us as the brother of Jared. The Lord had commanded Jared, his brother, and their families and selected friends to leave a wicked world behind at the time of the tower of Babel and the confusion of tongues and to travel to a promised land (see Ether 1:3).

When it came to constructing and occupying barges to cross the great deep, the Jaredites faced two significant challenges: air and light. When the brother of Jared asked the Lord for help with the problem of ventilation, the Lord freely gave him specific instructions; apparently it was beyond the capacity of the brother of Jared to come up with the solution by himself. When it came to the matter of light, the Lord said, in essence, "What would you have me to do?" The brother of Jared prepared sixteen transparent stones and brought them to the Lord. He then pleaded with the Almighty to touch them, for he had sufficient faith that if they were touched by God they would shine.

The prayer of this remarkably righteous man, one whose name is forevermore enshrined in our Who's Who in Faith, is most instructive. "O Lord," he implored, "thou hast said that we must be encompassed about by the floods. Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become evil continually" (Ether 3:2; emphasis added). An evil nature within the brother of Jared? What's going on?

Saints with Weaknesses

In each of the foregoing scriptural illustrations, we find that godly people, men and women of faith, those that most of us would surely deem worthy of exaltation, felt the effects of the Fall and the pull of this fallen world. They were good people, noble souls, but keenly aware of their weakness. My point here is that some of the greatest men and women who have ever lived have been very aware of their weaknesses, of their limitations, of their inabilities to make it alone. They knew they were not perfect on their own. Their humility was coupled with, inextricably tied to, their trust in and reliance upon One who was perfect, One who had done all things well.

Nephi wrote: "And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins; nevertheless"—and this is a huge nevertheless—"I know in whom I have trusted. My God hath been my support" (2 Nephi 4:19-20; emphasis added). Likewise, the brother of Jared said in prayer: "Because of the fall our natures have become evil continually; nevertheless"—there's that word again!—"nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desires" (Ether 3:2; emphasis added). In short, one of the only ways we can deal with our mistakes, our sins, and our frailties without giving up or surrendering to the devil is to acknowledge fully and yield completely to the Captain of our souls, Jesus Christ.

The people of Benjamin—as should we all—"cried aloud with one voice, saying: O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who created heaven and earth, and all things." And what happened to them can and does and will happen to us, if our hearts are welded to the Holy One of Israel as were theirs: "And it came to pass that after they had spoken these words the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy, having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of conscience, because of the exceeding faith which they had in Jesus Christ" (Mosiah 4:2-3).

It is not the world's version of self-esteem, a burgeoning self-confidence, that will see us through the vexations of the soul; it is confidence in God. A proper confession of our nothingness without the Lord, linked to a total acknowledgement of his power to recover, rescue, redeem, ransom, and renew us—these things lay the foundation for hope in Christ and provide the godly optimism so needed in a depressing world. Surrender results in solace. As President Howard W. Hunter explained: "Indifference to the Savior or failure to keep the commandments of God brings about insecurity, inner turmoil, and contention. These are the opposites of peace. Peace can come to an individual only by an unconditional surrender to him who is the Prince of peace and who has the power to confer peace" (That We Might Have Joy, p. 30; emphasis added).

Come unto Christ and His Love

Like Alma, I wish with all my heart that I had the power to "speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth" (Alma 29:1). I would bear testimony that there is a God in heaven, that he lives, and that he loves us infinitely and perfectly. I would bear witness of the good news, the glad tidings—that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of all mankind, and that peace and happiness here and eternal reward hereafter are to be found only in him. I would bear pure testimony that God has spoken anew in our day through a modern prophet, Joseph Smith; that through that choice seer and his successors the doctrines of salvation and the divine powers by which men and women may truly be forgiven of sin and become new creatures in Christ have been made available once again; and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is indeed the kingdom of God on the earth and the custodian of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

I wish there were some way I could speak so as to be heard, from one pole of the earth to the other, in bearing a like witness that our God is gracious, slow to anger, and easy to be entreated. We are literally his children. He longs for us to return to his presence. "And now, my beloved brethren, seeing that our merciful God has given us so great knowledge concerning these things, let us remember him, and lay aside our sins, and not hang down our heads, for we are not cast off" (2 Nephi 10:20).

One of the great needs in our day is for Latter-day Saints to have balance in their lives, balance between zeal in keeping the commandments and patience in achieving our goals, balance between a wholehearted devotion to truth and a loving acceptance of those (including ourselves) who fall short. And in our personal lives there needs to be a balance between a type of divine discontent—in which we are constantly striving to be better than we are—and what Nephi called a "perfect brightness of hope" (2 Nephi 31:20), which is the quiet but soul-affirming anticipation that if we trust in the Lord and seek earnestly to do our best, he will make up the difference in time and in eternity.

In the meantime, as Elder Neal A. Maxwell has written: "We can contemplate how far we have already come in the climb along the pathway to perfection; it is usually much further than we acknowledge, and such reflections restore resolve. . . . We can know that when we have truly given what we have, it is like paying a full tithe; it is, in that respect, all that was asked. . . . Finally, we can accept this stunning, irrevocable truth: Our Lord can lift us from deep despair and cradle us midst any care. . . . This is a gospel of grand expectations, but God's grace is sufficient for each of us if we remember that there are no instant Christians" (Notwithstanding My Weakness, pp. 9-11; emphasis in original).

Life may be difficult, but it need not be discouraging. The Lord of Life "loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him. Wherefore, he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation.

"Behold, doth he cry unto any, saying: Depart from me? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but he saith: Come unto me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey, without money and without price. . . .

"Hath he commanded any that they should not partake of his salvation? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but he hath given it free for all men; and he hath commanded his people that they should persuade all men to repentance.

"Behold, hath the Lord commanded any that they should not partake of his goodness? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but all men are privileged the one like unto the other, and none are forbidden" (2 Nephi 26:24-25, 27-28).

Like Ammon, I feel to rejoice in God's matchless goodness and mercy. "Therefore, let us glory, yea, we will glory in the Lord; yea, we will rejoice, for our joy is full; yea, we will praise our God forever. Behold, who can glory too much in the Lord? Yea, who can say too much of his great power, and of his mercy, and of his long- suffering towards the children of men? Behold, I say unto you, I cannot say the smallest part which I feel" (Alma 26:16).

The Divine Redeemer's eternal invitation has been extended to each of us. He knows us, one and all. He knows where we have succeeded and where we have fallen short, and yet he invites us into fellowship with him and with the Father. It is my prayer that we may respond affirmatively and actively and thereby "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him" (Moroni 10:32).
