James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

New Year's greeting, January 1, 1916

1916-January 1-Rocky Mountain Times 10: No. 1, January 1, 1916.

What prompted Mr. S. Iida, editor of the Rocky Mountain Times, to extend an invitation to the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to extend a New Year's greeting to the Japanese clientele and other renders of the paper is not known. The United States was desperately attempting to maintain neutrality in World War I at the time. The message points out that the only cure for war is the message of Jesus Christ and belief of all men of the earth in the fatherhood of God.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS

Mr. S. Iida, Editor Rocky Mountain Times, City. Dear Sir:

Responding to your courteous invitation, we take pleasure in extending to your readers a hearty New Year's Greeting.

We contemplate the past with thanksgiving and hail the future with hope. The old year leaves to us all the valuable lessons of a rich experience. The tragic war goes grimly on. Social, national and international problems engage the attention of the leaders and agitate the masses of all nations. At no time was the demand for sober, courageous, right-thinking, unselfish men greater than at present. Never has the need of right living and cautious speaking been greater than now. The new year and future years invite the inhabitants of all lands to unite in the establishment of peace and the realization of universal brotherhood. Strife, enmity, selfishness, immorality are evils to be eradicated from the individual life. No one is too lowly or insignificant to help. Let each man love his neighbor as himself and the present tragedies will pass away, future terrors will be averted, and "every man in every place will meet a brother and a friend."

An illustrious model of right living and noble fellowship was given to the world twenty centuries ago in Jesus Christ. His message was peace and good will. His law was founded on justice wisely exercised and righteousness intelligently applied. Light was His standard and truth His creed. But the present carnage in Christian Europe indicates that faith in Christ has deteriorated into a hollow eulogy of His name rather than developed into a sincere exemplification of His high virtues and splendid character. But we venture the earnest hope that Christian men will hasten the healing of the nations by a swift return to the path of Christ, and that Pagan men will quickly learn the fatherhood of God that they might more effectively work for the brotherhood of man.

We turn to our Japanese brothers too, far from their native land, who sojourn amongst us, and, upon the common level of human feeling, greet them with sincere wishes for their health, happiness and prosperity. Yours very truly, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
