James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Instructions on handling cases of adultery, April 8, 1916

1916-April 8-Conference Reports, April, 1918.

This message, given at a special priesthood session, seems self-explanatory. While it speaks of transgression, it is evident from the body of the message that the instructions were mainly for handling cases of adultery or perhaps fornication.

President Joseph F. Smith at the Special Priesthood meeting of the General Conference, held in Salt Lake City, Saturday, April 8, 1916:

"The question is often asked: 'How shall young people, guilty of transgression, be dealt with when they live in different wards or stakes? When they make things right, should they be required to make public confession and should they be baptized?' It depends upon the extent of the sin. Some should be required to make public confession, whenever the sin is known publicly. If young people sin, and it is not known to any but themselves and God and the one to whom they voluntarily confess it, and they are sincerely repentant it is not necessary to make their confession public, or to the older people so far as that is concerned. If they sin before many, they should make it right before many. Where they are in different wards, each should be handled by the Bishop of his own ward. Where the sin or their confession is not publicly known and they are humble and repentant, let the proper officer accept their confession, and let them renew their covenant privately by baptism, then let them not sin again, and look to the Lord for forgiveness, and let the Bishop also forgive them. During President Taylor's time he hated this great sin so much, that he made it a rule that if an elder became an adulterer he was cut off from the Church regardless of his repentance; but each case stands on its own merits. There is no precedence. You cannot judge one man by the conduct or action of another. The inspiration of the Lord should guide you to the right course to pursue in each case. All, however, ought to be required to renew their covenants by baptism. In ancient times God's law punished the adulterer with death."
