James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Procedures for keeping priesthood quorum records, May 9, 1916

1916-May 9-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; Improvement Era 19:752-753, June, 1916.

Proper procedures for keeping Priesthood Quorum records and rolls, fellowshipping quorum members, etc., are outlined in these instructions to Stake Presidencies.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, May 9, 1916. President Milton H. Welling and Counselors, Bear River Stake. Dear Brethren:

A number of enquiries have been received of late from Presidents of Stakes and quorum officers concerning enrollment in Priesthood quorums and classes. We consider this subject of sufficient importance to justify sending this letter to you, which we hope you will consider with the High Council and other stake and ward officers, and which should be entered in your stake historical record.

1st-Each quorum should have one roll only, and every person holding the Priesthood should be enrolled in the quorum having jurisdiction in the ward where his Church membership is recorded. The practice of keeping a supplemental or inactive roll is not approved.

2nd-Recommends from one quorum to another are not required. The present arrangement for admitting members in the quorum is already published as follows:

"The certificate of ordination should be carefully preserved by the person ordained; and, whenever necessary, it should be presented to the proper authority as an evidence of his ordination. Upon this evidence he should be admitted to membership in the usual manner by the quorum having jurisdiction in the ward or stake where he resides, providing he has been accepted as a member of the ward. If he does not possess a certificate of ordination, and the recommend upon which he is received in the ward names his Priesthood and ordination, it should be accepted as evidence that he holds that office, provided there is no evidence to the contrary, and provided he has been admitted as a member of the ward in full fellowship."

3rd-When a person holding the Priesthood removes from one ward to another and is accepted as a member of the ward into which he moves, it becomes the duty of the Ward Clerk to notify the president of the quorum of the arrival of this person. The new member should present his certificate of ordination as evidence that he holds the Priesthood, and upon that certificate he should be presented for admission to membership in the quorum to which members of that ward holding the same Priesthood belong. It is the duty of the Ward Clerk to report at the next ward weekly Priesthood meeting the arrival of any person holding the Priesthood, and every such newly arrived member should be enrolled in the proper class, whether he has attended a class meeting or not.

4th-When a member holding the Priesthood becomes a member of the ward, the proper quorum officer having jurisdiction should look after him and see that he becomes enrolled in the quorum.

5th-It is the duty of the secretary of a High Priests' or Elders' quorum to prepare certificates of ordination, and to have them signed by the proper officers, presented to the Ward Clerk to be entered upon the ward record, and then delivered to the persons in whose favor they are issued. Seventies' quorums, however, do not issue certificates of ordination. They are issued by the First Council of Seventy. Therefore, Seventies' quorums should not be provided with certificates. When a person is ordained to the office of Seventy by any other person than a member of the First Council, the proper quorum officers should immediately notify the First Council of Seventy, requesting a certificate of ordination to be mailed or delivered to the quorum officer, and after it has been entered on the quorum record and the ward record it should be delivered to the person in whose favor it is issued.

6th-When a quorum withdraws its fellowship from one of its members, a report of the action of the quorum should be sent to the Bishop of the ward.

We trust that you will take such steps as may be necessary to bring this matter before the quorums of the Priesthood in your stake of Zion, so that there may be uniformity established in enrolling members in quorums and classes and in the preparation and issuing of certificates of ordination.

With kind personal regards, we are Your brethren in the Gospel, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
