James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Innoculations, etc. for missionaries, September 20, 1926

1926-September 20-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

On December 9, 1922, the First Presidency had set a policy of having all medical matters connected with prospective missionaries attended to before the missionary arrived at the mission home in Salt Lake City. Seemingly, facilities were not available in some communities and this letter, which was sent to all missionaries and to Stake Presidents, modifies the earlier ruling in some matters.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah September 20, 1926. President Joseph K. Nicholes St. George, Utah

Dear Brother:

It is now the custom for missionaries to be vaccinated for smallpox and innoculated for typhoid fever before entering the mission field. This has been done at the Missionary Home, but it is considered advisable to request missionaries to have this attended to at home before reporting here.

If suitable facilities are not available in the home communities, arrangements can be made for missionaries to be innoculated in this city. It would be well, however, for those who desire to have this attended to in Salt Lake to come here about a week ahead so as to give ample time for them to recover from the effect of the innoculation that they may be in a condition to receive the full benefit of the Missionary Training Course.

Missionaries who reside in Salt Lake City and vicinity should be innoculated in good season, and it is suggested that they go to their family physicians.

Those who desire to be innoculated by the physicians who examine the missionaries are to report to Elder Harold G. Reynolds, Mission Secretary, at the Church Office Building, 47 East South Temple Street and he will direct them to these physicians.

Will state that the doctors here only charge missionaries for the material used for this purpose.

Missionaries are expected to remain at the Missionary Home during the period the Missionary Course is conducted. Their time is well occupied both during the day and evenings, therefore, appointments should not be made to interfere with class work. It is suggested that farewell parties be held before the missionaries enter the Home. Sincerely your brother, HEBER J. GRANT.

P.S. The above is copy of letter, which is mailed to outgoing missionaries prior to their departure, which I am sending you for your information.
