James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Card playing-the Deseret News, April 4, 1926

1926-April 4-Conference Reports, April, 1926, pp. 10-11.

In issuing these statements against card playing and in support of the Deseret News, President Grant announced that in both instances he was "speaking for the Church" or in other words in his official capacity as President of the Church.

President Grant indicated that repeated condemnation of card playing had been issued to members of the Church.

On January 13, 1899 the First Presidency had announced:

"The Deseret News is now the property of the Church and will be sustained by the First Presidency as the official organ of the Church. It is very important that the church should have a public journal which will reflect the views of the authorities and through which their official utterances may be declared. It is also important that the saints shall have a newspaper fit to go into every family. (See MFP 3:310-311.)

President Grant in the April 1926 Conference reaffirmed the 1899 statement.

PRESIDENT HEBER J. GRANT What the Church Requests as to Card Playing

By the way, I hear that card playing is becoming very, very popular, and that the Church must be in favor of card-playing because the Church authorities never say anything about it. From the time I was a child and read the Juvenile Instructor, published for the benefit of the people, I have read nothing except condemnation of card-playing and the wasting of your time in doing something that brings no good, bodily, intellectually or in any way, and sometimes leads your children to become gamblers, because they become expert card-players. The Church as a Church requests its members not to play cards. I hope you understand me, and I want you to know that I am speaking for the Church when I ask the people to let cards alone.

Sustain The Deseret News

Again I am speaking for the Church when I ask Latter-day Saints to sustain the newspaper published by the Church. I have gone into the homes of bishops and other leading families in this Church, and have failed to find The Deseret Evening News. We desire the support of The Deseret News because it is your paper. We are the Church and the Church owns The Deseret News, and if you make it a great financial success you will be sharing in that success because it is your paper. And I want to say to the Latter-day Saints that there have been a score or more of speeches published in The News in the past year, nearly every one of which to my mind was worth the price of The Desert News. I called up an influential man the other day and asked if he had read one, two or three of those sermons. He said no. I want to tell you that a sermon by one of the greatest educational minds in Utah, (I doubt there is a superior one) Dr. Joseph F. Merrill, over the radio and subsequently enlarged upon from this stand, was published in The News. I would not take a fifty dollar bill for it if I could not get it again.

We are here-for what? For the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and we get it in The Deseret News. I will say to you that one of the finest sermons on Priesthood that I have listened to-(by the way, I did not listen to it, but I read it in The News)-was by one of the great lawyers of America, one of the international lawyers, a man honored by our country to be called to Washington in the great conference on disarmament, J. Reuben Clark. You did not read it if you do not take The News. It was a splendid talk. I want to say to you that the talks by Adam Bennion and by Milton Bennion are worth the price of The News for a year. I will have to stop talking about The News, or I won't get through with the other things I want to say.
