James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Melchizedek Priesthood activities, August 24, 1926

1926-August 24-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

These instructions on Melchizedek Priesthood activities are self-explanatory.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah Aug. 24, 1926 President Jos. K. Nichols and Counselors,

Dear Brethren:

We have directed the Presiding Bishopric to submit to us a memorandum of the condition of the quorums of the Melchizedek Priesthood as rendered by the officers of these quorums as an annual report of the year 1925. Brief comment is made on the condition of each quorum, which is herewith enclosed.

It is desired that every person holding an office in the Priesthood be enrolled in the quorum to which he belongs; that the attendance at Priesthood quorum meetings be materially increased; that the quorum officers interest themselves in the attendance at the class meetings of the quorums of the various wards; also that special labor be taken up with those who do not attend their quorum meetings or Sacramental meetings.

Every quorum should make an effort to have representatives in the mission field, and as far as possible members should be actively engaged in some stake or ward duty, and especially active in the performance of their quorum duties.

Your attention is also called to the record of tithepayers. Some of the quorums make a very fine record, others not so good. There should be placed upon the president of each quorum and other competent persons the duty of laboring personally and privately with those who have failed to pay their tithing and who are reported as non-tithepayers.

Meetings should be held in every stake of Zion of the stake presidency and committee of the high council with the officers of the quorums of the Melchizedek Priesthood, at which the presidency of the stake give advice and counsel, make suggestions for improvements and follow up work of the quorums of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

With your active supervision and the cooperation of the members of the high council and the officers of the various quorums, the records should disclose a considerable improvement. Your brethren in the Gospel, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY, First Presidency.
