James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 17 1927

1927-December 17-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 25:313-315, December 27, 1927; Deseret News, December 17, 1927.

CHRISTMAS GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

We accept with gratitude the opportunity which the advent of the Christmas season again affords to extend holiday greetings and congratulations to our fellow members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and to all others who desire peace on earth and good will toward men. The blessings which the Almighty has poured out upon us as a people since our last holiday message have been so abundant and so wonderful that our hearts are filled with thanksgiving which it is difficult to find words to express. Prosperity in a material sense has smiled upon us benignly, while spiritually there has been a sincerity and zeal in the performance of duty which fills our hearts with joy. There never has been a time when the world had greater need of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and love of Him than today; and there never has been a time when these emotions were more in evidence than is the case today among those who have taken upon them His name and covenanted to keep His commandments.

In this gratifying fact we find warrant for encouragement and reason for praise. As we celebrate at this season, in common with the Christian world everywhere, the usually accepted anniversary of His mortal birth, the Latter-day Saints aim to do more than render Him mere lip-service. They acknowledge Him as their Redeemer, the Captain of their salvation, the one and eternal King of kings. They adore Him as the only begotten of the Father in the flesh, the beloved Son who was willing to clothe Himself with a mortal tabernacle which should be offered as an atoning sacrifice for the sins of mankind. They worship Him as the resurrected Lord who made possible that they too should live again, and by obedience to His laws could have part with Him in everlasting bliss. They have taken upon them His name, recognizing that there is none other under heaven by which man can be saved. They testify of Him as a reality, and not as a myth or tradition. They accept His life, from His humble birth in Bethlehem to His cruel death at Calvary, as a pattern for human devotion and endeavor throughout all time. His career from the manger to the cross furnishes to them the supreme perfection of humility, devotion and service to which the human soul can aspire. In His resurrection from the grave, they have complete assurance of the life to come.

Our mission is to testify of these things and of Him to each other and to all the world. In this latter duty, the labors of the missionaries are characterized by commendable energy and they are being crowned with much success. Those who are proclaiming the message of salvation are selected with care, and are perhaps better qualified than at any time heretofore; with the result that the Gospel is being preached in power and is finding hearers in fields hitherto closed. Thus is the world being warned and made ready for the approaching advent of the Prince of Peace. At home, too, the Saints in general are setting their houses in order and are seeking more closely to obey the Master's laws and commands. In the bringing of their tithes and offerings, in observance of the Word of Wisdom, in attendance at meetings, in exercise of the powers of the Priesthood, in keeping the Sabbath and safe-guarding the youth of Zion-in these and all other obligations resting upon them as Saints of God, the people are manifesting a spirit of sincerity and progress extremely pleasing to those vested with the authority of leadership. On their part, these watchmen upon Zion's walls and towers are vigilant and courageous as befits their calling and responsibility. For all these evidences of the spread and strength of true Christianity we have occasion at this anniversary season to express approval and gratitude.

In particular are we moved at this time to rejoice in the completion and dedication of another Temple to the Most High. The House of the Lord at Mesa, Arizona, is the seventh to be erected since the Saints came to the Rocky Mountains. Each new Temple forms an additional bond between the heavens and the earth, marking a new epoch in the mighty work of vicarious redemption by the living for the dead-enabling the Saints to be indeed saviors upon Mount Zion. This thought seems specially appropriate at this season when the Christian world celebrates the birth of Him who made vicarious atonement for us all.

Each passing year brings us nearer the date of the Lord's coming in power and glory. True, the hour and the day when this great event is to take place, no man knoweth; but all the promised signs indicate that it is not far distant. Meanwhile the duty of the Saints is to watch and work and pray, being valiant for truth, and abounding in good works. Despite the uneasiness and discontent in many parts of the earth, the suspicions and jealousies among the nations, the mounting wave of lawlessness and crime, and the seeming spread of the elements of destruction even in our own beloved country-despite these symptoms denoting the apparent growth of the power of evil, those who continue to stand in holy places can discern through it all the hand-working of the Almighty in consummation of His purposes and in furtherance of His will. That which, viewed with the natural eye, is portentous and dreadful, causes no apprehension to those who have faith that whatever happens, the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.

In conclusion, we give to the Latter-day Saints, and to all men so far as they are willing to listen, our good wishes, our testimony and our benediction. May your Christmas be blessed with cheer and happiness, your New year with prosperity and peace. May your hearts be warmed and your souls exalted with the echo of that glorious song which was sung above the plains of Judea on that blessed night of the Savior's birth more than nineteen hundred years ago, when a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, were heard by the shepherds, saying, "Glory to God, in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY.
