James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Lawlessness and immorality in Utah, January, 1928

1928-January-Conference Reports, October, 1928, p. 16; Liahona, the Elders' Journal 26:244-245, November 13, 1928.

This message dealt with lawlessness, immorality, and graft, which were said to exist in Salt Lake City and other Utah communities.

CAN THIS BE TRUE?

Can it be possible that reports which reach us concerning the lawlessness, immorality and graft which are said to exist in Salt Lake City and other localities in our state, are true?

Have we among our judges, attorneys and peace officers those who regard these iniquitous offenses against society with apathy and indifference?

Are we to believe that in this community of ours large sums of money are regularly collected which are disbursed by trusted agents among city, county, state or federal officers, who have been appointed or elected by the voice of the people to hunt down, prosecute and rid the community of lawless disturbers of the peace, violate the trust reposed in them, and for money seek means by which these criminals may be liberated, rather than convicted?

Do men with brazen effrontery perjure themselves while on the witness stand, in order that the law may be nullified and the guilty go free? Do any of our judges, knowing this, allow the perjurer to go without rebuke or punishment?

Are we losing our high ideals regarding the honor of men and the virtue of women? Do we ignore the existence of houses of prostitution and assignation into which virtuous women and innocent girls are being lured, or forcibly taken, to be ruined by wicked licentious libertines both white and black?

Laws which are enacted for the protection of society have no value except when they are administered in righteousness and justice, and they cannot be so administrated if dishonest men occupy administrative offices.

The Lord says: "When the wicked rule, the people mourn." Wise men, good men, patriotic men are to be found in all communities, in all political parties, among all creeds. None but such men should be chosen. * * *

Without beneficent laws, righteously administered, the foundations of civilization crumble, anarchy reigns, decay and dissolution follow.

We call upon all members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints throughout the world to honor the laws of God, and obey and uphold the law of the land; and we appeal to good men and women everywhere, regardless of creed, party affiliation, race or condition, to join with us in an effort to put into operation the words of Lincoln, the great emancipator, that our country may continue to be a light to the world, a loyal, law-abiding, God-fearing Nation. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY, First Presidency.
