James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Reaffirmation of Church principles on government and law, October 5, 1928

1928-October 5-Conference Reports, October, 1928, pp. 9, 11.

As President of the Church in 1928, President Grant reaffirms the declarations of Section 134 of the Doctrine and Covenants and of the First Presidency and the General Conference of the Church of April 5, 1907, on governments and law and on the separation of church and state. (See MFP 4:142-155.)

PRESIDENT HEBER J. GRANT Counsel Regarding Voting

It has been whispered around frequently, and I hear the murmur now, that the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ, standing at the head and holding the priesthood, desire this man or that man or the other man elected to office. The Presidency of the Church so far as they are concerned, allow every man, woman and child, that is old enough to vote, to vote according to his or her own conviction. But we do appeal to all men and women, realizing the responsibility resting upon them, to seek God our Heavenly Father to guide them politically as well as religiously, and to stand for right and for those things that are for the good of this nation. The Latter-day Saints believe absolutely that the Constitution of our country was written by inspired men. We believe in upholding the laws of our country. We believe in being obedient to the laws. One of the Articles of our Faith says that it is our duty to do so.

Belief Regarding Governments and Laws

I am going to read a declaration of the belief of our Church regarding the governments and laws, issued by the Prophet Joseph Smith in August, 1835:

"We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man; and that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in making laws and administering them, for the good and safety of society.

"We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life.

"We believe that all governments necessarily require civil officers and magistrates to enforce the laws of the same; and that such as will administer the law in equity and justice should be sought for and upheld by the voice of the people if a republic, or the will of the sovereign.

"We believe that religion is instituted of God; and that men are amenable to him, and to him only, for the exercise of it, unless their religious opinions prompt them to infringe upon the rights and liberties of others; but we do not believe that human law has a right to interfere in prescribing rules of worship to bind the consciences of men, nor dictate forms for public or private devotion: that the civil magistrate should restrain crime, but never control conscience; should punish guilt, but never suppress the freedom of the soul.

"We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments; and that sedition and rebellion are unbecoming every citizens thus protected, and should be punished accordingly; and that all governments have a right to enact such laws as in their own judgments are best calculated to secure the public interest; at the same time, however, holding sacred the freedom of conscience.

"We believe that every man should be honored in his station, rulers and magistrates as such, being placed for the protection of the innocent and the punishment of the guilty; and that to the laws all men owe respect and deference, as without them peace and harmony would be supplanted by anarchy and terror; human laws being instituted for the express purpose of regulating our interests as individuals and nations, between man and man; and divine laws given of heaven, prescribing rules on spiritual concerns, for faith and worship, both to be answered by man to his Maker.

"We believe that rulers, states, and governments have a right, and are bound to enact laws for the protection of all citizens in the free exercise of their religious belief; but we do not believe that they have a right in justice to deprive citizens of this privilege, or proscribe them in their opinions, so long as a regard and reverence are shown to the laws and such religious opinions do not justify sedition nor conspiracy.

"We believe that the commission of crime should be punished according to the nature of the offense; that murder, treason, robbery, theft, and the breach of the general peace, in all respects, should be punished according to their criminality and their tendency to evil among men, by the laws of that government in which the offense is committed; and for the public peace and tranquility all men should step forward and use their ability in bringing offenders against good laws to punishment."

I would like to emphasize that:

"All men should step forward and use their ability in bringing offenders against good laws to punishment."

"We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government."

I wish to emphasize that: "We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government."

—"whereby one religious society is fostered and another proscribed in its spiritual privileges, and the individual rights of its members, as citizens, denied.

"We believe that all religious societies have a right to deal with their members for disorderly conduct, according to the rules and regulations of such societies; provided that such dealings be for fellowship and good standing; but we do not believe that any religious society has authority to try men on the right of property or life, or take from them this world's goods, or to put them in jeopardy of either life or limb, or to inflict any physical punishment upon them. They can only excommunicate them from their society, and withdraw from them their fellowship."

Sentiments of Abraham Lincoln

In closing I wish to read a few words that I have read many times, (and I wish that we would get these words in our hearts and in our minds) from that great and wonderful man, Abraham Lincoln, who all Latter-day Saints believe firmly was raised up and inspired of God Almighty, and that he reached the presidency of the United States under the favor of our Heavenly Father, defeating Stephen A. Douglas, and fulfilling a prediction made by Joseph Smith to Stephen A. Douglas when he was an obscure country judge in Illinois.

Lincoln said:

"Let the people know the truth, and the country is safe."

"Let none falter who thinks he is right, and we will succeed."

"Let us dare to do our duty as we understand it."

"Bad laws, if they exist, should be repealed as soon as possible; still while they continue in force for the sake of example, they should be religiously observed."

Notice the language-"religiously observed."

"Let every American, every lover of liberty, every well wisher to his posterity, swear by the blood of the Revolution never to violate, in the least particular, the laws of the country, and never to tolerate their violation by others. As the patriots of seventy-six did to the support of the Declaration of Independence, so to the support of the Constitution and laws, let every American pledge his life, his property and his sacred honor. Let every man remember that to violate the law is to trample on the blood of his father, and to tear the charter of his own and his children's liberty. Let reverence for the law be breathed by every American mother to the lisping babe that prattles on her lap. Let it be taught in schools, in seminaries and in colleges. Let it be written in primers, in spelling books and almanacs. Let it be preached from the pulpit, proclaimed in legislative halls and enforced in courts of justice. In short let it become the political religion of the nation."

Above all, let it become the religion of the Latter-day Saints. Why? Because it is in absolute and perfect harmony with the word of the living God to us in the revelations, every word of which, according to God, shall be fulfilled.
