James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 22, 1928

1928-December 22-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 26:337-339, January 8, 1929; Deseret News, December 22, 1928.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

To the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and to the people of the world everywhere, we reverently cite and earnestly apply the words of the Lord Jesus: "All Hail" and "Peace be unto you!"

Christmastide, embracing the day accepted by common consent in commemoration of the mortal birth of the Savior and Redeemer of the race, and the beginning of a New Year according to our current reckoning of time, is the principal holiday season in Christendom. Because of its sacred significance, it invites, calls for, and demands our joyous yet solemn and worshipful observance.

Our minds revert or should be led to the manger in Bethlehem, which for the time became a sanctified and holy place, and to the glorious annunciation whereby the Angel of the Lord proclaimed to the humble shepherds: "Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."

Likewise on the Western Continent, among the descendants of Lehi, who constituted an isolated division of the House of Israel, wondrous signs were shown; for, as in the East, a new star appeared, and furthermore, the night was illumined, so that two days passed with no darkness between. On both hemispheres these marvelous signs and wonders came in strict fulfilment of earlier and reiterated prophecy.

And so the Lord Jehovah took upon Himself a body of flesh, to carry into effect the foreordained plan whereby redemption would be assured and salvation made possible to all humankind.

He lived and ministered, suffered and died, was resurrected and glorified, even as had been foreseen, decreed and predicted. He founded His Church on both hemispheres, and ordained men to carry forward the work so effectively established. Nevertheless, and again as had been foretold, there followed a great falling away from the faith among the people, so that in time the Church itself became apostate, and ceased to function on earth as other than an institution of men, deprived of further revelation, devoid of authority, they having "transgressed the, laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.

The Church of Jesus Christ, however, was not to remain in obscurity long-as the Lord reckons time. After several centuries of dark apostasy, during which the minds and souls of men had become benighted, and following a period of direct preparation, the heavens were opened anew, and the Lord spake again to a prophet divinely chosen and empowered. This man of God, to whom was entrusted the leadership of the restored and re-established Church in the last dispensation-significantly called in Scripture the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times-was Joseph Smith, the anniversary of whose birth falls on December 23rd.

As a people we voice our thanksgiving, supplication and worship to the Lord God Omnipotent, who lived and died as a Man among men and now reigns with His and our Eternal Father in the heavens above. As a people we humbly yet joyously thank Him for raising up His prophet in these latter times, as the one through whom the Gospel of Jesus Christ was to be and verily has been restored to the earth in preparation for the Savior's glorious coming, now near at hand!

The hour and day of the Lord's future advent is withheld from the knowledge of both men and angels; yet the signs, so definitely specified as harbingers of His coming, are multiplying apace. The prevailing unrest among men and nations, the fury of the elements, widespread destruction by land and sea, the frequency and intensity of volcanic and earthquake disturbances-all tell to the well-tuned and listening ear that the gladsome yet terrible day of the Lord is nigh-aye, even at our doors!

A sure indication of the great event, as specified by the Lord Himself, was and is that the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world. The missionary service of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints attests the progressive fulfilment of this prediction. We are sending out missionaries in great numbers, and the record of their effective labor is a witness to the world. By personal visitation, by the printed page, by radio broadcast and by all other available means the Church is enlarging its ministry of invitation, persuasion, and solemn warning to the nations.

Activities in the Stakes and Wards of Zion, through the Priesthood quorums and the several auxiliaries, are of wider scope and of greater productiveness in good results than ever before. While there is yet ample room for much improvement, the Church membership is maintaining its standard in the observance of the Law of the Tithe, and in living according to the code of health embodied in the divine revelation, inspiringly named the Word of Wisdom. Let everyone who yearns for the choice blessings promised by the Lord lay hold thereon by strict obedience to the laws upon which those blessings are predicated.

The Latter-day Saints are manifesting an ever-increasing concern in vicarious service for their dead, as the sacred ministry rendered in our Temples fully demonstrates. This Church is the only organization in existence that teaches the doctrine and administers the ordinance of baptism for the dead, which we associate with other vicarious administrations in behalf of our departed relatives.

To all members of the Church, to the House of Israel at large, to Jew and Gentile, we extend our heart-felt greetings, with good-will and prayerful interest, at this season of rejoicing. May the Lord our God be merciful, and stay the hand of the Destroyer, so far as is consistent with the Divine purposes and predictions respecting these momentous days. Let us seek safety through unreserved compliance with the laws and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Thus shall the Christmas be made joyous, and the New Year rich in the plenitude of the Lord's mercy. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY.
