James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Organizational change in Church educational program, May 29, 1929

1929-May 29-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This letter is notification of a change in organizational pattern for a portion of the educational program of the Church. The religious education of children 5-11 (elementary, K-6 students) was made the responsibility of the Primary Association, while children 12 years and older (7th bade and above, or junior high school age students) were still to be the responsibility of the Religion Classes under the General Church Board of Education.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah May 29, 1929 To Presidencies of Stakes

Dear Brethren:

Please be advised that we have approved the recommendations of the General Church Board of Education that the Primary and Religion Classes of the Church for the children of the elementary grades of the public schools, kindergarten to the sixth grade inclusive, shall be consolidated and the work be carried on under the auspices of the Primary Association which, it has been decided, shall hereafter be known as the Primary-Religion Class of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This organization is given the responsibility of conducting week-day classes in religion for the children of these elementary grades, in general about ages five to twelve inclusive.

Further, the General Church Board of Education through the Department of Education is given the responsibility of conducting week-day religion class work for the children of the Church beginning with the seventh grade of our public schools, in general about ages twelve and up. These classes, it has been decided, shall be known as junior seminary classes.

Again, until otherwise determined, the Primary-Religion Class organization shall have jurisdiction of the Seagull Girls, ages twelve to fourteen, for leisure-time activities, other than theological studies. In other words, these girls are assigned to the junior seminaries for week-day religion class work.

The purpose of these approved recommendations is to insure harmony and cooperation in providing week-day religious instruction for all our children by making only one organization at a time responsible for week-day religion class work. It is hoped that you and all others concerned will heartily support the plan and aid in carrying it out. All reasonable efforts should be made to have all children of the Church attend, where feasible, a weekday, as well as a Sunday, class to receive religious instructions.

Further information regarding the details of this suggested change may be had by applying to Joseph F. Merrill, Commissioner of Education, or Sister May Anderson, President of the Primary Association.

Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY, First Presidency.
