James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Commemoration of Church centennial, March 3, 1930

1930-March 3-Original circular letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The cover letter of instructions calling for a world-wide commemoration of the centennial of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints within a twenty-four hour period on April 6, 1930. The program, the central address (to be read in the native tongues) and the Hosanna Shout were to be uniform in all Branches, Wards and Stakes and Missions throughout the world.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah March 3, 1930 To Presidents of Stakes and Presidents of Missions

Dear Brethren:

We are sending you by this mail _________ copies of a program which we hope can be rendered in every ward and branch of the Church in all the world (excepting such wards and branches as may be able, by means of radio receiving equipment installed in their chapels and halls, to listen to the services as they are broadcast from the Salt Lake Tabernacle) on the 6th day of April, 1930, commencing at 10:00 A.M.

We are also sending you _____________ copies of an Address by the First Presidency of the Church, which we desire read in each ward and branch on this special occasion.

You are therefore requested to forward to your bishops and branch presidents copies of this program and Address, so that the same Address will be read, the same hymns sung, and the same Hosanna Shout given, throughout a period of about twenty-four hours-taking into consideration the difference in time in the various parts of the world where branches of the Church are located.

In foreign-speaking missions the Address of the First Presidency must of necessity be translated into the language understood by the people, and copies of these translations forwarded to the presidents of the branches. The work of translation should be done by or under the direction of the mission presidents, exercising extreme care to produce a correct translation of the original.

All other meetings of the Centennial conference should be arranged by the presiding authorities of the stakes and missions of the Church.

Praying the Lord to bless you abundantly and to give us all the spirit of this great occasion, Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY, First Presidency.
