James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 20, 1930

1930-December 20-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 28:337-339, January 6, 1931; Deseret News December 20, 1930.

The annual Christmas pastoral epistle of the First Presidency.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

At this recurring time of sacred remembrance we extend our brotherly love and fatherly blessing to all members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in the Stakes and Wards of Zion, in the mission fields near and far, and wherever they are throughout the world. To seekers after the truth, to earnest investigators of our faith, to the honorable of the earth not numbered with the Latter-day Saints, we extend assurances of good will and offer earnest and friendly invitation to rejoice with us in the solemn and blessed reality for which Christmas stands.

The churches and sects of Christendom are generally united in the observance of this season as commemorative of the greatest occurrence in human history-the earthly advent of the Only Begotten Son of the Eternal Father, born of Mary of Nazareth, the Babe of Bethlehem, Jesus the Christ.

Of such blessed import was that supreme occasion that men of earth and angels of heaven joined in glorious acclaim, on both hemispheres, and sang their soulful Hosannas to the Most High God. The time of the Savior's birth has become established as the "Meridian of Time" by which years, centuries and millenniums are counted forward and computed back, so that it has come to be acknowledged by Christian, Jew, and Pagan as the pivotal event in the chronicles of mankind.

To us, the Latter-day Saints, this annual commemoration of the Divine birth is of particular significance, in that we hold membership in the Church designated by the name of the Lord through direct bestowal from the Heavens; and before the world we declare that we have accepted His Gospel and are striving to live in accordance with His laws and commandments. Beloved Brethren, Sisters, what manner of men and women ought we to be?

Our celebration of the Christmastide should be so ordered that holy angels can approve and in spirit participate with us; then shall our joys and festivities be acceptable to Him whose birth we honor. May families be united and individuals moved upon by the Christmas Spirit in rich measure, that thanksgiving and praise, accompanied by benevolent ministry to those in need, may sanctify our hearts and homes!

We cannot ignore the fact that this particular Christmas season is not a time of unalloyed contentment and happiness; for notwithstanding the granaries of the nation are full, its storehouses stocked to repletion, the balance of demand and distribution is deranged, so that want and plenty exist side by side. The clouds of business depression are still thick and lowering, and this means lack of individual employment and consequent deprivation to the wage earner. Though much has been done by benevolent institutions and through personal efforts of many who are giving unto the Lord by ministering to His children, there are too many homes in which the specter of want is ghastly visible.

Such distress is not confined to our own country; actual starvation is stalking through populous provinces in lands beyond the western ocean. Industrial concerns are hampered and in many cases stopped. The governments of nations are disturbed, and upheavals through unrest are of frequent occurrence. The elements of Nature are angry; drought and flood, earthquake and storm, volcanic eruptions, disasters by land, sea and air, are of almost daily report, while crime in hideous excess has become the usual order.

Oh, that mankind would recognize and heed these signs of the times in their real import as the fulfillment of prophecy made contingent on the persistent unrighteousness of the race! These are the last days, foretold in Sacred Writ, through the Lord's prophets of ancient times and of the present dispensation.

It is fitting as we memorialize the mortal birth of the world's Redeemer and Savior that we bear in mind and prayerfully consider His predictions concerning the times in which we live, and shape our lives in accordance therewith. "Wherefore, stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the day of the Lord come; for behold, it cometh quickly, saith the Lord." (Doctrine and Covenants 87:8.)

The Latter-day Saints are less seriously affected by the state of prevalent depression than are the people of our nation generally. We have much for which we ought to be thankful, much over which we have great reason to rejoice; not only because there is less of poverty and suffering and more of material bounty and plenty among us than is found in many other communities, but especially because we have the light of latter-day prophecy to enlarge our perception and enlighten our understanding as to the expressed significance of the times.

We know that the Lord has spoken and is speaking in these days as in ancient times, through prophets of His choice and commission, and that the Church of Jesus Christ is reestablished upon the earth, with the Holy Priesthood vested therein, and for the last time!

As we solemnly yet joyously commemorate the coming of the Lord into mortality, to affirm His existence as the Son of the Eternal Father, to assure by His sacrificial atonement the universal redemption of the race from death, and to make possible the salvation and exaltation of all who will obey His law, so ought we to consider in happy expectancy the impending return of the Christ-for come He will, in power and great glory, to bring about a restitution and rectification of the affairs of men and nations. Then all shall know Him as Lord and King, whose dominion shall be that of righteousness, administered in strict regard to both justice and mercy.

We are nearer the time of the Second Advent than mankind have ever been, aye, nearer than mankind are willing to admit or believe.

Another year will soon begin its course; and we should devoutly hope that by Divine grace it may be a year less sullied by sin, and therefore more brightened by the growth of peace and good will among men and by greater receptiveness to the influence of the Spirit of Truth which emanates from the Lord Jesus Christ.

Latter-day Saints, let us be true to the faith we profess, true to the assuring testimonies we have individually received, true to Him whose name we have taken!

To all others, the world over, we acknowledge the common bond of brotherhood, for we are all children of the Eternal One, who is the Father of spirits. We earnestly plead that all shall heed the preaching of the Gospel by the Lord's commissioned servants, and accept the proffered boon of fellowship in the Kingdom of God, which is attainable by every soul who will comply with the conditions prescribed by the Redeemer and Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY, First Presidency.
