James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Harmful effects of cigarette habit, April 2, 1931

1931-April 2-Original leaflet. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This message was directed specifically to the harmful effects of the use of tobacco. The final paragraph commends the Auxiliary organizations of the Church for their efforts in showing the evil effects of tobacco. The Auxiliaries and the Department of Education of the Church published a pamphlet giving more details on the harmful effects of the cigarette habit.

FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY, THE OFFICERS OF THE AUXILIARY ORGANIZATIONS AND THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Salt Lake City, Utah, April 2, 1931

It is now nearly one hundred years since the Lord, through Joseph Smith, gave to the Saints what is known as the Word of Wisdom-a revelation "To be sent greeting; not by commandment or constraint, but by revelation and the Word of Wisdom, showing forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all Saints in the last days-given for a principle with promise, adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all Saints, who are or can be called Saints."

The Church has constantly urged its members to follow "the will of God" with respect to the use of tobacco, and, we believe, with gratifying success; but never before have the emissaries of the tobacco interests been so active as now in the endeavor to fasten the cigarette habit upon our boys and girls. These words of the revelation, therefore, seem especially significant: "Behold, verily, thus saith the Lord unto you: In consequence of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days, I have warned you, and forewarn you, by giving you this Word of Wisdom by revelation."

In view of the present conditions we feel constrained to call upon all Saints to be faithful in observing the warning contained in this revelation, that they may enjoy the wonderful promises made by the Lord to those who walk in obedience to His commandments.

We commend the efforts of the Auxiliaries and other agencies in showing the evil effects of the cigarette habit, and by overcoming these powerful and insidious influences with moral suasion and religious conversion. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY, First Presidency.
