James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

General authorities not available for all requested visits, May 15, 1931

1931-May 15-Te Karere 25: No.7, July, 1931.

The letter reflects the intense desire on the part of members of the Church in outlying areas to receive visits of General Authorities, and the inability of the Authorities to make all the visits requested.

LETTERS TO THE PRESIDENT May 15, 1931. President John E. Magleby, Box 72, Auckland, New Zealand.

Dear Brother Magleby:

We are glad that the 1931 Hui Tau was so successful. The people at Nuhaka are to be commended in their fine preparation for this conference, in arranging for food and sleeping accommodations for the large crowd which attended the Hui Tau. We approve of your arranging to hold the Hui Tau at Nuhaka next year.

We are not considering sending an Apostle or Patriarch to New Zealand. All the general authorities of the Church are very busy, and it would not be advisable to spare one for such a long period. We appreciate that a tour of the island missions by one of the general authorities would result in much good. We have confidence, however, in your ability to conduct the affairs of this mission and are satisfied that the Lord will bless and direct you in your many responsibilities.

Pleased that Brother Murdoch McKenzie and wife have been placed at the college to take care of the grounds, the cattle, poultry, etc.

We have not sent any single sisters to our European missions nor to the islands, with the exception of the Hawaiian Mission. It is probable that we can arrange for two married couples to be assigned to New Zealand, the wives of the elders to work in the auxiliary organizations. Glad that Brother and Sister Andrus and Brother and Sister Baird, who were at the college, are performing such an excellent labour.

With our love and kindest wishes, and prayers for your continued success, we remain, Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY, First Presidency.
