James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Details about the sacrament, January 20, 1932

1932-January 30-Deseret News, January 30, 1932.

DETAILS ABOUT THE SACRAMENT

In answer to the following question from one of the stakes of the Church: "When there is not enough bread or water on the Sacrament table to serve those present and additional bread or water has to be obtained, is it necessary to bless the additional bread or water before serving it to the people?"-the following instructions are given by the Presiding Bishopric after consultation with the First Presidency:

In every instance care should be exercised by the bishopric of the ward to see to it that there is always sufficient bread and water on the Sacrament table before the administration of the ordinance. To avoid any possibility of a shortage of the bread or water, it would be proper to have some extra slices of bread, which could be wrapped in a napkin, and a pitcher or other container of water on hand over and above the quantity required. However, should a condition develop, through carelessness or neglect, where there would not be sufficient bread or water at hand, then it would be proper when the additional bread or water is obtained to announce that the prayer will be offered again over the bread or the water.

In the administration of this sacred ordinance, it is desirable that the bread provided should be in medium slices, and it should be broken in fair-sized pieces. It is, of course, desirable to avoid having a large surplus of broken bread on hand.

Especial care, also, should be exercised by those who administer and pass the Sacrament, to be thoroughly neat and trim. It is very pleasing to see the young men who pass the Sacrament dress with white or light shirts and dark ties. This does not mean to establish a uniform. With this arrangement the boys would not wear coats or sweaters if the building is properly heated.

These details are worthy of attention on the part of a designated member of the bishopric.
