James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas greeting, December, 1932

1932-December-Improvement Era 36:67, December, 1932.

The First Presidency issued two Christmas messages in December, 1932. This message is directed specifically to the readers of the Improvement Era. The other message in the form of a comment on world conditions following World War I appeared in the Deseret News and the Liahona.

This and succeeding messages are signed only by President Grant and first counselor Anthony W. Ivins. Charles W. Nibley died December 11, 1931, and President Grant served with one counselor until J. Reuben Clark, Jr., was sustained as the new second counselor on April 6, 1933.

CHRISTMAS GREETING FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

To Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in all the World:

Dear Brethren and Sisters:

At this season of the year it is customary for people everywhere to send to their friends and relatives greetings which carry with them their sincere love and appreciation. Knowing that The Improvement Era goes to Saints and Elders in every land and clime, we, your brethren, take opportunity through its pages to convey to you a message of good cheer.

In many ways the year has been a hard one for our people, but in others it has brought blessings in rich abundance to our doors. While financial troubles have upset the even course of events not only in America but in other countries as well, they have mellowed the hearts of men and women until perhaps on this Christmas the true spirit of Christianity will shine with an added lustre. Heart may speak to heart, soul to soul this season in a manner more pleasing to the Master than for many years.

We wish to assure our people that if they will draw near unto the Lord, He will draw near to them. No earnest, righteous prayer has ever gone unheard or unanswered. No matter in what land we may dwell the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ makes us brothers and sisters, interested in each other, eager to understand and know each other.

The New Year holds out new promises of hope. Men and women everywhere should determine in their hearts that they will be worthy of the Lord's choicest blessings. If they will prepare themselves for the companionship of His Spirit, they will find a new joy which passeth the understanding of man.

May the Lord be with you all, our brothers and sisters, wherever you may dwell. May His peace be in your hearts; may His Spirit inspire you to new achievements in brotherly and neighborly service. This is the prayer of your brethren in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.
