James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 17, 1932

1932-December 17-Deseret News, December 17, 1932; Liahona, the Elders' Journal 30:337-338, January 3, 1933.

This message also appeared in pamphlet form with portraits of President Grant and President Ivins.

CHRISTMAS GREETING FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest."

Since our last Christmas greeting the world wide distress, and confusion to which attention was called has continued with increasing intensity, to a point unparalleled in the history of the modern world.

The great World War reached out its hand, and drew from the most remote hamlet the youthful strength of the nations, as well as the accumulated wealth of the people.

So likewise has the reaction which must inevitably follow the waste, ravages and devastation of war, settled like a pall over the people of every nation that was a party to it.

The world is in a state of financial confusion. The nations, including our own, are without funds sufficient to balance their budgets, and pay their just obligations. If required to do so, they would be forced into bankruptcy.

Millions of men, not only willing but anxious to work, are without occupation, and consequently deprived of the comforts, and in many instances the necessities of life.

The husbandman cultivates his farm, and watches over his flocks and herds, which produce abundantly, but is unable to meet the demands of the tax collector, because there is no market for his product. Our mines, our industries, our professions and commercial occupations, all suffer from the effect of the depression which continues with us.

Looking forward with the gift of prophecy, the prophet Isaiah, more than 2,500 years ago said: "It shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the giver of usury, so with the taker of usury from him."

No one will deny that Isaiah foresaw existing conditions. He tells us in simple language the causes which have led up to this condition, in the following words: "They have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant."

The remedy which will bring relief from the present confused condition is clearly set forth in the words of God our Father, spoken through his prophet Malachi: "Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the Lord of hosts. Bring all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there will not be room enough to receive it."

These are not our words, but the words of God our Father, spoken through His chosen prophets.

Whether it was on the night of the 25th day of December, or on some other date, that the angel of the Lord announced to the shepherds who watched over their flocks on the hills of Judea, the birth, in the city of David, of a Savior, who was Christ the Lord, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints joins with other Christian churches and people in commemorating this most important event in the history of the world.

The mission of Jesus was one of peace, of good will and love. In Him the law of Moses was fulfilled, and in its stead He substituted the doctrine of non-resistance, tempered by justice and mercy. He revealed to us the personality and character of God, who is His father and ours, telling us that whoever had seen Him had seen the Father, of whose person he was the exact image. He declared that He came from the presence of the Father, and that His only purpose in coming to earth was to do the will of the Father who sent Him.

Most important of all He was the first fruits of the resurrection, thus breaking the bands of death, and redeeming the human family from the penalty imposed upon it because of transgression.

He bore witness that He returned to the presence of the Father, from whence He came, to prepare a place for those who put their trust in Him, that they might be where He was. In His birth, His ministry and glorious resurrection, and His ascension into heaven, He symbolized the story of our own lives. He taught us that these mortal bodies of ours shall put on immortality, and that we shall rise as He rose, to inherit the glory of everlasting life. This was the purpose for which He came to earth.

As the season during which we commemorate His birth approaches we praise, and honor, and glorify His holy name, and call upon all people "who labor and are heavy laden to come unto Him and He will give them rest." HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS.
