James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Relief measures in the Church, July, 1933

1933-July-Deseret News, Church Section, pp. 1, 7, September 2, 1933; Millennial Star 95:657-659, October 12, 1933.

The two documents reproduced below may be said to be the initial documents for the launching of the Latter-day Saints' Church Welfare Program.

The first of the two documents contains these significant statements:

"Our faithful Church members are independent, self-respecting, and self-reliant; they do not desire charity."

and

"The experience of some of our stakes in which there is now the largest proportion of unemployed, persuades us that this can be done."

The reference in the second quotation, in all likelihood, was to the Pioneer Stake in Salt Lake City, with Elder Harold P. Lee as Stake President.

The second document contains the instructions of the First Presidency for a Churchwide survey of economic conditions existing among the membership of the Church. From this fact-finding survey and its results, and a survey conducted in September, 1936, the Church Welfare Program was launched.

A MESSAGE FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY CONCERNING PREPARATION FOR RELIEF MEASURES

To the Presidents of Stakes and Counselors

Dear Brethren:

Reported conditions in the state and nation suggest that a considerable burden may rest upon our Church relief activities in the near future. While it seems our people may properly look, as heretofore, for relief assistance from governmental and perhaps other sources, it cannot now be certainly foretold either what or how fully sufficient this assistance will be, and we must therefore prepare ourselves to meet the necessities that may fall upon us.

The Lord will not hold us guiltless if we shall permit any of our people to go hungry, or to be cold, unclad, or unhoused during the approaching winter. Particularly He will consider us gravely blameful if those who have heretofore paid their tithes and offerings to the Church when they had employment, shall now be permitted to suffer when the general adversity has robbed them of their means of livelihood. Whatever else happens, these faithful persons must not be permitted to come to want or distress now.

Reports indicate that generally good harvests are to be expected this year, harvests that will supply, if duly conserved and distributed, the full necessities of the people.

The Church organizations set up by the Prophet Joseph in the very early days of the Church, if properly co-ordinated by the bishops and presidents of stakes, are qualified by purpose, jurisdiction, ability of membership, and experience, to carry on adequately, during the coming winter, the work of caring for Church members. Indigent non-Church persons will obviously look to other sources. But no one must be permitted to starve or freeze in our midst.

In rendering assistance to those in need, the Church officers should have one prime consideration in mind, namely: that relief, except to sick, infirm, or disabled, should not be extended as charity. Our faithful Church members are independent, self-respecting, and self-reliant; they do not desire charity. Our able-bodied members must not, except as a last resort, be put under the embarrassment of accepting something for nothing. In recognition of this wholly praiseworthy and admirable attitude of mind, Church officials administering relief must devise ways and means by which all able-bodied Church members who are in need, may make compensation for aid given them by rendering some sort of service. It is believed that private and community enterprise in our wards and stakes can be found or created in sufficient quantities for this purpose.

The experience of some of those of our stakes in which there is now the largest proportion of unemployed, persuades us that this can be done.

The Church stands ready to assist the wards in this relief work to the utmost of its ability, though the Church must, of necessity, look now as always to the wards themselves to do the bulk of this relief work, raising, for the considerable part of this added service, special funds that are in addition to the regular tithes and offerings given by the people. This course is obligatory because the tithes must be available for the missionary, educational, and other indispensable and general activities of the Church which cannot otherwise be carried on, and because the regular offerings must be used to care for the ill and incapacitated and for ward maintenance. Unless there is a most generous, free giving by the people of all materials necessary for relief purposes, we can hardly hope to care for the needy. All relief will be extended through the wards or stakes.

The Church will, so far as possible, co-operate in any wise and effective local plan for furthering relief work.

We wish the presidency of each stake immediately to undertake, through the bishops, a detailed and exhaustive study of the actual condition of every ward in his stake. The greatest care and painstaking effort should be used in making this survey. We are forwarding herewith blanks with detailed instructions for making the survey.

We appreciate that the making of these surveys will require a considerable amount of careful and exacting work by the bishops and their aids and by the presidencies of stakes, but there appears to be no other feasible course if we are to plan adequately for caring for the needy during the coming winter.

We exhort the members of the Church to prepare to take upon their shoulders this great burden which now threatens us. The cries of those in distress must be hushed by our bounty. The words of the Lord require this from us. A feeling of common humanity bids it from us. Never has the Church membership had a better opportunity than now to reap a harvest from obedience to the law, given by the Saviour, "It is more blessed to give than to receive." If we shall fully observe that law, the Lord will pour out His richest blessings upon us; we shall be better and happier than ever before in our history; and peace and prosperity will come to us.

The spiritual condition and faith of the members of any ward or stake may be gauged by their response to this urgent call of the unfortunate for help.

To Israel of old God spake through Malachi:

"Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

"Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.

"Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it."

Out of an experience, rich in God's blessings and chastisements, ancient Israel drew this bit of profound wisdom: "Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase: so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses burst out with new wine."

These are the blessings promised to those who do not rob the Lord. We must not be guilty of this offense. We earnestly exhort the people to have faith in the Lord and His promises. Take Him at His word: "Prove me now herewith, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it." Feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and learn how much the Lord will bless.

We wish the presidencies of the stakes and the bishops of the wards to urge, earnestly and always upon the people, the paramount necessity of living righteously, of avoiding extravagance, of cultivating habits of thrift, economy, and industry, of living strictly within their incomes, and of laying aside something, however small the amount may be, for the times of greater stress that may come to us. By no other course will our people place themselves in that position of helpful usefulness to the world which the Lord intends we shall take. Sincerely your brethren in the Gospel, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR.

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS Church Relief Work for Period 1933 to July 1934

There will also be sent to each president of stake three form S sheets, on which he will consolidate the ward reports sent to him, one of these sheets (white original) will be followed [sic] to the presiding bishop, attached to it one copy (white original) of the ward reports sent to him by the bishops of the wards of his stake, and the other sheet of form S (yellow) and one copy of form R (yellow) he will keep in his own personal file for future reference.
