James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Commendation to missionaries, July 27, 1933

1933-July 27-Millennial Star 95:488-489, July 27, 1933.

WORD OF APPRECIATION FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

To all missionaries who are in the field, those who have rendered missionary service, and those who are yet to go upon missions:

Christ our Lord called His twelve disciples together and sent them out to preach the Gospel. And He said to them, "Take nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two coats apiece."

He also appointed other seventy, and sent them out two and two, and said to them: "The harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few. Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves."

Just prior to His crucifixion, Jesus declared the destruction of the temple at Jerusalem, and the judgments which would come to the Israelitish people.

As He sat upon the Mount of Olives, His disciples asked Him when the predictions made would be fulfilled, and particularly, what was to be the sign of His coming again to earth, to redeem His people.

Among other signs by which they were to be made aware of the near approach of His coming, He said: "And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come."

Following the example of the Master, and in fulfillment of His predictions, the missionary system adopted by Him has been in operation in the Church since the period of the Restoration.

It is estimated that more than sixty thousand members of the Church have served in the mission field since its organization. In one respect we have deviated from the custom of the primitive Church greatly to our advantage, we have included women as well as men in our missionary system.

These representatives of the Church, composed in great part of young men and young women, have gone out into the world with the same faith and courage exemplified by the disciples of our Lord. They have manifested the same fortitude and courage, have met the same opposition from the enemy of truth, and in some instances have given their lives, martyrs for the cause which they represent.

The Lord has gone before them and been their reward. The signs promised have followed them in their ministry. They have carried the glad tidings of the Restoration to many homes where hearts which were in hopeless despair have been made happy because of the message which they brought.

From our hearts we praise and bless them for the faithful service rendered, and pray that the protecting hand of Almighty God may be over them, both men and women, those who have served, those who are now in the field, and those who may follow after.

Your brethren and fellow-workers in the Master's service, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR.
