James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December, 1933

1933-December-Improvement Era 37:3, January, 1934.

A MESSAGE AND GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

In our Christmas Greeting and Message, sent out a year ago to our Brethren and Sisters of the Church, and our many friends who are not affiliated with it, we called attention to the wide spread confusion and distress which prevailed among the people of the world, a condition never before experienced under similar circumstances.

Surrounded by abundance, with elevators overflowing with wheat, warehouses stored to capacity with manufactured goods, millions of our fellow citizens were without the common necessities of life.

These people did not ask for charity, they pled for work, for occupation by means of which they might honestly earn a stipend which would enable them to provide for their families the common necessities of life, and for their children the opportunity of education to which every child is entitled.

Through the liberality of a beneficent government, and the liberal contributions of those who were more fortunately situated, agencies were established for the distribution of needed aid, with the result that winter passed with little, if any, actual suffering. We enter the present winter with general conditions greatly improved, but by no means entirely composed.

The relief agencies to which reference has been made, are operating with greater efficiency than heretofore. We appeal to members of the Church who may be in financial circumstances to justify, to give liberally in support of the agencies which have been set up by the Government, the States, the Counties, cities and private charitable organizations, to the end that the necessities of the needy may be provided for during the present winter.

During the year that has passed since our last message, great political changes have come to our country. Among these the repeal of the eighteenth amendment to our Federal Constitution, which prohibited the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors within the area of the United States, is perhaps the most far reaching and important

It is obvious that these changed conditions should have little, if any, effect upon the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Its members have always stood for temperance; they still stand for temperance, and should unitedly use their influence for the enactment of rational laws which will hold the liquor traffic in proper restraint, that we may never return to the golden age of the bootlegger, or the intolerable conditions which preceded him.

Without reserve we endorse the attitude of the President of the United States when he says: "To take the life of a person without due process of law is murder." It has always been, and still continues to be a fundamental doctrine of the Church that: "The murderer has not eternal life abiding in him."

Notwithstanding the vexatious delays of the laws, the uncertainty of the verdict to be pronounced by judge or jury, by which violators of the law who are obviously guilty are too frequently acquitted and turned loose on the community, to again kill, kidnap or rob, we admonish members of the Church to refrain from participation in acts of lawlessness, and to advise others to refrain from all association with mobs.

As Christmas comes and passes, and we contemplate its importance to us, and the people of the world we forget, for the moment the earthly burdens which we bear: the world depression, our depleted bank account, the note which falls due on the first of the New Year, as we turn with irresistible impulse to the shepherds who kept watch over their flocks by night on the hills of Judea, and with them shout: "Glory to God in the Highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men."

"And the Angel said unto them: Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."

Christ, the long expected Redeemer of mankind, the Son of God had come to earth. In Him the law of Moses was fulfilled, the bands of death with which man had been fettered from the beginning of time are broken. As we think of him the sting of death is made more tolerable, the victory of the grave is swallowed up in the hope of a glorious resurrection.

"And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after the resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many." (Matt. 27:51-53.)

That the spirit of the Christ may pervade this Christmas tide, and incline the hearts of men the world over to peace, fraternity and love is our earnest prayer for all. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR.
