James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Short-term missionaries, January 23, 1934

1934-January 23-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Although addressed to a particular Stake President, this letter was sent to all Stake Presidents.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah January 23, 1934 Pres. William O. Bentley, St. George, Utah

Dear Brother:

Recently we received a letter from one of our Mission Presidents stating that it is not understood by all of the short-term missionaries that they are expected to pay their transportation both to their field of labor and returning to their homes. We would suggest that when you interview brethren with reference to filling a short-term mission, that you make this clear to them.

We are gratified with the number of brethren who have been recommended for a short-term mission. We receive from our Mission Presidents most excellent reports of their labors. It is intended that only brethren who have previously filled a mission or outstanding men of experience and judgment should be recommended for a short-term mission.

All of our missions are calling for additional laborers. We do trust that as economic conditions improve that a goodly number of brethren and sisters will be recommended. Bishops and Presidents of Stakes should assure themselves that those who are suggested are worthy and prepared to embark into this sacred service. They are to be interviewed both by the Bishop and the President of the Stake. A notation or a letter is to accompany the recommendation, signed by the President of the Stake, that he has personally interviewed the prospective missionary and considers him worthy and prepared.

We do wish to increase, if possible, the efficiency and quality of our missionary work and we would thank you for your cooperation in this matter.

May we express to you our sincere appreciation and commend you for the excellent work you are accomplishing. Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS.
