James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Youth aged 12-16 all assigned to M.I.A., August 3, 1934

1934-August 3-Original circular letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This letter indicates a decision by the First Presidency that changed the Church program for girls ages 12-16. Prior to this time, they had been the joint responsibility of the Primary Association and the Y.W.M.I.A. organization. Henceforth, they were to be the responsibility of the Y.W.M.I.A., thus placing both boys and girls of this age group under the same direction.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah August 3,1934 President William O. Bentley and Counselors, St. George Stake

Dear Brethren:

For a number of years past, on account of Boy Scouts 12 and 13 years old being enrolled in the Y.M.M.I.A., the question has continuously arisen as to whether or not girls of the same ages should be admitted into the Y.W.M.I.A.

Some years ago it was suggested that the parents of the 12-13 year old girls should in each individual case assume the responsibility of deciding whether their girls should attend the Primary organization or the Y.W.M.I.A. This arrangement did not, however, prove entirely satisfactory, but resulted in a duplication of work and some confusion.

Recently this problem having been again brought to our attention by the general officers of the Y.W.M.I.A. and the Primary Association, we appointed a committee consisting of the general superintendencies of the Y.M.M.I.A. and the Primary, and the general presidency of the Y.W.M.I.A., to carefully consider the question of the most desirable placement of the 12-13 year old girls in the auxiliary organizations of the Church and to submit to us their recommendations.

This committee has recommended that the 12-13 year old girls be under the supervision of only one organization, and that the youth group, consisting of boys and girls from 12 to 16 years of age inclusive, be assigned to one or the other of the existing organizations or to one to be created.

We have assigned this group of young people to the Young Men's and Young Women's Mutual Improvement Associations with full assurance that the general officers of those organizations, and their associates, will be competent to arrange a program that will be adapted to the welfare and proper development of these boys and girls.

This letter is sent to you for your information and guidance, and a copy of it is being mailed to each of the bishops of wards and presidents of branches in your stake. Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS.
