James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December, 1934

1934-December-Improvement Era 38:4-5, January, 1935.

The annual Christmas greeting and message.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

We extend our greetings and give our blessing to the members of the Church and to people everywhere who are sincere searchers for truth.

As we pause in life's duties to extend these felicitations of the season, we are not unmindful of those into whose homes Death has entered and left vacancies and sorrowing hearts. Time continually takes its toll of loved ones. During the year now ending the Church has mourned with bereaved relatives the passing of a number of valiant leaders, in wards and stakes, and among the General Presiding Authorities. Gloriously have these noble servants merited the encomiums paid them. May the true spirit of Christ our Redeemer give comfort to all whom Death has caused to mourn. May the Savior's promise, made not only to His Apostles of old, but to all other true followers, bring solace to aching hearts as it must have done to His disciples when He said: "I go to prepare a place for you . . . that where I am, there ye may be also."

To mankind in general the Lord's Resurrection proclaims a message of hope and comfort, as His birth heralds, to all, joy, peace, and good will.

Almost two millenniums ago, the Son of God was born among men. To the watchful shepherds in Palestine, round about whom shone the glory of the Lord, came the Angel announcing the Messianic birth, while a multitude of the heavenly host, who were with the Angel, sang "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace, good will toward men." In Zarahemla, in the Western World, on the eve of the decreed death of the righteous who believed in the Christ, came to the Prophet of God the Lord Himself, announcing His birth on the morrow, and then followed the long promised sign:

"And it came to pass that there was no darkness in all that night, but it was as light as though it were mid-day."

In the divine ministry of His life, the Lord proclaimed the Gospel, and as a mortal being He gave us the example of the perfect man.

The Gospel is a plan for the guidance of men in their minglings together here as mortals, and for their direction in their spiritual lives to the end that they may be saved and exalted in the world to come. The Gospel is not a social program, though its living on this earth involves one, if greed and avarice, covetousness and selfishness be trodden under foot, and if ambition, envy, and love of earthly power and dominion be cast out. The Gospel is eternal truth, existent from eternity to eternity; it is all truth.

The Gospel teaches us to look first to the inward things of life, to our spiritual being; all outward things are for the growth, benefit, and aid of the inward.

The pleasures and the ills of the flesh are fleeting; we speak today, tomorrow our voices are hushed. All that which exalts and makes ease and pleasures the precious goal of this life is from Evil.

God looks to our eternal souls; His care rests over that which helps the soul in its everlasting struggle against wrong. He is mindful of our material well-being only as it helps us to purify, strengthen, and give growth to our spirits. His mind never forgets that basic truth, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect."

In these times when many are pleading that we place foremost our fleshly ease and comfort, or bodily and worldly convenience, or frivolous lightmindedness, we shall do well to call to remembrance the Master's command:

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:

"But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal."

Paul's admonition to Timothy, his dearly beloved son in the faith, is as applicable to the world today as when he wrote, out of deep experience and communion with the Master:

"Godliness with contentment is great gain.

"For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.

"And having food and raiment let us be therewith content.

"But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.

"For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

"But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness."

We deeply deplore the privations which have come to the people; we are sensible to the inquietude of mind and spirit with which many suffer; we sympathize with them in every distress with which they are afflicted; but we promise the people that their burdens will be lightened and surcease will come from their trials and griefs in so far as they keep the commandments of the Lord, with an eye single to His glory.

Speaking to the multitude on the Mount the Savior said:

"But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you."

God will pour out His richest blessings upon all His faithful people; and we bless you with comfort, and with peace, and joy in mind and spirit, in the measure that you keep His commandments. HEBER J. GRANT, J. REUBEN CLARK, JR., DAVID O. MCKAY.
