James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Demoralizing customs of Church youth, September 22, 1916

1916-September 22-Original circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This circular appointed the General Boards of the Relief Society, Y.L.M.I.A., and Primary Association as a Churchwide committee to meet the challenge of the "demoralizing fashions of the world" in women's dress and to control standards of conduct at Church-sponsored dances. The Sunday School, Y.M.M.I.A., and Religion Class organizations were to cooperate with this committee in bringing about a reformation among the youth of the Church. The Messages that follow in this volume under dates of November 8, December, 1916, and January, 1917, are all out-growths of these instructions issued on September 22, 1916.

Salt Lake City, Utah, September 22, 1916. Dear Sisters:

We feel that there exists a pressing need of improvement and reform among our young people, specifically in the matter of dress and in their social customs and practices. Our women are prone to follow the demoralizing fashions of the world; and some of the daughters of Zion appear to vie with one another in exhibitions of immodesty and of actual indecency in their attire, wholly forgetful of the precepts of the Lord and the counsels of his servants, and seemingly oblivious in this respect to the prompting and duties of true womanhood. Many of our youth of both sexes are fast approaching a state of depravity in dancing, and in their feverish pursuit of frivolous and dissipating pleasures.

We are grateful in knowing that only a fraction of our people are seriously affected by the deadly contagion of Babylon; but those already infected among the Latter-day Saints are all too many. The conditions call for prompt, determined, and persistent action, lest the standard of morality and spiritual health in our community be further impaired.

We call upon you, as the chief officers of a great and influential auxiliary within the Church, to give this matter immediate consideration, and to make it the subject of specific effort and systematic missionary labor among the members of your organization and with the people generally throughout the Church. See that your own officers first, and then that your members show by their own example the sincerity of their efforts towards the accomplishment of the purposes of this special mission to which we call you.

We advise that you work in harmony with the officers of our other auxiliary organizations; and with this cooperative course in mind, we are sending this appointment concurrently to the General Boards of the Relief Society, the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, and the Primary Association. For the information of the General Boards of the Sunday School, the Y.M.M.I.A., and the Religion Class, a copy of this letter will be sent to each of those Boards with the request that they do all within their power to assist in the correction of the evils herein referred to.

Inasmuch as one of the most important phases of this reformatory labor has to do with our girls and women, we advise that for the present the General Boards that are composed of women work together as a cooperative unit. You are requested therefore to appoint three of your number as members of a committee; and this committee, consisting of nine members, should straightway set about preparing a plan for effective operation. Let the General Board of the Relief Society determine upon and notify the other organizations of the time and place of the first meeting of the committee, at which first meeting the committee may organize itself by electing a chairman and other necessary officers. We desire to be kept informed of your progress in operating under this appointment.

With prayerful wishes that the Lord will give you in full measure the spirit of this ministry, and that joy through success will attend your efforts, we are, Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.

1916-November 8-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt lake City, Utah.

The preceding circular appointed the Churchwide committee "with a view to correcting the prevailing immodesty among our young people in dress and dancing." This letter asked the Stake Presidents and Bishops of the Church to support and expedite the work of the committee.

November 8th, 1916

Dear Brother:

The General Boards of Relief Society, Young Ladies and Primary Associations have been called on by us to commence a systematic movement throughout the Church with a view to correcting the prevailing immodesty among our young people in dress and dancing; and as a means of successfully carrying out the movement, the suggestion was made that each of these societies appoint a committee of three to constitute a general committee for this purpose.

That committee, with Sister Amy Brown Lyman as chairman, is now seeking the cooperation of the Stake Presidents and Bishops in the endeavor about to be made to carry into effect the object of the movement, and we bespeak for them all the support and aid you and your Bishops can afford them.

We are, with kindest regards, Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
