James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Dress and social practices, December, 1916

1916-December-Improvement Era 20:172-173, December, 1916.

Modesty in dress and conduct has had repeated emphasis in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Joseph F. Smith was ordained an apostle by Brigham Young July 1, 1866. He was set apart as one of the twelve apostles October 5, 1867, at the age of 29 years. As early as September 3, 1871, this young apostle had said:

"You daughters of Israel born of parents as true to the Gospel as men and women can be on this earth, who are dressing and painting to show yourselves, wasting your time and spending your fathers' means corruptly and wickedly in the sight of God, he will send a curse on you if you do not desist. I say it in the name of Jesus Christ." (JD 14:287.)

In this message of 1916 he was equally blunt and pointed:

"We complain that our daughters go, shall I say, half-naked before the public. It is an outrage, and should not be tolerated by Latter-day Saints under any conditions. But the home is at fault again."

DRESS AND SOCIAL PRACTICES

For months past it has been noted in all parts of the Church that some of the social practices, particularly in matters of dress and dancing, need to be reformed, The subject has come before the Mutual Improvement organizations on many occasions. From time to time strong efforts of various kinds on the part of presiding authorities have been put forth to remedy the evils; and from the pulpit, indecent dressing and unbecoming positions in the dance have been vigorously condemned. Little improvement in this line has been noticed, however. At the June conference of the M.I.A. the subject was discussed both in the meetings of the young men and of the young ladies, and also in one of the joint meetings in the tabernacle, at which the joint social committee of the young people presented a number of excellent rules and regulations for governing their social gatherings which were adopted and printed in the August numbers of the Era and Journal, and later presented and adopted in all the fall conventions.

The movement has resulted in much good, and recently the First Presidency were led to take further action that must, if carried out, lead to permanent betterment. They addressed a letter to the General Boards of the Relief Society, the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association, and the Primaries, calling attention to the fact that "there exists a pressing need of improvement and reform among our young people, specifically in the matter of dress, and in their social customs and practices," and asking these boards to take such action as shall create reformation along these lines. A copy of the letter was sent to the General Boards of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association and the Deseret Sunday School Union, asking for their cooperation and assistance.

A joint committee is at work. With unified plans and a systematic course of action, to be made known from time to time, and all cooperating to accomplish the desired end, good results must follow. We invite every officer, every young man, every young woman, every father and mother to join in the good work, by their influence and example.

It was a wise action to place this reform movement under the immediate charge of the Relief Societies-the mothers in Israel. For upon them, the burden of dress reform, at least, if not of social dancing, must necessarily rest most effectively. They are the managers, the exemplars, in this matter. It is the home influences that, above all others, should direct in moral, social and dress reforms. The home should lead in the work being done by the organizations which are only auxiliary to the home. They exist for the sole reason that it is necessary that the home should be helped in a great measure in the care and education of the children. Schools are instituted to help the home, not to domineer and direct it. But the home must be what it should be, and not as it is in hundreds of cases. It is almost past belief that there should be mothers who take pride in seeing their daughters go dressed immodestly, if not indecently, but there are such mothers, and their actions are astounding if not execrable.

We complain that our daughters marry men who are not worthy of being married in the only right way-in the temple. The home is at fault. Our daughters are permitted to mingle with men who are not worthy to go into a temple.

We complain that our daughters go, shall I say, half-naked before the public. It is an outrage, and should not be tolerated by Latter-day Saints under any conditions. But the home is at fault again. There is neglect in the home, and the principal part of that neglect, in my opinion, is due to the disregard of the mother, and the crudeness of the care for her daughter.

When my little folks were growing up, I was careful to get my family together and to tuck my boys in bed myself, every night, and see that they were at home. I directed, taught, and watched over them from infancy to manhood, until they could act for themselves. If now one of my boys shall go astray, which the Lord forbid, he will do it on his own responsibility. He has no commission from me to do it; neither any permission by my example, or otherwise. It should be the aim of every father and mother in Israel to constantly teach, guard, and carefully watch, that they may have no apologies to make to the world, nor to any living soul on the earth for the conduct of their children.

In this matter of dress and social conduct, then, the mothers have a deep responsibility, and their great organization-the Relief Society is a fit instrument to bring about reforms by having the mothers make the effort in the homes of the Saints. Let each mother take up the matter in her own home, first. Then, as an officer in her organization, first with herself, then with her neighbor, then with the membership as a whole of that organization. This is a sample for all the auxiliary organizations. Let the officers set the example, or, as Paul says, "Take heed, therefore, to yourselves;" then seek to discipline every member in their own organization to good behavior and decency-"all the flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers." JOSEPH F. SMITH.
