James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 16, 1916

1916-December 16-Millennial Star 79:17-22, January 11, 1917; also Deseret News, December 16, 1916.

This is the annual pastoral epistle of the First Presidency issued at the Christmas season, outlining the highlights in the growth and development of the Church for 1916.

A SEASONABLE SALUTATION FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY.

Christmas of nineteen hundred and sixteen comes laden with good things and good tidings to the Latter-day Saints. Notwithstanding the terrible condition of the great nations in Europe, and the prolonged internal disturbances in our neighboring republic in this land, the prosperity that has prevailed in the United States, of which Utah has enjoyed her full share, with the prospect of immediate future progress and blessings, sheds a glow of rich sunshine and hope upon the present holiday season. In this the saints thankfully participate, and have great cause for rejoicing. In common with all the people of this thriving State, we are blessed with peace and plenty, with health and increase, with order and liberty. The abundant harvests of the year, the wealth that has come from field and farm, from orchard and garden, from manufactures and commerce, from ranch and mine, from hill and vale, from varied interests, and from every point within our borders, should silence all complaint and inspire a feeling of contentment, and evoke praise to the Giver of all good. The Latter-day Saints not only enjoy these rich favors, but have cause for gladness in the knowledge of the truth revealed from heaven, and their fellowship with Him whose birthday is celebrated throughout Christendom. For they have become one in Christ through His gospel and the acceptance of His precepts and His Spirit, and they have special reason for rejoicing at this festive season.

While the whole world is measurably affected for good by the coming and mission of the Great Teacher, whose advent formed a new era, whose life and precepts have influenced mankind in so marvelous a manner, only those who have received Him in His true character as the actual Son of the eternal God, the Redeemer of mankind, the atoning sacrifice, the Resurrection and the Life, can grasp the importance and beneficence of the Nativity, and rightly celebrate His mortal birth and honor, His eternal and rightful Kingship, and none but those who compose the Church that He has Himself rebuilt, and to which He has revealed anew His power and light, and upon which He has bestowed divine authority, can possibly enter into the realities of His divinity and love and glory. To them Christmas is truly a heavenly, holy day.

The conflicts and calamities of the times were foretold by Christ in plain and pointed language. They are among the signs of His second advent. They were to precede His appearance as the Prince of Peace. As they surely fulfill what He declared should herald His coming and Kingdom, so certainly will that promise of His personal return in majesty be accomplished. It is in faith of those words that we hail each succeeding Christmas as one step nearer to the great consummation, and extend greeting to those who are baptized unto Him, bidding them to rejoice and be glad in the glorious assurance of the approaching reign of righteousness and peace.

The Church established by Christ in these latter days is growing in strength, increasing in numbers, developing the powers with which He has endowed it, and gaining in the recognition which is sure to come, of the sincerity of its faithful adherents and self-sacrificing ministers. At home the splendid organization which the Savior has set up is expanding in its powers for good, reaching out to all the members in efforts for their spiritual growth and general welfare. Abroad the missionaries, though unable to carry the gospel message to the seats of war, have been wonderfully successful since our last Christmas message, breaking down prejudice, defending the principles divinely revealed, and bringing thousands of honest souls into fellowship with the Church. Every foreign, as well as American mission, is thriving and prosperous. Freedom of speech is enjoyed by our advocates. The literature of the Church is being widely distributed and greatly appreciated. Calls for it come continually from desiring minds awakening to the falsehoods of our detractors, and responses are made as opportunity offers. Public journals, once hostile because of misinformation, are opening their columns to facts and explanations which place our true position before the people, and our cause is thus assisted greatly. Church publications are in big demand. Dr. Talmage's Jesus The Christ is in its fourth edition, every one being exhausted as soon as printed. Tracts and pamphlets are furnished in large numbers by our Bureau of Information. The Book of Mormon is receiving a wide circulation in the United States missions, and there is a general change in the public attitude towards the Church. When the virulent efforts of our maligners are considered, their utter failure to accomplish their designs, resulting in giving aid to that which they seek to destroy, it is suggestive of an overruling Providence, and the triumph of truth over error which will ultimately become universal.

Newly acquired buildings for places of worship in many cities abroad add largely to the increase of opportunities for the spread of the gospel and the worship of God by members of the Church. So also with the erection or enlargement of chapels and meeting houses in the wards and stakes of Zion, in the modern improvements and conveniences suited to the times. Amusement halls, gymnasiums, etc., under Church regulations, afford proper recreation for our young people, and the recently organized movements for the preservation of decorum in dancing and in dress are working desired reform in these important particulars. We urge upon the local Church authorities the need for wisdom and careful supervision in these matters during Christmas festivities and on all other occasions, that purity and virtue may be upheld, and decency be strictly maintained.

The cause of education has received full attention and assistance from the funds of the Church. While the State provides liberally for the common school and high school system, it is properly limited within secular lines, and, therefore, ecclesiastical teaching and influence must be supplied from ecclesiastical sources, and a constant increase of appropriations is needed to meet growing financial demands. These total a very large sum, in addition to the outlay for school edifices. Satisfactory progress is being made in the grade of our teachers, the courses of study and the acquirements of the pupils of both sexes, who are thus favored with correct instruction in religion and morality.

The duty of rendering to the Lord one tenth of each member's interest, to be paid when received, is generally understood and practised with commendable punctuality and fidelity by most of the people. They receive full returns in temporal prosperity, as well as in spiritual gifts and inspiration, and the revenue thus obtained is expended fully and entirely for Church interests. This is vouched for by the auditing committee in their regular reports. The poor receive a large proportion of the tithing for their support or relief, as well as the offerings gathered on fast day for their special benefit. The return fares of missionaries, when they have served their time abroad, after furnishing there the means for their own support, require also a large expenditure. The maintenance of mission headquarters at many important points, form no inconsiderable item in the general outlay. To this must be added the cost of support for the regular temple workers, and the hands employed in the Church offices; also the repairs and improvements in those structures call for repeated expenditures.

The Temple now building in Canada is rapidly approaching completion. It is receiving due attention and needful supplies. It will be a splendid addition to the Houses of the Lord wherein the work of salvation is in daily observance. The year 1917 will doubtless give the north this long-desired opportunity for the administration of the higher sacred ordinances, and open new means for rejoicings on earth and in the spirit sphere. The Temple at Laie, in Hawaiian Islands, is also nearing completion. The natives of the Pacific Islands are joyfully looking for the great blessing of ministering therein for the redemption of the living and the dead, in which their faith is deep and thorough. Here it will be timely to suggest to a number of our zealous friends that the Hawaiian Temple is to be for the use of the natives of the Islands in the Pacific, and for a long time after its dedication will not be available for large numbers of visitors. The idea of getting up big excursions for the opening ceremonies and immediately subsequent ministrations, is not feasible. The Hawaiian membership numbers a little less than ten thousand souls, including children, scattered over a number of Islands. Laie, where the Temple stands, by the shortest route is thirty-five, and by the longest is forty-eight miles from Honolulu, and could not take care of a great crowd of visitors. Temples in Salt Lake City, Logan, Manti, and St. George, afford ample opportunities for ordinance work here, and other facilities will come in due season. "A word to the wise" should be sufficient.

The splendid building for Church offices is now attracting favorable comment from people of all faiths, parties, and persuasions. It is chiefly of Utah materials, and has received the care and skill of competent architects and workmen. It will be an ornament to the city, and a credit and convenience to the Church. Soon after the opening of the new year it will be ready for occupation. It has cost much more than originally estimated, but its grand exterior and internal adornments will well repay the expenditure, and it will stand as a monument to the taste and thoroughness of its promoters, and an exhibit of Utah's resources and industries that will carry her fame to the ends of the earth.

The public buildings, private dwellings, comfortable homes, fine farms, splendid ranges, stock and sheep herds, wonderful mines, magnificent railroads, electric-lighted towns, telephone and telegraph connections which put us in communication with the great world, its marts and wealth and marvelous productions, place our State in a proud position among the most progressive communities. We are rapidly coming to the front in music, art, science, law, and literature, and all this is but a galaxy of stars that in the future as glowing suns will shine with such lustre that Utah will be the admiration of the world, and the faith of its people will be a guide to millions of seekers after truth and righteousness.

The beet-sugar industry is an important factor in the sum of Utah's activities, and during the past year has advanced greatly in the markets of the country. It has reached a point far above the expectations of its founders, and gives satisfactory returns to its investors. It was started under the auspices of the Church, and for a long time was maintained under trying disadvantages; but predicted success has been achieved, and the objects in view at its beginning have been attained. It has provided labor for many industrious hands, paid farmers vastly greater remuneration than was obtained from other crops, circulated much money in business circles, and enriched the State immensely, its benefits extending in every direction and to almost every household.

The changes that have taken place through the passing away of notable men and women, have reminded us of the uncertainty of human life. The sudden departures of President Francis M. Lyman, of the Council of the Twelve, and Elder Joseph S. Wells, of the Presidency of Ensign stake, were a great trial, not only to their immediate relatives, but to the entire Church and the whole state. They each rounded up the work for which they came on earth, and their memory is sweet and wholesome. Their places have been filled by competent servants of the Lord, who will strive to emulate their good deeds and follow their splendid example. Elder Heber J. Grant, being next in order of ordination, naturally took the position of President of the Twelve Apostles, for which he is well fitted by long experience and eminent abilities. Such changes emphasize the truth that in this Church there will always be found competent successors to those who are removed to higher spheres beyond the veil. It is so with leaders required to fill places in presidency or other important positions. Elder Hyrum M. Smith, of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, with his talented wife, figured prominently for three years in the European mission during a most trying period in its history. They have returned, and Elder George F. Richards, also one of the Twelve, is now filling the post of President ably and diligently. Elder Theodore Tobiason, who presided over the Swedish mission, is succeeded by Elder A. P. Anderson. Elder Hyrum W. Valentine, who remained for a long time as president of the Swiss mission during the conflict on the continent, is now succeeded by Elder Angus J. Cannon, who, with his family and associates, has reached Basel after difficult and trying experiences. Thus the Church, which is a live organization, develops its own requirements and supplies its own authorities according to the needs and changes that occur.

The certainty of the persistence of man's spirit when the body has finished its earthly mission, and the progress of the "better part" in worlds eternal, with the fond assurance of an actual resurrection, and a reunion of family associations ordered under Divine laws and covenants, robs death of its terrors, and sheds light upon the darkness of sorrow and doubt. It is full faith in the promises and powers of Him who was raised from the tomb, and is Himself the Resurrection and the Life, that gives joy to the bereaved, and renders Christmas such a time of gladness, as commemorative of the birth of the world's Redeemer, who will raise all mankind from their sleeping dust, and reward each according to his works. While singing carols concerning the birth of the Babe of Bethlehem, we can join in anthems declaring "Christ is risen," and therefore we shall rise! Death is but a temporary conqueror. Christ is King, with power over all things in heaven and upon the earth, and His coming and reign are at hand.

We extend to our brethren and sisters the glad hand of fellowship and good will at this Christmas season. We labor for their benefit, and rejoice in their advancement. We invoke the Divine blessing for them and their families and posterity to the latest generation. We wish them, and all mankind, a happy Christmas. We pray that He who overrules all things, to bring about His own purposes, will soon quell the raging of the nations and bring about peace on earth, good will to men. We believe that despotism and tyranny will eventually be put down, and righteousness and equity will prevail. But this will require the exercise of Almighty power, and it will be swayed by the incomparable Nazarene, clothed with immortality and Godlike authority. And in looking for His appearance, and His kingdom, we exhort the saints to prepare for His advent. He will come in the might of His Eternal Father. Let all the people rejoice over the prospect. Let the mountains shout for joy and the vales reverberate the glad acclaim, and all humanity bow the knee to the King of kings, whose earthly birth we fervently celebrate. JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE.
