James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Improvement in dancing and dress, March 20, 1917

1917-March 20-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

On September 22, 1916, the First Presidency had appointed the General Board of the Relief Society to head a cooperative committee, with the General Boards of the Y.L.M.I.A. and Primary Association to work out dress and dance standards for the women of the Church. They were to have the cooperation also of the General Boards of the Sunday School, Y.M.M.I.A. and Religion Class in recommending proper and appropriate dress and dance standards for the membership of the Church.

In the January, 1917, Relief Society Magazine 4:36-38, a report was published of the action taken by the committee and their recommendations for the implementation of a plan for reform in dress and dance standards or practices among the membership of the Church. The committee also published a small pamphlet setting forth the recommended Church standards on dress and dance for Churchwide distribution.

The letter below, asking for Churchwide distribution of the pamphlet, was sent to Stake Presidents and Bishops.

It is interesting that a similar need for reform of dress and dance practices and standards arose again in the period 1965-1970, which also saw the preparation of a pamphlet for Churchwide distribution entitled "For the Strength of Youth."

March 20th, 1917. Dear Brethren:

Several months ago the General Boards of all the auxiliary organizations of the Church were requested by the First Presidency to give consideration to the matter of improvement in the dancing and dress of our young people. A committee representing all of the General Boards, after spending a long period of time in study and investigation of the subjects, has rendered its report of recommendations to us. We have approved this report of the committee, as have all the General Boards, and the report has been prepared for distribution in the form of a small pocket pamphlet convenient for use and preservation.

In addition to the pamphlet above mentioned which concerns chiefly dancing, there has been prepared by the joint committee a communication on the subject of dress, particularly for the benefit of women officers and teachers of the Church.

We are sending you under separate cover a sufficient number of copies of the pamphlet and the communication so that you may cause a copy of each to be delivered to each member of your High Council and your Stake priesthood officers. The General Boards have sent to their respective Stake organizations copies of the report and letter for their use. It is the intention that every Stake and Ward officer and teacher, both male and female throughout the entire Church, shall be supplied with the pamphlet and that all of the women of the Ward and Stake officers shall be given a copy of the communication. The Presiding Bishop's Office has taken care of the distribution in the Wards.

We heartily endorse the suggestions and recommendations included within the report. The matters therein contained have given us grave concern for some time past. We earnestly hope that you will adopt the recommendations suggested in your Stake and give to the movement the whole-hearted support of your Stake organization.

Sincerely your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
