James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Passports for missionaries to New Zealand, June 23, 1917

1917-June 23-Original letter. Reed Smoot collection, Brigham Young University, Archives. Provo, Utah.

The help of an influential Senator in Washington was useful to the missionary and other programs of the Church.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, June 23rd, 1917. Senator Reed Smoot, Washington, D.C.

Dear Senator:

I duly received your letter of the 16th inst., in regard to the eight missionaries assigned to New Zealand, whose passports the British government declined to vise, and shall wait with interest the result of any further action the government may be induced to accord to this matter, which we hope will be favorable, for the reason that these missionaries are needed in New Zealand and are not particularly needed in the Hawaiian Islands, where they now are ready to proceed to their field of labor as soon as word can come from London permitting them to land at Auckland.

We fully appreciate the interest manifested by you in this matter, and indeed the same in regard to all the business referred to you from time to time in which the Church is directly concerned, and sincerely hope we shall never be without a friend in Congress capable of representing and taking care of our affairs.

I have carefully noted and may say very much regret what you write in regard to the spirit of a certain radical element in the Senate whose aim is to raise all the money necessary to carry on the war by means of taxation on incomes and the industries of the country. I hope better counsels will prevail, and that this great burden may be so arranged as to be borne as equitably as possible by all, believing as I do that this is the way it should be borne, and the only way by which the most satisfactory results may be achieved.

After the adjournment of Congress, I shall be very glad to welcome you home again, and sincerely hope that Sister Smoot will return with you greatly improved in health. I am, with kind love, Your Brother, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
