James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Introduction of "Home Evening" in missions, November, 1917

1917-November-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

A letter from the First Presidency to Stake Presidents and Bishops, dated April 27, 1915, inaugurated the "Home Evening" program of the Church. (See MFP 4:337-339.) Instructions were subsequently distributed again to the Wards and Stakes of the Church through the columns of the Improvement Era in June, 1915. In June, 1916, the First Presidency issued a circular to Presidents of Stakes, Bishops, and Parents in Zion on the "Home Evening" program.

This letter, copies of which were sent to Mission Presidents, extended the "Home Evening" program to the Missions of the Church.

Salt Lake City, Utah, November, 1917. President Charles A. Callis, P.O. Box 417, 711 Fairview Avenue, Chattanooga, Tenn.

Dear Brother:

As you, perhaps, know, in June of last year we issued a circular, in which we recommended to Presidents of Stakes, Bishops, and Parents in Zion, the inauguration of what is known as "Home Evening," to be observed by families in all the Stakes of the Church. We suggested that a certain evening be set apart each month, during which families should spend an hour or more together in a devotional way-in the singing of hymns, songs, prayer, reading of the Scriptures and other good books, instrumental music, family topics, and specific instructions on the principles of the Gospel and on the ethical problems of life, as well as the duties and obligations of children to parents, the home, the Church, society and the nation. This custom is being observed by many families, and very interesting and profitable evenings are being spent.

The thought has come to us that a weekly "Home Evening" might profitably be introduced among families in the missions of the Church. Very interesting evenings might be spent in the way we have suggested, or in work similar to that done in the Religion Classes. A weekly Religion Class in every home in the Church would be an excellent thing. A program something like the following could be carried out:

Permit us to tell you some of the results of Religion Class work in non-Mormon homes.

A little boy, a non-member of the Church, attended a Religion Class and became greatly interested in the work. He was taught, as a memory gem, a blessing on the food. One afternoon, on his return home, he asked his mother why thanks were not given to God for the food they ate. The mother could not answer the child. He told her he had learned to ask a blessing on food at the Religion Class, and that, if she and father would let him, he would ask a blessing at each meal. His request was granted, and three times each day grace was said in the home. Soon after this the little fellow introduced family prayer morning and evening, he offering up the petitions. One Sunday he requested his mother to go with him to Church. The good woman went, and in less than a year she and her boy were baptized.

Two little girls, daughters of apostates, were given permission by their parents to join a Religion Class. One week the lesson taught in the class was the keeping holy of the Sabbath day. The following Sunday morning the children's father saddled and mounted his horse. He was just going to ride off when one of his little daughters said to him: "Father, where are you going?" "I am going to round up some cattle," he answered. Then the little innocent looked up into his face and said: "Father, don't you know it is a sin to ride on Sunday?" Tears came into the father's eyes; he thought a moment; then he dismounted, and, unsaddling his horse, he led the animal back to the stall. The next day, on meeting the principal of the Religion Classes, he said to him: "What are you teaching my children in the Religion Classes?" "Nothing but good," was the reply. "I believe it," said the father of the children, and then he told the principal what had happened the morning before, adding: "If you ever see me riding again on Sunday, you will know I am compelled to do it." Today the whole family are members of the Church.

Many similar experiences could be related, but these will suffice.

Please let us know what you think of our proposed weekly "Home Evening" for your mission, and oblige, Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
