James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Divine authority of the Church, April 6, 1918

1918-April 6-Original circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; Improvement Era 21:639, May, 1918.

This official declaration of the divine authority resting in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints answered a current challenge being made to the authority of the Church.

AN AUTHORITATIVE DECLARATION By President Joseph F. Smith

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is no partisan Church. It is not a sect. It is THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS. It is the only one today existing in the world that can and does legitimately bear the name of Jesus Christ and His divine authority. I make this declaration in all simplicity and honesty before you and before all the world, bitter as the truth may seem to those who are opposed and who have no reason for that opposition. It is nevertheless true and will remain true until He who has a right to rule among the nations of the earth and among the individual children of God throughout the world shall come and take the reins of government and receive the bride that shall be prepared for the coming of the Bridegroom.

Many of our great writers have recently been querying and wondering where the divine authority exists today to command in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, so that it will be in effect and acceptable at the throne of the Eternal Father. I will announce here and now, presumptuous as it may seem to be to those who know not the truth, that the divine authority of Almighty God, to speak in the name of the Father and of the Son, is here in the midst of these everlasting hills, in the midst of this intermountain region, and it will abide and will continue, for God is its source, and God is the power by which it has been maintained against all opposition in the world up to the present, and by which it will continue to progress and grow and increase on the earth until it shall cover the earth from sea to sea. This is my testimony to you, my brethren and sisters, and I have a fulness of joy and of satisfaction in being able to declare this without regard to, or fear of, all the adversaries of the truth.

The above declaration was made at the morning service of the annual conference on the 88th anniversary of the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, April 6, 1918.
