James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

How to choose stake and ward officers, June 18, 1918

1918-June 18-Original circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The title and contents of this circular are self-explanatory.

HOW TO CHOOSE STAKE AND WARD OFFICERS Salt Lake City, Utah, June 18, 1918. Dear Brethren:

As there appears to be a little indefiniteness in the minds of some of the Stake Presidencies regarding the proper method of choosing the Stake and Ward officers, the following review of the order usually followed may be found helpful:

Patriarchs are chosen and ordained by the members of the presiding council of the Church, in accordance with the revelation assigning to the Twelve the duty of ordaining "evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation."

Bishops are also ordained only by members of the First Presidency and Council of Twelve. However, in choosing a Bishop it is the duty of the Stake Presidency to make recommendations to the First Presidency, and to receive the latter's approval before notifying the man so chosen. All such recommendations should first be submitted to the Stake High Councils BEFORE they are sent to the First Presidency.

When practicable, Bishops' Counselors should also be chosen and submitted for approval in the same manner as Bishops. However, since the Bishop should be consulted in regard to his counselors, it frequently happens that between the meeting with the proposed Bishop and the date set for the organization of the Bishopric there is insufficient time to submit the names of the counselors to the First Presidency. In such cases the Apostle appointed to the quarterly conference is fully authorized to act for the First Presidency and Twelve.

High Councilors, Alternate High Councilors, Stake Clerks, Presidents, and counselors to presidents, of independent and dependent branches are chosen by the Stake Presidencies and High Councils and set apart by or under the direction of the Twelve. It is not necessary to submit their names as in the case of Bishops, to the General Authorities. The members of the Council of Twelve visiting the Stake are fully authorized to officiate in all such matters.

The Presidency of the High Priests' Quorum are usually set apart by the Twelve; the Presidents of Seventy under the direction either of the Twelve or the First Council of Seventy.

Presidents of Elders Quorums are chosen and set apart by Stake Presidencies and High Councils, and the Presidencies of the quorums of the Aaronic Priesthood by the Bishopric of Wards.

Your brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
