James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Use of Liahona in missionary follow-up, November 13, 1918

1918-November 13-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

"Inasmuch as it is the mission of the Seventies and Elders to preach the gospel, and as only 108 Seventies out of an enrollment of 10,350, and only 814 Elders out of an enrollment of 31,090 are actively engaged in missionary work," the First Presidency thought it time that the members of these two priesthood callings be given an opportunity to do some missionary work. The plan outlined in this letter and the accompanying document which went to the Melchizedek Priesthood Quorums is such a plan, through the distribution of Church literature.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah November 13th, 1918. Prest. Serge F. Ballif and Counselors, Cache Stake.

Dear Brethren:

We send you herewith enclosed copy of a communication dated 8th inst. addressed by us to the Quorums of Melchizedek Priesthood and Saints generally, calling upon them to assist our traveling ministry in the United States to make more effective their missionary labors in the way explained in it, with the request that you meet with your Elders' Quorums and agree upon a plan by which contributions may be solicited and forwarded to Zion's Printing and Publishing Company at Independence, Missouri. Where contributions are made by Church members outside the quorums, the names and addresses of all such donors should be sent with the remittances.

The Presidents of your Quorums of Seventy are to receive similar instructions from the First Council of Seventy.

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.

See previous document for explanation of this letter.

November 8th, 1918. To the Quorums of Melchizedek Priesthood, and the Saints generally.

Dear Brethren and Sisters:

The subject of extending the circulation of our Church literature as a means of making more effective the labors of our traveling ministry, was considered at a council meeting with the Mission Presidents during our late General Conference, at which meeting it was decided to adopt what is known in business circles as the follow-up plan, that is, where elders doing active missionary work find persons or families interested in the gospel message, the names of such persons with their post-office addresses are to be sent by the missionaries to the office of Zion's Printing and Publishing Company at Independence, Missouri, whose business it will be to send to all such people a copy of Liahona and other Church literature free of charge for a period of three months, at the expiration of which time an appropriate letter of inquiry is to be sent to all such persons to ascertain if they are interested in the literature sent to them, if so, they are to be invited to subscribe for Liahona; if not, they to receive no more free literature.

The Council of First Presidency and Twelve decided to cooperate with the Mission Presidents of the United States in the adoption of this plan, and appropriated $5000. towards putting it into practical operation. But this is only half the amount needed, and therefore we decided also to permit the Mission Presidents, through Zion's Printing and Publishing Company, to appeal to the quorums of Melchizedek Priesthood and people generally to contribute the balance of the sum necessary to carry out, as an experiment, this follow-up plan of preaching the gospel, amounting to at least $5000.

Inasmuch as it is the mission of the Seventies and Elders to preach the gospel, and as only 108 Seventies out of an enrollment of 10,350, and only 814 Elders out of an enrollment of 31,090 are actively engaged in missionary work, it would appear but consistent and reasonable that the Seventies and Elders Should render willing assistance in raising this amount, and especially among those who are without missionary experience.

Your Brethren, JOSEPH F. SMITH, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
