James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Temple instructions to bishops, 1918

1918-?-Original circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

While no day or month is given for these particular Temple Instructions to Bishops, they are part of a handbook or circular for the year 1918.

TEMPLE INSTRUCTIONS TO THE BISHOPS (1918)

Dear Brother:

If you have not already adopted the practice of calling attention to the following regulations, when you issue recommends to individuals going to the Temple, you will please do so hereafter, in every instance.

FIRST: The garments worn by those who receive endowments must be white, and of the approved pattern; they must not be altered or mutilated, and are to be worn as intended, down to the wrist and ankles, and around the neck.

Please inform all to whom you issue recommends that these requirements are imperative, and that admission to the Temple will be refused to those who do not comply therewith. The Saints should know that the pattern of endowment garments was revealed from heaven, and that the blessings promised in connection with wearing them will not be realized if any unauthorized change is made in their form, or in the manner of wearing them.

SECOND: All who come to the Temple to perform ordinance work are expected to make donations according to their circumstances, to aid in meeting necessary expenses, but the poor who have nothing to give are equally welcome.

This rule has been a part of the printed instructions, since the commencement of work in the Salt Lake Temple, but is repeated here with the request that you will mention it to all to whom you issue recommends, because the aggregate amount received is very small. It may properly be suggested to a man, who is going to the Temple to be married, that the amount of his donation should approximate or be equal to what he would be required to pay if he had the ceremony performed elsewhere, if he could afford to donate that much.

The following important items are also submitted for your careful attention:

Bishops should make themselves familiar with the printed instructions issued by the President of Salt Lake Temple, so that they may be able to duly inform the individuals, to whom they issue recommends, as to the preparation such persons should make to enable them to properly participate in the sacred ordinances of the Lord's house. (See Bulletin No. 7).

Recommends should be issued only to those who are worthy and faithful. A sufficient time should elapse after baptism to prove worthiness. Children under eight years of age do not need recommends, when they accompany their parents or guardians. Recommends should not be given to persons afflicted with any kind of infectious disease, or with serious or offensive skin disease.

Before being recommended to receive endowments, each individual should be informed concerning the purpose, and importance, of that sacred ordinance.

Living boys and girls as young as sixteen years of age may receive endowments if, in each case, the character and condition of the individual is such that the Bishop feels justified in issuing a recommend for that purpose.

Males over twenty-one years of age, and females over eighteen, are not permitted to take part in, or witness, Temple ordinances until they receive their own endowments, except that they may be baptized for the dead; in that event the recommend must show that it is issued FOR BAPTISMS ONLY. If they are to receive endowments at the time they are to be sealed to parents, the fact that they are authorized to be endowed then must be stated on the recommend.

A living woman can not receive endowments while her husband is alive, if the husband has not been endowed.

Men should be ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood before they come to the Temple to receive endowments.

Recommends for the privilege to work in the House of the Lord must be renewed every six months. Each individual needs a recommend, including children over eight years of age.

Individuals who have been endowed, and afterwards have been excommunicated, and subsequently joined the Church again, should not be recommended to the Temple until former blessings have been sealed upon them by special permission of the President of the Church.

Robes, etc., may be hired at the Temple, but all are advised to provide themselves with their own, if they can do so conveniently. The sisters should not have long "trains" on the whit" dresses they wear in the Temple, nor decorate with colored ribbons or gaudy ornaments.

Each person who is to receive endowments should bring a towel for their own use. All should be perfectly clean in body and clothing, not offensive to others.

Small children who are to act only in the ordinance of sealing to parents, or adoptions, need not be brought to the Temple Annex before 12 m.; all other persons should be in the building not later than 8:30 a.m., for the first company, and not later than I p.m., for the second company. The second company is composed of those only who are taking endowments for the dead.

It should be clearly made known to those who can receive recommends to be married in the Temple, that they should not have the marriage ceremony performed before coming to the Temple, unless there is some good and justifiable reason for doing so, such as having to delay an undesirable length of time before they could come, or having to travel alone, by team, to reach the Temple.

Bishops are not to issue recommends for second anointings: that is the province of Presidents of Stakes, under approval of the President of the Church, and the individuals selected must not be informed until after the issuance of such recommend. As a general rule, such recommends are issued only in behalf of those who have had endowments in lifetime, and have been sealed and lived together faithfully as husband and wife, and who have been valiant in the defense of truth and active in all good works.

Each head of a household, or representative of a family line should be advised to become a member of the Genealogical Society of Utah, as thereby they may receive valuable assistance in procuring, and properly compiling, names of relatives for whom they purpose having Temple ordinances performed.

This letter should be preserved, as instructions to the Bishop, in the records of his office, to be kept in mind by him and to be transmitted to his successor.

Your brother in the Covenant, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
