James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Resumption of regular religious services following influenza epidemic, December 28, 1918

1918-December 28-Deseret News, December 28, 1918.

As indicated in the document preceding this one, a special fast day had been set for December 22, 1918, "for the arrest and speedy suppression by Divine Power of the desolating scourge that is passing over the earth."

This message one week later indicated that the influenza epidemic had passed its crest to the point that Church services could be resumed.

SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT

The notable abatement of the epidemic which occasioned the closing of the public places of worship and amusement, and caused other rigid rules for its suppression, being now practically assured, it is deemed safe and wise to permit the re-opening of the Sunday Schools and the tabernacles, chapels and other meeting houses of the Latter-day Saints. Therefore Sunday, January 5th, 1919, the first Sabbath day of the New Year, is hereby designated as a fitting time for a return to the usual regular observance of religious services. This is to be observed in all places throughout the Church except in such as are still suffering from a prevalence of the dread disorder or in case of its recurrence.

The general observance of the Fast Day in every ward and branch on that occasion is advised and urged, when thanks to God for the relief that has come and prayers for the epidemic's speedy extinction, will be in order everywhere. It is intended that the Salt Lake Tabernacle will be opened for public worship b_Clark Messages of the First Presidency, Vol. 4

on Sunday, January 12th, while the Temples in this city, in Logan, Manti and St. George will re-open for ordinance work on Monday, January 6th.

We take the opportunity to acknowledge with great pleasure and gratitude the immense shower of letters from all parts of the world, from all classes of society and various faiths, expressing satisfaction and approval of the reorganization of the First Presidency, also conveying the good wishes of the season and invoking blessings and hopes for the Divine favor upon us in the coming years. These tokens of love and confidence are too numerous to be answered individually, so we here assure our correspondents of our full appreciation of their fellowship and goodwill, and echo to each and all of them the sweet sentiments and benisons in their missives, to be multiplied upon our brethren and sisters and friends forever, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE.
