James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

President Heber J. Grant-Letter to Senator Reed Smoot on assuming Presidency, December 28, 1918

1918-December 28-Original letter. Reed Smoot files, Brigham Young University, Archives, Provo, Utah.

A personal letter of the new President of the Church to a member of the Council of Twelve Apostles who obviously had not been present at the meeting in the Salt Lake Temple when the President was sustained and set apart. An appraisal of the administration and person of his predecessor and an expression of his own humility.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah, Dec. 28, 1918. Hon. Reed Smoot, United States Senator, Washington, D. C.

My dear Reed:

Yours of November 26th was acknowledged by Brother Otterstrom. Since my return, last Sunday, I have been trying to answer the many letters that had accumulated during my absence, but to-day is the first time that I have been able to do any dictating, on account of the press of other matters needing attention.

The letter to which you refer, as having been written to Presidents Lund and Penrose, I have not yet seen, but I shall ask for it, as I would like to read what you have to say in the same.

The loss of President Smith is a very great one, as I believe he lived in the hearts of the people more than any other President has done, except the Prophet Joseph. At his funeral I read a little poem entitled "A Real Man," from the book "A Heap o' Livin'," a copy of which I believe I sent you last year for Christmas; and I certainly have a desire to be the same kind of a man as President Smith. Had Mr. Guest, the author of this poem, known President Smith he could not have written more appropriately describing his life than he did in the poem "A Real Man."

I thank you, Dear Brother, for your kind words of blessing and your prayers in my behalf, that I may be successful in my work as the President of the Church.

We had a most splendid time at the reorganization of the Presidency, and a rich outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord, for which I was deeply grateful. If we can retain the same spirit that we then had, all will be well with Zion.

Ever praying earnestly for your welfare and success in Washington, and thanking the Lord, from the bottom of my heart, for the way that He has blest and prospered you in the past, I am, with love for yourself and family, HEBER J. GRANT.
