James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Call for missionaries, February 10, 1919

1919-February 10-Letter to Stake Presidents. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This document and the one following detail procedures for taking care of servicemen being discharged at the close of World War I, both in terms of mission calls and fellowshipping in the Stakes and Wards of the Church.

CALL FOR MISSIONARIES

Salt Lake City, Utah, February 10, 1919 President James Wotherspoon and Counselors, North Weber Stake, Twenty-first St., Ogden, Utah.

Dear Brethren:

The war appears to be over and our young men are being mustered out of service. It is a good time to replenish our forces in the mission field. You will appreciate the great need of Elders in all of our missions, knowing that we have only been able to send a few brethren into the field since the United States entered the war, and most of those who left before have returned home.

Brethren, we need missionaries. "The harvest truly is great but the laborers are few; pray, therefore, the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his harvest." We will appreciate your earnest efforts in this direction, and suggest that your Bishops go through the membership of their wards and get every available man who is worthy of recommendation and financially and physically able to go.

Men of experience are needed, those who have already fulfilled missions and those who have been active in the ministry at home. We believe there are many of the Seventies, who are specially called and fitted for the work of the ministry abroad, who can fill missions. Before the war the Seventies were called upon to prepare themselves and shape their affairs and circumstances so their services could be utilized in the missions, and many of them are no doubt ready to go. We trust you will be successful in recommending a goodly number of brethren for missions.

With our blessings and kindest regards, we remain Sincerely your brethren, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, In Behalf of the First Presidency.
