James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

In the interest of returning soldiers, February, 1919

1919-February-Improvement Era 22:350, February, 1919.

IN THE INTEREST OF RETURNING SOLDIERS Office of the First Presidency, Salt Lake City, Utah

To the Presidents of Stakes and Counselors, High Councilors and Bishops of Wards and Counselors. Dear Brethren:

Our boys who are now returning from army life should he given special attention. They have performed a most magnificent work, and have freely offered their lives on their country's altar for us and for humanity everywhere.

As they come home many of them find themselves without occupation or the means of making a comfortable livelihood. We, therefore, urge upon the presidencies of stakes, high counselors and bishops and counselors to give these returned soldier boys their special attention. They should be visited at once and the condition of their affairs looked into with a view of trying to help them to secure work where they are out of work, or to get them started on their small holdings in the country settlements.

We must look after these boys. Naturally, they will return to the localities they formerly resided in, and they should be encouraged wherever it is possible, to try to secure a small piece of land and establish a home They should not be allowed to drift to the larger cities. The cities are already crowded.

We can do a great deal to help them, if we only make a business of doing it. Visit them, preach the gospel to them, and in every way encourage them in all that makes for good citizenship and an independent life.

Then there are the families of those who will never come back. Those boys who have made the supreme sacrifice and given their lives on the battle field or otherwise in the service of their country. These families before all others should be given our kindest attention. They must not be allowed to suffer for the necessaries of life. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
