James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

President Heber J. Grant-Pledge of service, June 1, 1919

1919-June 1-Improvement Era 22:823-825, July, 1919.

Just as President Joseph F. Smith, on the day he was sustained as President of the Church in a Special General Conference held November 10, 1901, had made a covenant and pledge before the body of the Priesthood (see MFP 4:4-6), so President Heber J. Grant, on the day he was sustained by the General Conference, made a pledge of service and action.

Brigham H. Roberts, in CHC 6:479-491, discusses the "Opening of President Heber J. Grant's Administration" and quotes the following statement from President Grant's discourse at the dedication of the Hawaiian Temple as probably being the theme of his entire administration:

"It is not the miraculous testimonies we may have, but it is keeping the commandments of God, and living lives of absolute purity, not only in act, but in thought, that will count with the Lord." (Honolulu Star Bulletin, December 6, 1919, as quoted in CHC 6:486.)

President Grant's statement and pledge, reproduced below as he gave it in General Conference, is in the same spirit with which he had expressed himself in his letter to Apostle-Senator Reed Smoot on December 28, 1918.

PRESIDENT HEBER J. GRANT'S PLEDGE OF SERVICE AND ACTION A Pledge of Faithful Service

I feel humble, beyond any language with which God has endowed me to express it, in standing before you here this morning, occupying the position in which you have just voted to sustain me. I recall standing before an audience in Tooele, after having been sustained as president of that stake, when I was a young man twenty-three years of age, pledging to that audience the best that was in me. I stand here today in all humility, acknowledging my own weakness, my own lack of wisdom and information, and my lack of the ability to occupy the exalted position in which you have voted to sustain me. But as I said, as a boy in Tooele, I say here today: that by and with the help of the Lord, I shall do the best that I can to fulfil every obligation that shall rest upon me as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the full extent of my ability.

I will ask no man to be more liberal with his means than I am with mine, in proportion to what he possesses, for the advancement of God's kingdom. I will ask no man to observe the Word of Wisdom any more closely than I will observe it. I will ask no man to be more conscientious and prompt in the payment of his tithes and his offerings than I will be. I will ask no man to be more ready and willing to come early and to go late, and to labor with full power of mind and body, than I will, always in humility. I hope and pray for the blessings of the Lord, acknowledging freely and frankly, that without the Lord's blessings it will be an impossibility for me to make a success of the high calling whereunto I have been called. But, like Nephi of old, I know that the Lord makes no requirements of the children of men, save he will prepare a way for them, whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has required. With this knowledge in my heart, I accept the great responsibility, without fear of the consequences, knowing that God will sustain me as he has sustained all of my predecessors who have occupied this position, provided always, that I shall labor in humility and in diligence, ever seeking for the guidance of his Holy Spirit; and this I shall endeavor to do.

The Standard of Action

I shall not occupy your time by reading Section 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants. I will leave that for each and every one of those before me, and those to the right and the left, holding the priesthood, and as many of the audience as may feel so disposed, to read it when they go home. With the help of the Lord, I shall endeavor, standing at the head of the Priesthood of God upon the earth, to exercise the authority that has come to me in keeping with that wonderful revelation: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned." God being my helper, the priesthood that I hold, the position that I occupy, shall be exercised in accordance with these words that I have quoted to you. We can do nothing, as recorded in that revelation, only as we exercise love and charity and kindness-love unfeigned. With the help of the Lord that is exactly how I shall administer, to the best of my ability, the Priesthood of God that has come to me.

I could stand here and occupy all of the remaining time, with the hundred and one thoughts that have come into my mind, in connection with the duties that devolve upon me; but I am anxious that my counselors should speak to you here this morning, and I am anxious to pay my tribute of respect to those men who have preceded me. I take no credit to myself for occupying the position that has come to me. I realize that failure will be the result if I do not give the Lord the credit for calling me to this position, and seek for the light of his Spirit to guide me in all that I shall do.
