James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Instructions to mission presidents, October 8, 1919

1919-October 8-Original circular letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Instructions outlining a new, standardized system of accounting for the missions of the Church. President Heber J. Grant was a businessman who had organized several successful business enterprises before becoming President of the Church.

INSTRUCTIONS TO MISSION PRESIDENTS Accounting System

A standardized system of accounting has been developed for all the missions of the Church. Mission Presidents and secretaries should not change this system except with the written consent of the Presiding Bishopric. The quarterly and annual report forms are arranged to comply with this system of accounting. The Presiding Bishopric will be pleased to receive suggestions from those who are operating the system in the missions and if they are accepted the quarterly and annual forms will be adjusted accordingly. The accounts in the general ledger should be in harmony with the printed headings of the quarterly and annual reports.

Mission Funds

The funds of each mission are placed in the hands of its president to be used subject to the supervision of the Presidency of the Church and the Presiding Bishopric and they should be used only for legitimate expenses of the mission and no exception should be made without written consent of the First Presidency or the Presiding Bishopric.

Account Books

The following are the standard books which should be kept in the mission for accounting and record purposes. No other books should be used unless written consent is obtained from the Presiding Bishopric. The mission standard account books consist of Revenue and Purchase Record, Journal and Ledger. The Mission historical record should contain an epitome of all important transactions and business connected with the affairs of the mission. The missionary record should contain the name of each person who is laboring in the mission, the date of arrival, the class or character of work, the date of release and departure, etc.

Mission Payments

Each mission should pay up once a month all bills for the previous month and not later than the 10th of the month following. Purchases should be arranged so that there will be no excessive bills to meet in any particular month and every payment should be made on an original bill duly certified to and approved by the President of the Mission, who, whenever practicable should be at the mission office in the early part of the month and until all bills and accounts have been passed upon and checks signed by him and bills and vouchers ready for payment.

Personal Accounts

No personal accounts should be kept on the mission general books, such as mission president, secretary, elders or any other persons. The mission record should represent the handling of the mission funds only, such as tithes, fast offerings, donations for mission purposes and other similar revenues and usual expenditures. No personal bills of the president of the mission or his family or any other person not officially connected with the mission, should be paid from or be allowed to pass through the mission accounts, either through the mission general fund or the trust fund account.

Trust Funds

A separate bank account and separate book should be provided for all trust funds, such as elders' deposits, students' deposits and any other funds that do not belong to the mission. Such funds should be accounted for separate from the business of the mission. Occasions will arise when it will be necessary to advance means to an elder pending the arrival of funds from home. Such advances should not be more than sufficient to carry an elder for one month and he must replace the funds thus borrowed before calling for another remittance. Missionaries should be encouraged to keep on deposit more than they need from month to month so that temporary loans will not be necessary. Should it be necessary to make temporary loans they should be made from the mission funds to be returned within thirty days. All trust funds should be placed in the hands of the secretary of the mission and he should be held responsible for them and checks against this account should be signed by him. The reason for this is the president of the mission is frequently away on the first of the week when remittances to elders are usually made.

Bank Deposits

All funds received in the mission for church purposes should be deposited in the bank so that the total of the bank deposit book each month will he the total receipts for the month. All payments made on mission accounts should be made by check, except such as are made out of the contingent fund as hereafter explained. All checks when returned should be clamped in 50's in their consecutive order, including canceled and spoiled checks which should be clamped in their place with the paid checks.

At the close of each month an adjustment of the bank balance should be made from the ledger and the statement furnished by the bank. The President of the Mission should personally examine all returned checks, the receipts and deposits and expenditures of that month; he should satisfy himself that the accounts have been paid and all receipts and disbursements properly recorded. Checks for the disbursement of funds belonging to the mission should be printed so that they can be signed by the president of the mission and countersigned by the mission secretary.

Expenditures

In order that proper control may be had over the expenditures of the mission, the Mission President is authorized when necessary to make reasonable expenditures on the following accounts without reference to the General Church Offices; the rent of halls, fuel and light, janitor service, stamps and special office supplies, Mission President's traveling expenses, return fares of elders, ordinary charity cases, taxes, one-half cost of books and tracts for missionaries only, ordinary repairs on mission property. Whenever it becomes necessary to make extensive repairs on mission property or to purchase furniture and office equipment, or the erection of meeting houses and other buildings, a communication should be addressed to the First Presidency making request for permission to incur such expenditures and if approved, due authorization will be given.

Permanent Secretary

In view of the extensive clerical work required in the larger missions, it has been thought desirable that a permanent secretary be appointed whose duty it will be to handle mission funds and accounts under the direction of the Presidency of the Mission and General Authorities of the Church. Whenever in the opinion of the Mission President such a secretary is desired, he should communicate with the Presiding Bishopric.

President's Allowance

The allowance of the President of the Mission is for the support of himself and family whether they are at home or with him in the mission field and is to include every expenditure necessary toward their maintenance and support. The Mission President's allowance should not pass through the mission accounts, nor should it be handled through the mission funds. Out of this allowance he will pay for any traveling expenses of his family, including transportation, except railroad fare for family on first going to and finally returning from the mission.

Contingent Fund

Each mission secretary should be provided with a contingent fund, the amount to be determined according to the volume of business transacted in that mission, and he will be held personally responsible for its return when he is released from his duties. Out of this fund he should pay all small bills, such as expressage, postage and similar items. He should be charged with the first amount on the books of the mission and it should be held there until he is released and the money redeposited in the bank and his account credited with this fund. Whenever the account is nearing its exhaustion, or at least on the last day of the month, he should submit on a voucher the payments made from this fund and with the approval of the president of the mission a check may be drawn from the general funds to replace the amount so expended. Every bill should be stamped or marked with the number of the check drawn for its payment. This rule should apply to every payment made from the mission funds.

Titles

The Presiding Bishop's Office will attend to all the business connected with the purchase and sale of mission property when a purchase has been agreed upon and approved by the First Presidency. Whenever real estate is purchased an abstract of title should be procured from the seller and forwarded to the Presiding Bishop's Office for examination. If the title is found correct, suitable deeds will be prepared by the Presiding Bishopric for the purpose of receiving the title. The same rule for preparing deeds will apply whenever property is to be sold. No deed should be accepted nor should final payment be made until instructions to that effect have been received.

Monthly Reports

A monthly report will be required of each mission which will be a brief statement of cash on hand (mission fund) on the first day of the month, amounts received on tithing, fast offerings and other mission receipts during the month, and payments made therefrom and the balance on hand. If the latter is large the president of the mission should report on the back of the form if any portion of this fund is being held, and if so, for what purposes; if not, the mission president should forward to the Presiding Bishopric any surplus and the check should be attached to the monthly report.

Quarterly Reports

The quarterly report is a brief summary of the business of the mission and if the books are kept in harmony with the instructions of the Presiding Bishop's Office the quarterly report becomes a transcript of the balance at the close of each quarter.

Annual Reports

The fiscal year closes on January 10th. All missions should be prepared to render complete annual reports not later than February 1st; that is, they should he at the office of the Presiding Bishopric by that date. In the instance of missions whose distance from Zion renders it impossible for them to get reports by that time, they are authorized to make their fiscal year December 10th.

Fast Offerings

Receipts should be given for all fast offerings collected and a duplicate of the receipt kept on file in the branch or conference where the funds are donated. Branch and conference presidents are allowed to retain fast offerings and to expend as much of these funds as may be necessary in their branch or conference for the care of the worthy poor. All surplus fast offerings in branches and conferences should be sent to mission headquarters once each quarter with a statement of the amount collected each month, and with names and amounts to whom disbursements have been made.

Mission Transfers

Forms were sent several years ago to each mission which were especially designed for transferring the mission funds, property and accounts from the retiring mission president to his successor in office. If these forms cannot be found, the following information should be tabulated on letter-size paper. 1st, the ledger should be balanced and the totals brought down but not transferred. 2nd, a statement should be made of the assets and liabilities. 3rd, an inventory should be taken of all property belonging to the mission. If the mission has a chapel, the portable property in the chapel, if a house, the portable property in the house, and any other property completely inventoried, including merchandise, etc. A detailed statement called a "Bank Adjustment Statement" should be drawn up, showing the ledger bank balance, also the bank balance and the checks outstanding at that date, and such other information as may be considered necessary under the circumstances. Two copies should be made of this transfer, one sent to the office of the Presiding Bishopric for checking, the other should be given to the retiring mission president, and it should be copied in detail completely in the mission historical record for future reference and signed by the retiring mission president and the incoming mission president.

Office Force

Heretofore members of the office force have paid $15.00 per month for their board and keep at the mission house and they have been provided with their room and board and their washing. The balance of the cost of room and board has been drawn from mission funds in the appropriations allowed for mission house maintenance. Inasmuch as the mission president will receive an allowance for maintenance of himself and family at the mission house, it is recommended that those missionaries working in the office and living at the mission home pay as heretofore $15.00 per month to the mission president for their keep and that whatever the expense of such board and keep should be in addition to the $15.00 be ascertained and the amount drawn from mission funds and entered into the account of assistance rendered missionaries.

Entertainment

Conditions and circumstances will frequently arise where it will be right and proper to entertain officers of the Church and others, and at the close of each month a voucher should be prepared showing the cost of this entertainment and reported to the Presiding Bishop's Office. If approved, the voucher will be returned with a notation to that effect and then the amount may be drawn from the mission funds and replaced on Mission President's personal expenditures. This will not bar him, of course from making his own personal entertainments to his personal friends and missionaries from his own personal funds.

Traveling Expenses

Reasonable and necessary traveling expenses will be allowed the mission presidents and will be paid out of the General Mission Fund. At the close of each trip he will make up a voucher form giving a statement of expenditures incurred which will be kept on file for reference purposes. The Mission President should not include any expenses connected with visits outside of his mission to be paid for out of his mission funds, except consent is first obtained from the First Presidency.

Emigrants

For each person leaving for Zion a certificate of membership should be issued and a "certificate of identification" given to the individual and signed by the President of the Mission. The certificate should be written in the English language and should contain the usual genealogical data. The certificate of membership should in all cases be forwarded to the Presiding Bishop's Office at the time the person leaves or earlier. Special endeavors are being made to advise the bishops of the arrival of those who come from foreign lands with the purpose of having the newcomers become identified with the ward in which they first locate, and of seeing that they are made welcome generally. For this purpose it is absolutely necessary that the certificate of membership be forwarded without delay.

Temple Recommends

Presidents of Missions are not authorized to give temple recommends; these are issued by the President of the Church for mission members; upon obtaining suitable letters of recommendation from Mission Presidents for such members. Letters of recommendation should be given only to those who have been members of the Church at least a year, and in good standing for one year prior to giving the recommend. It must be known that they keep the Word of Wisdom, pay their tithing and otherwise are good members. Each letter of recommendation should specify what particular blessing the person is recommended to receive.

Application For Trustee-In-Trust Assistance

Efforts should be made to make each mission self-sustaining. Where this condition has not been attained, application may be made to the Trustee-in-Trust for assistance. Applications from missions as well as those from wards and stakes are passed upon once a quarter, and such applications may accompany the regular quarterly reports. Your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE.
