James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 23, 1919

1919-December 23-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 17:210-211; Deseret News, December 23, 1919.

This is the annual Christmas greeting of the First Presidency.

CHRISTMAS PROSPECTS AND CONGRATULATIONS

"God send you a merry Christmas and a happy New Year." That is an old-time, old-world salutation that expresses our present wish for all good people throughout the world and especially to the Latter-day Saints, whom we congratulate on their favorable condition and excellent prospects.

The cessation of war and the general desire for permanent peace bring a benign influence suited to the season. "Let us have peace" sounds in harmony with Christmas bells and Christmas carols. The approaching unity of nations, which must come in spite of threatening obstacles, animates the vast majority of mankind and presages the fraternization of whilom [sic] contending powers and the substitution of friendly arbitration for the settlement of international quarrels in place of armed conflict and detestable bloodshed.

The efforts in motion towards the ushering in of a new era of amity and good will are steps leading to the establishment of that glorious world-wide government which prophets and poets, sages and seers have predicted from time immemorial. Selfishness-the bane of mankind-is showing up in hideous opposition to the altruism of deified humanity, and the contrast is seen and felt by the thoughtful everywhere. Arrogant egotism is not in harmony with the spirit of the times, especially during the festive proclamation, "peace on earth, good-will to men," and mutual aid to unified nations.

In promoting the benefit of others, self preservation ought to be paramount. This applies to nations as well as to individuals. Therefore, in extending to foreign governments similar liberties to those enjoyed under our heaven-inspired Constitution, care must be taken that the powers executed and the rights secured to us by the "supreme law of the land" are not invaded or abridged or weakened in any degree. We should not forfeit a single national prerogative or principle in endeavoring to break down rampant militarism and overthrow tyrannical monarchism. Let us have peace, but not at the price of our country's freedom.

The spread of Gospel principles, engaged in by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, promoted and carried on in the spirit of sacrifice and devotion, blends with the work of statesmen and humanitarians the world over, and glows as the shining early rays of a Millennial dawn, which will ultimately dispel the fogs and clouds of error and diabolism and flood the earth with the meridian glory of the Redeemer's dominion.

The change of popular sentiment towards the Saints should be a matter of congratulation. The "Mormon" position during the late world-conflict, the courage and stability of our stalwart sons and brothers at the front, the self-sacrifice displayed by the women and daughters of Zion, the financial and other material aid rendered by the Church and its individual members, the patriotic spirit exhibited throughout the gigantic struggle have brought to light previous praiseworthy deeds of patriotism which were once passed by without great notice, and the nation of which we are an integral part begins to recognize us as we are. This is to be regarded with intense gratification.

The appointment of a number of Utah's sons to high offices in the government of the United States gives great satisfaction to this State. They are also members of the Church, descended from much-esteemed and valiant pioneers, who helped to lay the foundation of the State.

Spasmodic outbursts from fanatics and zealots, roused to fury by self-seeking adventurers, are not to be regarded as serious expressions of influential people. They are to be viewed as is our past history, with patience and calmness as ebullitions of ignorance and folly, which have the good effect of arousing public interest, which is much better for the cause of truth and right than the stagnation of crass indifference. In view of the success attending the labors of missionaries, and the growing friendship of good citizens and intelligent investigators, we have cause of rejoicing and incentives to perseverance.

We have reason for gratification in the spread of the work, notwithstanding the dire effects of war and the terrible attacks of plague which have stood in the way of proselytism abroad and affected conditions at home. The stoppage of passports for our missionaries to foreign points has been quite an obstacle. These hindrances have not prevented but have only hindered the missionary work. They are being gradually removed, and will soon be overcome, and a splendid prospect is opening to those active men and women who are inspired with faith and fervor to labor "in the vineyard."

Church edifices are being erected and additions made in numerous localities. The Temples are kept in ordinance work continuously and crowded with eager applicants to labor for the salvation of the living and the dead. Our young people are waking up to the deep importance of celestial, that is eternal, matrimony in contrast to the contract of "until death shall you part."

The dedication of the Temple at Laie in the Hawaiian Islands, November 27th, 1919, is an event of special importance. Not only is it of beautiful appearance, on a magnificent site with lovely surroundings, and grand interior adornment and furnishings of a high order, but it is unique in its purposes and intent. It is designed for ordinance work for the living and the dead, to be performed only by Latter-day Saints considered worthy of the privilege. It will be used for those who inhabit the islands of the Pacific, and Australia and New Zealand, and their progenitors who have passed away. A more imposing Temple is nearly completed in Canada, which will be dedicated in due time, and used for similar purposes by the Saints in that region, like the Temples in St. George, in Manti, in Logan, and in Salt Lake City.

There are many thousands of noble, lovely young men and women in our auxiliary organizations, who have in their souls an abiding witness of the restored gospel and divine revelation, and this overwhelms the small minority who fall away and take the downward road. Our Sunday School and Religion Class work progresses remarkably and produces excellent results.

Faith in the ordinance for the healing of the sick, resulting in remarkable manifestations of restoration to health, is growing among the Saints, and causes great increase in devotion and service. There is a general advancement in tithing observance, enabling the Trustee in Trust to make appropriations for Church edifices and kindred purposes, as advancing needs require. Amusement halls, gymnasiums, and other structures are assisted, and projects for social order and entertainment are aided and encouraged. Proper decorum is required; indecorous dancing, undue familiarity and unseemly behavior are decried and forbidden. Intellectual exercises are provided, and great improvement in these regards is clearly perceived.

There is a gratifying increase in the quorums and class exercises of the priesthood, in attendance, interest, in theological studies, and the order and discipline of the Church, and this is true regarding Parents' and other advanced classes and home gatherings, all of which is worthy of notice, as evidence of the growth of the Church in things more to be admired than increase of numbers, material prosperity, or earthly means and possessions.

The care of the poor has been a particular duty devolving upon the Church from the beginning. It is carried on to a larger extent as the years advance. Donations from fast-offerings on the first Sunday in each month are supplemented by aid from the Relief Society of the Church, and by appropriations from the tithing, which aggregate a very large sum. At the Christmas season, "Remember the poor" should not be lost sight of in extra contributions for their benefit.

The celebration of the Redeemer's advent, December 25th, also the birth of His Prophet, Joseph Smith, December 23rd, afford occasion for the repetition of our testimony concerning both. We bear witness solemnly and sincerely that by the light and power of the Holy Ghost we know that Jesus of Nazareth was and is the veritable Son of the living God, the Christ, the Savior of mankind, who will be the King of Kings and the Prince of Peace, and that Joseph Smith was and is the chosen of God for the ushering in of the dispensation of the fullness of times, to whom was committed the keys of this dispensation, a Prophet, Seer, Revelator and Translator, through whom the fullness of the everlasting gospel has been restored to earth for the last days and for the last time, to be preached to every nation, kindred, tongue and people; who sealed his testimony with his blood, a martyr to the cause of Christ and the salvation of souls.

The Saints throughout the world have great cause to rejoice at this Christmas season, not only for the few reasons we have here advanced, but for the advancement being made in every department of the Latter-day work, the fulfillment of the former and latter-day prophecies, and the prospects of the speedy accomplishment of all that has been promised concerning it.

Let joy be felt in every "Mormon" household throughout the world. Let Christmas of 1919 be celebrated everywhere. Let the little ones be made glad. Let peace and love, benevolence and charity abound. Let forgiveness and patience and tolerance drive out all animosities, and let us all serve God and help our neighbor, and put on Christ and follow Him, as well as celebrate His birth on earth. A happy, bounteous, glorious Christmas to all. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE.
