James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Improved attitude toward the Church, January 12, 1920

1920-January 12-Original letter. Reed Smoot files, Brigham Young University, Archives, Provo, Utah.

Though a personal letter, this document is included for its appraisal by the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints of the changed attitude toward the Church during the administration of his predecessor, President Joseph F. Smith, particularly by the Salt Lake Tribune.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah January 12th, 1920. Honorable Reed Smoot, United States Senator, Washington, D. C.

My dear Reed:

Yours of December 31st, came duly to hand. Extracts from the letter of Mr. Henry M. Statz to you were published in the News. In the providences of the Lord, as the years come and go, I believe that more friends like Mr. Statz will be raised up to us. When I stop to think of the splendid editorial that appeared in the Tribune, when President Smith passed away, which editorial was the equal if not superior to the editorial in either the Herald or the News, I think it is little less than marvelous that the Tribune would be willing to publish such an editorial, speaking in the highest terms of the life and labors of our late beloved President, in view of the many cartoons and the many lies which appeared in that paper soon after he became President of the Church. I believe that we are entering upon an era of good will for our people, superior to anything that we have ever known in the past; but of course, the devil is not dead, and we cannot hope to escape the lying of his emissaries, in opposition to the truth.

I pray earnestly for the Lord to bless you abundantly in your labors. I wish to express my sincere and heartfelt sympathy because of the poor condition of your wife's health, as related in one of your other letters, but earnestly pray that she may soon be restored to perfect health.

I am as ever, Your affectionate brother, HEBER J. GRANT.
