James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Cooperative auxiliary conventions, May 6, 1920

1920-May 6-Improvement Era 23:746-747, June, 1920.

This message called for more than a change of pattern for auxiliary conventions; it called for a re-distribution of the work load and service opportunities of the membership of the Church.

CO-OPERATIVE AUXILIARY CONVENTIONS

Under date of May 6, 1920, the First Presidency of the Church issued the following instructions to stake presidencies, which are of special interest to bishops of wards, and officers of auxiliary organizations:

Dear Brethren:-At a recent meeting of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve, it was decided to hold the annual conferences of the auxiliary associations of the Church as group conventions. In a number of the stakes, in 1920, these conventions are to be held in connection with the quarterly conferences, commencing about August 1 and continuing until October 31.

A program of meetings will be arranged to include general sessions where subjects of equal interest to all may be presented; separate meetings of stake boards; and departmental meetings where definite and practical help will be given to ward workers.

One difficulty in carrying out this proposed plan is the fact that in some of the stakes it has seemed in many cases necessary to assign to one person several offices. This causes a duplication of work out of which will inevitably arise conflicts in appointments and meetings. It is sincerely hoped that this group convention will tend to bring about a readjustment in this matter; the purpose and genius of the Church organization being to give activity to all members of the Church, and not to have a few willing and faithful members performing two or three times their share of Church work.

Therefore, between now and the date set for the convention, it might be necessary for bishops to make a thorough canvass of their wards in order to bring into active service young men and young women whose talents and ability are now lying dormant.

Trusting that the advantages of this plan over that of holding six separate conventions will be readily apparent to you, that the minor difficulties connected with it may be overcome in your stake, and assuring you of the hearty cooperation of the General Boards in all efforts to make auxiliary work a potent facto; for good in the lives of the people, we remain, Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
