James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Church position on drives for charitable funds, June, 1920

1920-June-Improvement Era 23:743-744, June, 1920.

This special notice makes it clear that while the "Mormon" Church is sympathetic to the need for charitable drives for funds in times of emergency, it cannot be expected to shoulder the major portion of such regional or national drives which originate outside of its own organization.

SPECIAL NOTICE

the progress of the recent war in Europe the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints came to the aid of this Nation in its efforts with the Allies to free the world from the domination of monarchical despotism. The "Mormon" people demonstrated their devotion to country and the cause of freedom by sending their brave sons to the front and by contributing liberally to the calls for funds to meet the financial requirements of the gigantic struggle.

The Church, through its splendid organization, was a mighty force in the fray, gathering the means in demand and sending their soldiers over the sea. It proved to the world that loyalty to the government and devotion to the welfare of humanity formed part of the "Mormon" creed and entered into the religious life of its followers. The world witnessed and wondered at this unanswerable refutation of popular slanders. Thank God, the awful strife is over, and the need for such organized help is greatly modified. There are still loud cries from various sources for money in large sums to swell the numerous "drives" that are in vogue.

What is the position of the "Mormon" Church as to these movements? is a frequent question. It is this, and let all the Latter-day Saints and reasonable people everywhere understand it: While members of the Church are free to donate, as they desire and are able, to any charitable and worthy cause, the Church as an organization is not in a financial position to respond to the demands and requests that are made upon it, and it is not required of its stakes, wards, quorums or associations to use their ecclesiastical activities or influence in those directions. There are persons and institutions in need of relief and support within our own ranks, and applications for appropriations to an immense amount which cannot be granted for some time have had to be laid over until some means can be obtained to meet them.

We do not wish to cripple or restrain the hand of individual benevolence, but our organized institutions must not be expected to do the impossible or neglect the duties and requirements that are within our jurisdiction and are imperative. We trust that this will be plain and clear enough to all reasonable persons, and that promoters of "drives," however worthy of assistance, will not fail to understand the situation and will not misjudge our course or our motives. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
