James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Quorum and teacher-training leaders, October 12, 1920

1920-October 12-Improvement Era 24:176, December, 1920.

These instructions and earlier ones under a date of May 8, 1920, on "Teacher-Training and Social Work" indicate the existence of a Priesthood Correlation Committee and a Church Correlation Program antedating the Correlation Program inaugurated under the direction of President David O. McKay more than a quarter of a century later. It antedates "A new teacher development program for the Church, which will take effect January 1" (1971) by a half century.

THE QUORUM AND TEACHER-TRAINING LEADERS

Salt Lake City, Utah, October 12, 1920. To Presidents of Stakes, Bishops of Wards, and Presidents of Priesthood Quorums.

Dear Brethren:

A number of letters have been received by the presiding authorities inquiring as to whether or not the priesthood quorums should participate in the regular weekly teacher-training classes now established throughout the Church. In order that there may be a definite understanding regarding this matter, you are hereby authorized to urge all quorum officers and class instructors to pursue regularly and diligently the teacher-training course as prescribed by the Correlation Committee, representing the Priesthood Outlines Committee and the general auxiliary boards of the Church.

Ward teachers, too, will find the course most helpful, and where proper arrangements can be made to avoid conflict in officers, the monthly report meeting may be held as part, either of the second or the fourth meeting of the month, thus avoiding the necessity of holding the extra meeting for ward teachers' monthly' reports.

The details of the quorum officers' meetings and the ward teachers' meetings can be worked out best by Stake and Ward authorities to suit local conditions.

One of the specific duties of the Priesthood is to teach. We desire to commend every effort that is now being put forth to make the teaching in the Church more efficient. The cooperation of the priesthood will do much toward giving strength and impetus to the important movement in teacher-training.

Ever praying the Lord to bless you in all your diligent labors for the advancement of truth, we remain, Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
