James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 18, 1920

1920-December 18-Deseret News, December 18, 1920; Millennial Star 83:17-18, January 13, 1921.

This is the annual Christmas message of the First Presidency.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

To the Saints Throughout the World, and to all Mankind, Greeting:

Joining with the uncounted millions who celebrate in this festive season the anniversary of the birth of the Savior of the world, we extend to one and all to whom our message shall come fervent wishes for a Merry Christmas and a prosperous and Happy New Year.

Since last we had the opportunity of sending greetings through the Christmas News, the earth and its inhabitants have experienced many of the violent reactions that could not but ensue as the aftermath of so great a war as that lately ended. The sword has not been fully sheathed; the voice of suspicion and strife has not been entirely stilled. Though in comparatively few countries to-day are men arrayed against each other in regular line of battle, in many there is still a persistence of conflict smoking with devastation and running red with blood. In others, there is the angry clash of class and faction, the muttering of discontent, the threat or fear of the overturn of society's foundations. In yet others, gaunt famine stalks, starvation menaces millions, and pestilence is laying its consuming hand upon the under nourished populations. The year now drawing to its close has been tempestuous and disturbing; and some of its developments have tended to chill the timid with forebodings, presaging problems and perils to civilization such as never have had to he met before.

But allusion to these phases of the present world situation serves but to emphasize the causes for gratitude which abide with the great body of religious worshipers to and for whom we speak to-day. Surely we have been abundantly blessed and prospered. Zion's lines have been lengthened and her stakes strengthened. Peace and health and progress have been our portion, and love of righteousness is taking ever firmer root among our people. There is a perceptible advance, not only in numbers but in good works; unity and that true charity which should ever characterize the Church of Christ are increasingly manifest. As watchmen upon the towers, we therefore bid you to be of good cheer. Though dark may have been the night, the approaching dawn of a brighter day is already shot with gleams of encouragement and hope.

We have reason to rejoice, beyond the power of expression, in the birth of the lowly Nazarene in whom we hail the Redeemer of mankind. We have even greater reason to rejoice that His death wrought out salvation for all those who will take upon them His name and keep His laws. Appreciation of this sacrifice and gift can in no way so sincerely be shown as by obedience to His precepts and devotion to His cause. Even in the festivities of the holiday season, this resolution may be taken to heart, as we reflect on the humility of His birth, the wondrous beauty of His life, the ignominy with which He was made to suffer death, the glory and power in which He rose again. Desiring no one's injury but everyone's good; seeking to be helpful to those in need, and forgiving to those who err, our gifts, whether given or received, our mirth and melody, our feasting and our family reunions will have a sanctified significance that will multiply their pleasure manyfold.

In the spirit of blessing and benediction we send forth these few words, adding the prayer that human strife may soon cease; that health and plenty may prevail; that the true spirit of Christ may hasten the time of universal brotherhood and the Messiah's reign, when good-will to men shall everywhere be found, and peace on earth become a blessed reality. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE.
