James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Special Fast Donations to international relief funds, January, 1921

1921-January-Improvement Era 24:354-355, February, 1921.

The First Presidency had said in a "Special Notice" as of June, 1920:

"While members of the Church are free to donate, as they desire and are able, to any charitable and worthy cause, the Church as an organization is not in a financial position to respond to the demands and requests made upon it, and it is not required of its stakes, wards, quorums or associations to use their activities or influence in those directions." (See this statement in context, under date of June, 1920, earlier in this volume.)

The above, evidently, was the general rule and policy. In this message the same First Presidency called a Special Fast Meeting, with collections and contributions to go to two foreign relief agencies to assuage the suffering of children resulting from the aftermath of World War I. The two agencies to be assisted were the Near East Relief Fund and the European Relief Council.

SPECIAL FAST MEETING, JANUARY 23

It is hereby directed that in all the stakes and wards of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to which this notice shall come, a Special Fast Meeting be held on Sunday, January 23, at 2 p.m. on which occasion collections will be made and contributions received for the "Near East" Relief Fund which is dealing with the distress prevailing in Armenia and in other oppressed sections of Asia, and also for the European Relief Council which is planning to provide food for three and a half million hungry children in mid-Europe.

Bishops are requested to invoke the services of their ward teachers and all other available agencies in making a thorough canvass of their wards, between now and the date named, in order that every family shall be invited and encouraged to contribute the equivalent of at least the two meals contemplated by the fast, for the feeding of those who are confronted by long months of semi-starvation. We should like to feel that every man, woman and child in all our communities had done this much in responding to this most piteous appeal to their humanity; while of course those who feel so inclined may contribute as much more as they choose. All funds thus collected should be forwarded without delay to the office of the Presiding Bishopric.

The condition of these millions of under-nourished little ones in Europe, as described by those who have visited the countries of central and southeastern Europe, is tragic in the extreme. Whatever may have been the causes of the present woe, the children are not responsible. They must not be allowed to perish if an outstretched hand offering sustenance and nourishment can save them. Let every parent in our land of peace and plenty-and let every child also—bestow a sympathetic thought upon a situation of such suffering as happily they have never known-and the response, we feel sure, will be spontaneous and liberal. It is an extraordinary emergency, calling for unusual measures, and must be met promptly. As followers of the Master who drew the little children to him and blessed them, our immediate duty is to see that no hungry child cries in vain for bread. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHON H. LUND, CHARLES W. PENROSE, First Presidency.
