James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Commendation and concern for Senator Reed Smoot, February 4, 1921

1921-February 4-Original letter. Reed Smoot files. Brigham Young University, Archives, Provo, Utah.

Although in President Heber J. Grant's public discourse before the Salt Lake Stake Conference September 21, 1919, he had announced that he was a Democrat, he had also decried extreme partisan politics.

In this letter, written on the letterhead of the First Presidency, he commends Republican Senator Reed Smoot for his contribution to the nation and to "the cause of truth" and reminds him that "Humility is strength with the Lord and I want you never to forget you owe your all to Him." Senator Smoot's standing and influence with the President of the United States is also commended.

Earlier (December 27, 1920) President Grant had written to Apostle-Senator Smoot as follows:

". . . I am thankful beyond my power to tell for the great labor that you are doing for the benefit of the Lord's work by being a Senator of the United States-our grand and beloved country. It was hard for me not to take an active part in laboring for your return [to the United States Senate] as at one time Bishop Nibley, McCune and others felt unless I did there was danger of your not returning." (Reed Smoot files, B.Y.U.)

The present letter was written in longhand by President Grant from Santa Monica, California, where he had gone for rest and golf. He suggests that Senator Smoot also take up golf.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Santa Monica Feby 4/21 Hon. Reed Smoot Washington, D.C.

My dear Reed:

Your letter of the 23d, ult. reached me here. I got here one week ago yesterday for a much needed rest. I came near breaking down just before Bp. Nibley & Mr. Wattis left for the East & came here for two or three weeks rest & had to go back home at the end of four days. I shall remain another ten days. Have greatly enjoyed the rest here and golf with the Bishop and Bro. Lafayette Holbrook. I am pained to learn that you are not sleeping well. I wish you would play golf. Your life is too precious and of too much value to the cause of Truth and our beloved country for you not to take care of your health.

With all my heart I thank the Lord for your very splendid standing with Prest. Harding. It is very wonderful to me the way you have been blessed in your labors at Washington, and the commanding position which you hold fills my heart with very deep gratitude. Humility is strength with the Lord & I want you to never forget you owe all to Him.

I hope and pray that the Pennsylvania Rd. Co. may not go into the hands of a receiver. H. J. G.
