James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Re-endorsement of "Home Evening" program, March (?), 1921

1921-March?-Original circular. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The copy of this circular in the files of the Church Historian's Library carries no month or day. From the position of the circular in the file for 1921, however, and the date of the choosing of Anthony W. Ivins as the new second counselor in the First Presidency, it is likely that this re-issue or re-endorsement of the original "Home Evening" program of the Church was made sometime in March, 1921. The last paragraph of these instructions by President Grant and counselors refers back to the original instructions, printed in the Improvement era for June, 1915, by President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors. (See MFP 4:337-339.)

After a brief illness, President Anthon H. Lund, first counselor in the presidency, had died on March 2, 1921.

"At the meeting of the council of the presiding authorities, held in the Salt Lake Temple, Thursday, March 10, 1921, President Charles W. Penrose was chosen by President Heber J. Grant as his first counselor, and Elder Anthony W. Ivins as his second counselor." (ECH p. 641.)

This circular, therefore, was issued sometime subsequent to March 10, 1921. By the same deductions above, the letter following this circular which was the cover letter of the annual "Circular of Instructions" to Stake Presidents, Bishops, and all Church authorities, must have been issued early in 1921, but subsequent to March 10, 1921. Neither of the documents carry dates of issuance.

TO THE PRESIDENTS OF STAKES, BISHOPS AND PARENTS IN ZION

Dear Brethren and Sisters:

We counsel the Latter-day Saints to observe more closely the commandment of the Lord given in the 68th section of the Doctrine and Covenants.

"And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her Stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents;

"For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her Stakes which are organized;

"And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of hands;

"And they shall also teach their children to pray and to walk uprightly before the Lord."

The children of Zion should also observe more fully the commandment of the Lord given to ancient Israel, and reiterated to the Latter-day Saints: "Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee."

These revelations apply with great force to the Latter-day Saints, and it is required of fathers and mothers in this Church that these commandments shall be taught and, applied in their homes.

To this end we advise and urge the inauguration of a "Home Evening" throughout the Church, at which time fathers and mothers may gather their boys and girls about them in the home and teach them the word of the Lord. They may thus learn more fully the needs and requirements of their families, at the same time familiarizing themselves and their children more thoroughly with the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This "Home Evening" should be devoted to prayer, singing hymns, songs, instrumental music, scripture reading, family topics and specific instruction on the principles of the Gospel, and on the ethical problems of life, as well as the duties and obligations of children to parents, the home, the Church, society and the nation. For the smaller children appropriate recitations, songs, stories and games may be introduced. Light refreshments of such a nature as may be prepared largely in the home might be served.

Formality and stiffness should be studiously avoided, and all the family should participate in the exercises.

These gatherings will furnish opportunities for mutual confidence between parents and children, between brothers and sisters, as well as give opportunity for words of warning, counsel and advice by parents to their boys and girls. They will provide opportunity for the boys and girls to honor father and mother, and to show their appreciation of the blessings of home so that the promise of the Lord to them may be literally fulfilled and their lives be prolonged and made happy.

We request that the Presidents of Stakes and Bishops throughout the Church set aside at least one evening each month for this purpose, and that upon such evenings no other Church duties shall be required of the people.

We further request that all the officers of the auxiliary organizations throughout the Church support this movement and encourage the young people to remain at home that evening, and use their energies in making it instructive, profitable and interesting.

If the Saints obey this counsel, we promise that great blessings will result. Love at home and obedience to parents will increase. Faith will be developed in the hearts of the youth of Israel, and they will gain power to combat the evil influences and temptations which beset them.

The foregoing instructions were issued June 15, 1916, over the signatures of Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, and Charles W. Penrose, the Presidency of the Church, and we now endorse them and urge that they be carried out by the Latter-day Saints. Your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.
