James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Missionary access to Sweden and South Africa-Showing of movie "Riders of the Purple Sage," August 24, 1921

1921-August 24-Original letter. Reed Smoot files, Brigham Young University, Archives, Provo, Utah.

This letter, and the one following it of September 14th, expresses the interest and concern of President Grant and the First Presidency in two problems current at the time; namely, access of L.D.S. missionaries to Sweden and South Africa; and the nation-wide distribution and showing of a motion picture, "Riders of The Purple Sage," based on a novel by Zane Grey, which the Church considered to be "scandalous" so far as its portrayal of Mormon history was concerned

It is evident from the letter of September 14th that Senator Smoot's influence with William H. Hays of the National Board of Motion Picture Review was sufficient to cause the elimination of the picture "from the screen.

President Grant's comment: "Sometimes I think we are too passive and do not defend ourselves as we should against such onslaught" is interesting in terms of how long one can 'turn the other cheek' See also the notes for the telegram of April, 1921, earlier in this volume.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah August 24th, 1921. Honorable Reed Smoot, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.

Dear Brother Smoot:

I have before me your letter of August 12th. I was very much disappointed myself in not being able to run down to Washington and have a visit with you, but my time was so completely occupied while I was in New York, that I found it impossible to do so.

I note carefully the letter you received from Hon. Charles E. Hughes, of date July 15th, 1921. I have read your comments on this matter and note that you think it begins to look as if the only way to settle the question of our missionary interests in the Scandinavian countries will be for some of us to make a trip to Europe, and see if it is not possible to convince these countries of the injustice and wrong done the "Mormon" people thru the position they have taken towards our Elders preaching the Gospel to the people of those countries.

I would like to inquire whether or not you had in mind any particular plan, and in case we decide to send someone, do you think you could arrange to go. It occurs to me that if you could go that we might get a hearing. I cannot feel that our work is finished in Scandinavia but do feel that it is our duty to leave no effort unused to gain entrance for our elders.

Yes, I have heard from Brother Sessions and the South African situation seems now to be in a very satisfactory condition. Our trouble now is to find sufficient number of missionaries who can arrange to go to that far distant land, as the expense is very great.

I am also very glad to note that you have taken up the matter of preventing the motion picture houses from showing Zane Grey's novel "Riders of the Purple Sage." Thru the efforts of the Commercial Club here and also others who have endeavored to have this stopped, I am informed that the picture is no longer passing censorship in the State of Michigan. I sincerely hope that it will not be necessary to bring suit in this matter.

Don't you think that if it could get to the National Board of Motion Picture Review that litigation is likely to follow if exhibition of this scandalous picture is not prohibited that good results might obtain? It would seem to me that large damages could be collected and I don't know but that the advertising we would get might be beneficial. Sometimes I think we are too passive and do not defend ourselves as we should against such onslaught.

I shall be glad to hear from you further on this matter at your convenience.

Ever praying the Lord to bless you in your labors and with very best wishes, I am, sincerely and affectionately Your friend and brother, HEBER J. GRANT.

1921-September 14-Original letter. Reed Smoot files, Brigham Young University, Archives, Provo, Utah.

See note for previous document of August 24, 1921.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah September 14th, 1921 Hon. Reed Smoot, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.

Dear Brother Smoot:

I have before me your letter of Sept. 7th and note carefully your suggestion that Apostle Widtsoe and yourself visit Sweden for the purpose of trying to secure a reverse of the judgment given our Mormon elders preaching the Gospel in the Scandinavian countries.

Since writing you on August 24th, we have received a letter from President Isaac P. Thunell of the Swedish Mission in which he informs us that there is to be an election in the near future and that he is inclined to think that it would be better not to push our claim too strenuously until after this election is held, believing as he does that the change in officials may make the way easier. As I observe it would be impossible for you to go in the near future, I assume that this suggestion will be satisfactory to you.

I have read with very much interest the manner in which you succeeded in having the objectionable picture entitled "Riders of the Purple Sage" by Zane Grey and which was produced by the Fox Film Corporation eliminated from the screen and I assure you that I am very grateful for your efforts in this direction and much gratified at the result.

Ever praying the Lord to bless you in your labors and with very best wishes, I am, sincerely and affectionately Your brother, HEBER J. GRANT.
