James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Day of prayer for conference on arms limitation, October 9, 1921

1921-October 9-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 18-19:174, October 25, 1921.

The United States was not a member of the League of Nations. In order, therefore, to find a means of handling two pressing international problems, disarmament and Asia, Congress, in February, 1921, had adopted a resolution introduced by Senator Borah of Idaho, which asked for an international conference to consider these two subjects. United States, England, France, Japan, Italy, Belgium, Portugal, the Netherlands, and China met in Washington, D.C., in November, 1921.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on October 9, 1921, in General Conference adopted by vote the following resolution supporting the coming Washington conference and setting aside a Sabbath day before November 11, 1921, "to engage in special, and solemn prayer for Divine guidance of the international conference." The Church adopted November 6 as the day of special prayer, Churchwide.

The full text of the resolution follows:

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, brought forth and established by the power of God and dedicated to the mission of preparing the way for the glorious coming of the Son of God to reign in the earth, in truth and righteousness and peace, beholds with deep interest every authoritative movement taken by the nations in the interest of world peace.

It is believed that the conference called in Washington to consider the limitation of armaments and questions concerning the Pacific and nations of the far east may, under the favor of Heaven, promote this great objective.

To the end that it may do so, the Latter-day Saints, in general conference now assembled approve the appointment of a Sabbath day before the 11th of November, 1921, on which in all the wards and stakes of Zion, and in all branches of the Church in the United States and in the missions throughout the worlds the members of the Church, shall be called together in their usual places of worship to engage in special, and solemn prayer for Divine guidance of the international conference on the limitation of armaments, that the cause of peace may be thereby enhanced, and an amelioration of the burdens of mankind secured.
