James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Senator Smoot's missionary work with President Harding, October 12, 1921

1921-October 12-Original letter. Reed Smoot files, Brigham Young University, Archives, Provo, Utah.

This letter commends "Brother Smoot" for the missionary work he was doing with the President of the United States, Warren G. Harding, and his family.

It also indicates that, although the new edition of the Book of Mormon, which had been announced on December 24, 1920, was now ready for distribution, the new editions of the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price were not ready for distribution as of this date.

The statement of President Grant that "I have never thought it the proper thing to make as wide distribution of the 'Doctrine and Covenants' as we do of the 'Book of Mormon'" is interesting.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah Oct. 12, 1921. Hon. Reed Smoot, United States Senate, Washington, D.C.

Dear Brother Smoot:

Upon my return to this City from the East, I find your letter of Sept. 20th upon my desk. I am glad to learn that in your opinion the Volstead Beer Bill will be passed by the Senate within a very short time. I shall convey this information to Mr. Wheeler.

Do you think our interests will be jeopardized by awaiting the results of the coming election in Sweden, or do you think the position taken by President Thunell is correct?

I note your preference of Chinese to Cubans for immigration into Hawaii and I consider the reasons you offer well taken. As explained in my letter to you of date Sept. 14th, I have not gone into the matter carefully at all but simply gave you the few thoughts I had from reading of the situation in Cuba and Hawaii. You are no doubt in a much better position to know what is the proper thing to do in relation to this matter.

I note with much interest the visit you and your good wife had with President Harding, his wife and his sister, and I am grateful for the opportunity you had of presenting some gospel truths to these prominent people and that you succeeded in interesting them.

It will certainly be a great pleasure to present President Harding with a set of Church works in the best form they are gotten out. The new edition of the "Book of Mormon" is now ready for delivery. We are having "The Doctrine and Covenants" and "Pearl of Great Price" gotten out in the same shape but it will be a month or six weeks before they are ready for delivery. Brother Talmage seems to think that the "Book of Mormon" in full Morocco binding, printed on a heavier paper would be more desirable than the India paper for presentation to the President.

I am wondering if it would not be better to present the President with a copy of the "Book of Mormon" in one of the best bindings, whichever may be selected, and a copy of "The Articles of Faith" by Brother Talmage, and then should we decide to present him with a copy of the "Doctrine and Covenants" and "Pearl of Great Price" later on when they are ready, we could do so.

I have never thought it the proper thing to make as wide distribution of the "Doctrine and Covenants" as we do of the "Book of Mormon" as I think many people who would appreciate the "Book of Mormon" would not understand nor appreciate the "Doctrine and Covenants."

I shall be glad to know your views on this matter.

I have not seen the letter you wrote to Judge Rolapp giving your experience with Mr. Thompson, Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, but should be very glad to read it and if convenient shall appreciate your sending me a copy.

I had a most delightful trip to Southern Utah and enjoyed every moment of it. The weather was perfect and the scenery was certainly grand. I have never seen any mountain scenery to equal it in any other part of the world, that I have ever visited.

Since the Union Pacific acquired ownership of the Salt Lake Route, there is quite a little talk about building a branch line connecting it with the Grand Canyon. I feel certain that such a road would be quite generally patronized by the tourist travel, and it would be a great benefit to our State.

Ever praying the Lord to bless you in your labors and again assuring you of my love and confidence, I am, as ever, sincerely and affectionately Your brother, HEBER J. GRANT.

P.S. I expect to start for New York & Washington Friday in Co. with Mr. E. O. Howard & others in the interest of our sugar business. H. J. GRANT
