James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 17, 1921

1921-December 17-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 19:250-251, December 20, 1921; Deseret News, December 17, 1921.

CHRISTMAS PROSPECTS AND CONGRATULATIONS By the First Presidency

The swing of the seasons has again brought round the occasion and the opportunity for extending through The Deseret News a Christmas greeting to our fellow-members of the Church of Christ and to the world. We rejoice both in the occasion and in the opportunity; for we do know and do testify that He whose mortal birth in the Manger at Bethlehem the world celebrates at this festive season, is indeed the Son of God and the Savior of mankind through the atonement wrought out on the Cross at Calvary. This sure knowledge invests with sublime significance the day commemorated as the anniversary of His birth. The chronological inaccuracy that has fixed the Nativity as of December 25 is of minor importance compared with the supreme truth of the event itself. We do well to celebrate it in gift-giving and good cheer, in gratitude and in charity, in love toward one another and a spirit of good will toward all men. Our greeting to those to whom this message shall come is attuned to this spirit and freighted with best wishes for a joyous and blessed Christmas and a bright and prosperous New Year.

A beloved name identified for more than a scope of years with this annual greeting-President Anthon H. Lund-will be missed this year, and will recall that during the twelve months past a considerable number of veterans in the Church, and some elders in the mission field, have been called hence. We miss these useful and faithful co-laborers, but our mourning is lightened by the assurance that they have gone not only to their earned reward but to a greater sphere of activity, and their works do follow them.

Generally speaking, the health of our communities has been good; there have been no epidemics such as have claimed so many victims during several seasons past. In this respect, the situation calls for heartfelt congratulation and gratitude. The earth also has yielded of its abundance in the products of garden, orchard and field, in response to the efforts and toil of the husbandman. Prices for these products, as well as those of ranch and range, factory and mine, have not, it is true, been as favorable as could be desired. But the signs of a more correct adjustment of values are promising, and better times, we believe, are near at hand. It will doubtless be agreed that much of the dire financial distress which has been so widespread was due to unwisdom and lack of vision in realizing that a reaction must come following the forced, feverish and abnormal conditions consequent upon the great war; and that the prodigality which marked these conditions must soon or late be paid for in humiliation and bitterness. Nevertheless, we do not feel that this is a time to indulge in repining or rebuke. If from the present experience we shall be admonished to greater prudence in the future, the lesson, severe though it is, will have been not in vain but of enduring value.

We congratulate the Latter-day Saints upon the continued lifting of the clouds of prejudice by which they and their faith, and even their works, have been more or less densely enveloped during the past years. While we cannot anticipate a day when all the world will speak well of us, we nevertheless desire to live in peace with our fellow men, to benefit and help them, without being misjudged, misrepresented and persecuted. The past year has furnished many notable evidences of a better understanding with reference to our principles, practices and purposes, not only on the part of leading men of our own and other nations, but also of thousands of travelers who have visited our communities and have seen us as we are.

The missionary efforts of the Church have taken on redoubled vigor, and they are being put forth with a systematic thoroughness and a zeal that is most gratifying as well as fruitful in results. The work in the Temples for the dead is being prosecuted with a devotion and an earnestness never before equaled, the capacity of the sacred structures erected for this purpose having been taxed to the utmost. In this connection it is pleasing to state that the site for a new temple to be built in Arizona has recently been dedicated, and that a request for a similar edifice to be built in Southern California has been urgently presented and is under consideration. Thus the work for the redemption of the dead goes hand in hand with that for the salvation of the living, while, the watchcare over those already in the fold, exercised by the priesthood quorums, the auxiliary associations, and the various Church educational institutions, is ever energetic and vigilant.

Looking beyond these heartening conditions as affecting the situation here at home, we find the world still staggering from the dreadful effects of the recent tremendous war. Famine stalks unchecked in great sections of Old-World territory, drawing a host of black calamities in its train. In other regions, rumblings of political and social upheaval cause men's hearts to fail with fear. The white dove of peace finds precarious reception in many places-in some it is still denied admittance at all. Yet even out of the gloom which such conditions create emerges the hope that through the sincere efforts of the greater nations of the earth now being put forth in the capital of this Republic, the causes and provocations of future war, and the enormous costs associated therewith, as well as the incalculable suffering and destruction and demoralization that ensue therefrom, shall be minimized if not removed. Our prayers should continue to be that the statesmen charged with these great negotiations may be blessed with the courage, sagacity, sincerity and inspiration that shall enable them to devise plans for reducing the menace of war, relieving the groaning world of some of its crushing burden of useless expense, and promoting the cause of humanity and peace.

To the foregoing reflections, briefly expressed, we feel, in conclusion, to add a word of benediction and blessing. At this joyous season let personal discords be forgotten and animosities healed; let enjoyment of the genial Christmastide include remembrance of the needy and afflicted; let rejoicing be heartfelt but not boisterous, and gift-giving as generous as circumstances will allow but not extravagant; let the hearts of the children be made glad, and forgiveness reach out to those who have wronged us, even as we hope to be forgiven; let goodness abound in our hearts and love prevail in our home-so shall the birthday of the lowly Man of Sorrows take on the larger significance of His approaching advent as the Prince of Peace, when all evil shall be put under His feet, and the world will glow in a universal Christmas in the actual presence of its omnipotent King. HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS.
