James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Need for missionaries in Swiss and German Mission, March 1, 1922

1922-March 1-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah March 1, 1922 President Joseph R. Cardon and Counselors Cache Stake

Dear Brethren:

We are in receipt of a communication from President Serge F. Ballif, of the Swiss and German Mission, advising us of the great need of Elders in that Mission. President Ballif writes that the branches are growing rapidly, new ones are being organized, and in some cities the Elders are permitted to use the public school houses and buildings for the purpose of holding meetings. Thousands of people are being taught the Gospel and many are being brought into the fold. "The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few," and "the field is white already to harvest." The Mission is in need of men of experience, brethren who have a knowledge of the German language and who have previously filled missions in that country.

At present the Swiss and German Mission is one of the least expensive fields, which is due to the hospitality of the people and the high purchasing value of American money.

All of our mission presidents are calling for Elders, especially for men of experience who understand the Gospel and can point the way of life and salvation.

We would be pleased to have you recommend a goodly number of brethren who are worthy to fill missions, who are physically and financially able to go, and who will be prepared to leave in the near future.

Several of our missions are in need of lady missionaries-sisters who are not too young, and who have good educations and have been active in the auxiliary organizations of the Church at home.

Praying the Lord to guide you in this important matter, we remain Sincerely your brethren, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, In behalf of the First Presidency.
