James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Choosing and ordaining of priesthood officers, August 15, 1922

1922-August 15-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

These are brief but pointed instructions for choosing and ordaining priesthood officers or for setting officers apart in case no ordination is called for or required.

FOR STAKE PRESIDENTS

(1) Patriarchs are chosen and ordained by or under the direction of the presiding council of the Church.

(2) Recommendations for ordination of Bishops should receive approval of the High Council before sent to the First Presidency for approval. The men thus recommended should not be spoken to about it until after the approval of the First Presidency is obtained.

(3) Counselors to Bishops should be the direct choice of the bishops themselves, subject however to approval of the Stake Presidency and High Council, also subject to the approval of the Apostle setting them apart. A late ruling at a meeting of the First Presidency and Twelve makes it unnecessary for the names of Bishops' counselors to be submitted to the First Presidency for approval.

(4) Presidents of Independent Branches may be chosen by the Stake Presidency and High Council, subject to the sustaining vote of the Branch members, subject also to the approval of the Apostle setting them apart.

(5) Presidents and Counselors of High Priests' quorums are chosen and set apart under the direction of the presiding council of the Church.

(6) High Councilors, Alternates and Stake Clerks may be chosen by the Stake Presidency and High Council, subject however to the sustaining vote of the Stake Conference and approval of the Apostle setting them apart.

(7) Presidents of Elders Quorums may be chosen by the Stake Presidency and High Council and set apart by the Stake Presidency at a quorum meeting after receiving the sustaining vote of the quorum members.

(8) Presidents and Counselors of quorums of the Aaronic Priesthood may be chosen and set apart by the Bishoprics at a regular quorum meeting, after receiving the sustaining vote of the quorum members.

(9) High Priests regularly chosen may be ordained under the hands of the Stake President and Presidency of the High Priests quorum at a regular quorum meeting.

(10) Elders regularly chosen may be ordained under the hands of the Stake Presidency and Presidency of the Elders Quorum at a regular quorum meeting.

HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.
