James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Priesthood quorums and auxiliary associations fields and functions, October 5, 1922

1922-October 5-Original circular letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This letter constituted notification Of a major change in responsibility for the Sunday School and Y.M.M.I.A auxiliary organizations of the Church.

From October 10, 1880, to his death in 1901, George Q. Cannon, first counselor in the First Presidency, had been General Superintendent of the Sunday Schools. Subsequent to that the President of the Church had been General Superintendent. From the turn of the century, at least, the President of the Church had also been the General Superintendent of the Y.M.M.I.A auxiliary organization.

The letter announces: "While the present administration [the administration of President Heber J Grant] has relinquished the direct presidency of the Sunday Schools and the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, it still retains the right of presidency over all the quorums and auxiliary organizations of the Church." According to a letter of the First Presidency of January 18, 1935, the "relinquishment" would have been completed in 1918.

The functions and purposes of each of the auxiliary organizations is briefly but clearly stated and the existing over-all committee on outlines and courses of study is released, placing the responsibility directly on the individual priesthood quorums and auxiliaries subject to the final direction of the First Presidency.

The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Salt Lake City, Utah October 5, 1922

Chairman of the Committee on Priesthood Outlines and Courses of Study, and to the General Superintendents and Presidencies of Auxiliary Associations:

Dear Brethren and Sisters:

For a number of months, matters pertaining to the functions and fields of endeavor of the Priesthood Quorums and Auxiliary Associations have been under consideration by the First Presidency. It has been deemed advisable to make some observations to those herein addressed regarding these matters, and the following is, therefore, submitted:

The order of administration in the conduct of the Church has been definitely outlined in the revelations given by the Lord to its members.

Those ordained to the priesthood, both to the Melchizedek and Aaronic are organized into quorums in order that both old and young may be taught and become familiar with the order of the Priesthood which they hold, its keys of authority, the field of endeavor occupied by each quorum, and its limitations. The method of conducting quorum meetings should always have this purpose in view.

The Auxiliary Associations

The Auxiliary Associations of the Church are organized helps in government, the purpose for which they were founded being, first to provide means by which better facilities could be provided for the study of Gospel doctrines, and after that adopt the best means available for the control and development of the literary and social activities of the Gospel.

The Relief Society

Women, not being heirs to the priesthood except as they enjoy and participate in its blessings through their husbands, are not identified with the priesthood quorums, and consequently do not receive the religious instruction and training imparted at quorum meetings.

One of the purposes of the organization of the Relief Society was that a system might be inaugurated by which study of religious subjects, or Church doctrine and government, might be pursued by women. The administration of charity under the direction of the Bishopric, nursing the sick, preparing the dead for burial, and comforting the afflicted was to be part of their active work. But this was not intended to absorb their activities to the exclusion of the development of faith, and the advancement of women in literary, social and domestic activities of life. We believe that close adherence to these fundamentals is as necessary at present as it was at the time the Society was organized.

The Sunday School

The direct purpose which prompted the establishment of this important auxiliary organization of the Church was to find a means by which children and young people might be provided with proper occupation on the Sabbath day and be taught the fundamentals of our religion. Our present system has developed greatly since the organization was effected, and there are now enrolled in it many of the adult and older people of the Church. Nevertheless, it must be borne in mind that the dominant obligation in this institution is to minister to the spiritual needs and religious welfare of the youth of Zion.

The Mutual Improvement Associations

When the Mutual Improvement Associations were organized, under the direction of President Young, it was with the definite understanding that the purpose which prompted their organization was to provide a means by which the doctrines of the Gospel could be more effectively taught to young men and young women, that testimony of the truth of these doctrines and the divinity of the mission of Joseph Smith might be gained, and also that the literary tastes of the young might be developed and their social activities brought under better management and control.

The Primary Associations

The Primary Associations are expected to deal with the requirements of children of tender years. Here also, as in other auxiliary organizations, the development of faith through moral lessons which the partly developed minds of children can understand, should be the dominant feature.

All of these organizations were presided over and their fields of activity outlined by the Presidency of the Church, the details of their work being directed by the general and local officers who were chosen to preside over them.

While the present administration has relinquished the direct presidency of the Sunday Schools and the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, it still retains the right of presidency over all the quorums and auxiliary organizations of the Church.

Under the Presidency of the Church are general Boards, which have been chosen to direct, in detail, the various associations. These General Boards are expected, in all that they do, to act in harmony with the Bishoprics of the various Wards. Thus, all of the agencies through which the activities of the Church are controlled come under the direct supervision of the priesthood, from the Bishopric to the Stake Presidency to the Presidency of the Church, the general boards acting as intermediary through which the desire of the presiding priesthood of the Church is conveyed to its members.

We desire to express appreciation for the services rendered by the committee which has outlined the course of study for the priesthood, and by the committees which have represented the general boards of Auxiliary Associations. We are sure that the brethren and sisters of these committees have served earnestly and well, and that great good has come to the Church from their efforts. We feel, however, that the existing quorums and associations are competent to plan for and execute the activities of each, and that it is advisable that the members of the committees mentioned be honorably released from their appointments and the committees discharged. We trust that in no particular will the forward movement of the organizations be halted.

Your Brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.
