James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Physical examination for prospective missionaries, December 16, 1922

1922-December 9-Original circular letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

As indicated in the letter, the policy of having L.D.S. missionaries receive physical examinations only after arriving in Salt Lake City on their way to their fields of labor was changed to a system of examination by local physicians before leaving home and before final arrangements for the mission had been made. This operating policy continues to date (1970).

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah December 9, 1922 Pres. Joseph E. Cardon and Counselors Cache Stake, Logan

Dear Brethren:

We are receiving letters from mission presidents advising us of brethren and sisters who have entered the mission field physically unable to perform missionary service, and after laboring a short time were obliged to return home, which was a great disappointment to the Elders and also an expense, as well as to the Church.

At present the missionaries are examined at this office when they report here to be set apart. We feel, however, that the proper time to examine them is before they receive their missionary appointments and before they have made all arrangements to leave for the mission field and had their farewell party, etc.

We recommend, therefore, that in the future all prospective missionaries be thoroughly examined by a competent physician before their names are sent to this office.

We believe that in each community there' are physicians who will be willing to give such examinations free of charge. In Salt Lake City several prominent physicians have offered their services for this purpose, and this has been the practice in Weber County for several years past.

Please attach to each missionary recommendation the doctor's certificate showing that the missionary has been examined and is in a condition physically to respond to a call.

Kindly communicate this information to your Bishops.

Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.
