James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 16, 1922

1922-December 16-Improvement Era 26:285-286, January, 1923; also Deseret News, December 16, 1922.

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY From the Christmas Deseret News

On this auspicious anniversary, commemorated as the natal day of the Redeemer of the World, with thanksgiving and rejoicing we send greeting, love and good will to the Latter-day Saints, and to all mankind, at home and abroad.

We pray that the season may be one of joy, and that it may so continue throughout the new year, and into the years to come.

The Saints are happy in the knowledge that the words of the ancient prophets were fulfilled in the birth of our Savior, in the meridian of time: "The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light, they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath a great light shined. For unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end." (Isaiah 9:2, 6, 7.)

In this further knowledge we also rejoice, that we who live in the later times have not been forgotten.

As a presidency we appreciate, and thank you for your willing cooperation and devoted assistance in carrying on the work of the Lord.

We pray God our Heavenly Father that His peace may abide with you, and His Spirit enlighten all. We pray that the Lord may bless you in your homes, in your fields, that they may produce in their strength, in your flocks and herds that they may prosper. May the blessing of the Lord be with you as husbands and wives, parents and children, that faith may increase, and good works be manifest in your lives. Let us not forget the obligation which rests upon us to render allegiance and service to the Lord, and that acceptable service to Him cannot be rendered without service to our fellow man.

And so, on this happy day we extend to you, our brethren and sisters, fellow workers in the cause for which the Master lived, and for which He gave His life, our cordial greetings, and our blessing, that in this time of turmoil and confusion, which prevails in the world, you may find peace to your souls, with the assurance that the purposes of the Almighty will be accomplished, Christ's Kingdom be established, and the will of the Father be done upon Earth, as it is done in Heaven. HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.
