James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

M.I.A. to supervise Church recreation, June, 1823

1923-June-Recreation Bulletin No. I. General Boards, M.I.A. 1923. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah; Improvement Era 27:265-267, January, 1924.

As pointed out in the notes for the circular letter of the First Presidency of October 5, 1922, up until 1922 the Sunday Schools and the M.I.A. organizations were presided over by, and under the direct supervision of, the First Presidency. The October 5th circular noted the organization of general Boards "which have been chosen to direct, in detail, the various associations."

The present letter to Presidents of Stakes and the accompanying Recreation Bulletin No. 1, which was approved by the First Presidency and the Executive Heads of all the auxiliary organizations of the Church, indicates the release of the former stake and ward social committees and the placing of the responsibility for the social and recreational programs of the Church in the hands of the M.I.A. organizations.

In the June 1923 Conference of the Mutual Improvement Associations, a full session was devoted to the new recreation program, under the direction of Melvin J. Ballard of the Council of the Twelve Apostles.

To Presidents of Stakes Dear Brethren:

We recently advised you that the General Boards Of the Young Men's and Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations had been given the supervision of recreational work in the Church, and that the social committees be retained until further plans were projected by these boards.

The further plans for carrying forward this work through their organizations are herewith enclosed; and have been adopted by the Mutual Boards with our approval.

While this releases the present stake and ward social committees from supervising recreational work in the Church, any members of those committees who are especially qualified for this work, should be retained under the plan the Mutual boards have adopted.

We suggest that once a month you could, with profit, have a meeting with the presiding officers of the stake auxiliary boards; and the Bishopric, a similar meeting with the presiding officers of their ward auxiliaries, providing an opportunity to correlate their work, keep harmony among their organizations, and a closer cooperation between the presiding authorities in stakes and wards and the presiding officers of the auxiliary organizations.

Your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.

INSTRUCTIONS TO STAKE AND WARD COMMITTEES ON RECREATION*228-1

The fundamental purpose of recreation as set forth in Bulletin No. 1 on Recreation is to develop Latter-day Saints. The making of money is not the primary object. It is found that not infrequently the most desirable standards are difficult to establish, but the fixing of these is a moral necessity. Serious effort on the part of the leaders of the community, and the cooperation of the home, the auxiliary organizations and all Church institutions, in order to establish moral sentiments and habits of culture, are not only desirable but essential.

The warmth of emotion created in social functions and the moving picture show sinks deeply into the moral life of our young people. If, for instance, we consider first of all the standards of a party itself, if we consider always the moral objectives which we have set up for ourselves, and if we judge a party successful because of the high quality of its music, the aesthetic appeal of the decoration, the sympathetic and congenial atmosphere of the group, the dignified conduct of the individuals, the dancing party actually becomes a factor for moral uplift and an enterprise which utilizes the pleasure-seeking instinct for spiritual and moral purposes.

When there are general calls made upon an auxiliary organization, or there are special needs in the community, such as missionary farewells, etc., which, in the mind of the bishopric of the ward and the executive officers of the various organizations, cannot be met in ways other than through recreational activities, we suggest that the matter be carefully considered and the organization be permitted to give an entertainment for that purpose. There should be no other function in a community to conflict with this. The committee on Recreation should be directly responsible as in all other parties for the standards maintained. When such needs are clearly recognized by all the organizations and agreed upon by them in meeting of the executive officers, there will be no occasion for dissatisfaction. On the other hand, a real opportunity will be created for cooperation. All such needs should be clearly investigated at the beginning of the season, or at the time when the budget is being prepared.

The budget system is conceded the best method for financing Recreation and the following general recommendations are made:

*228-1 Approved by the First Presidency and the Executive Heads of All the Auxiliary Organizations of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

In view of the fact that many organizations are not sufficiently conversant with their financial needs and financial resources for recreation, it is suggested that when the above plan is not feasible, that for the present a partial budget system be worked out as follows:

Additional Suggestions on the Year-Round Recreation Program (See also Recreation Bulletin No. 1)

It is understood that the various quorums of the Priesthood and also the stake and ward choirs be given opportunity with all the auxiliary associations to participate in the year-round program.

At the meeting of the executive officers the various auxiliary organizations, quorums of priesthood, and choir, will be given as far as possible a place and time and activity in the schedule of the year-round program. This implies that any organization that so desires may furnish at least once during the year, a recreation program for the ward. It is suggested that once a year all these organizations combine and with the assistance of the Recreation Committee, put on a big ward festival, carnival or fair.

It is also suggested that several times during the year a free Recreation feature-dance, drama, musical, opera or other activity -be provided by the Recreation Committee, the expense of the same to be paid by the General fund.

In some wards other Recreational activities may be included in the year-round program.
