James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Plea for contributions for poor European saints and Near East children, November 10, 1923

1923-November 10-Deseret News, November 10, 1923, p. 3; Improvement Era 27:163-164, December, 1923; Circular letter, Office of The Presiding Bishop, November 17, 1923.

On May 1, 1922, the First Presidency, by letter, had placed the handling of all charitable drives and relief measures for the Church in the hands of the Presiding Bishopric of the Church. This letter deals with the needs of European Church members caught in the aftermath of World War I, also the children being served by "Near East" charities.

The document following these instructions brought the resources and facilities of the Church women's organization, the Relief Society, into the picture of European relief.

NOTICE

To the Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards in all the Stakes of Zion:

Our people have been bounteously blessed during the present year and surely the cry of the poor shall not appeal to us in vain. Thousands of our poor Saints in Europe are in a desperate situation. Many of them will no doubt suffer for want of food. There are many thousands of suffering children that are being cared for by the Near East charities who also have claim upon our sympathies.

Sunday, December 2nd, is our regular fast day, when contributions for the poor are paid to the bishops of the wards. We request the presidencies of stakes and bishoprics of wards and the Relief Society organizations also, to take upon themselves the labor of visiting the Saints under their jurisdiction, and of inviting everyone to attend the fast day services on the first Sunday of December, prepared to make generous contributions for the relief of those whose poverty and suffering are appalling.

Detailed instructions will be sent from the Presiding Bishop's office.

HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.

1923-December-Improvement Era 27:163-164, December, 1923.

NOTICE

To Presidents of Stakes, Bishops of Wards and Relief Societies:

Information just received from our mission headquarters in Germany states that the poverty of the Saints in that land is most distressing. Used clothing and shoes of all kinds for men, women and children will be a great blessing to those poor Latter-day Saints.

We desire that the Relief Societies of all the wards and stakes in the Church shall collect and put in order and repair used clothing and shoes, and forward same at the earliest possible date to the headquarters of the Relief Society, 28 Bishop's Building, Salt Lake City. Prompt action is requested. "He gives twice who gives quickly."

HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.
