James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Greeting to foreign-born saints in the West, September 1, 1924

1924-September 1-Liahona, the Elders' Journal 22:122-123, September 23, 1924.

In this and the document that follows, the concern of the First Presidency is expressed for the foreign-born membership of the Church residing in Utah and surrounding states and for the readers of the foreign-language newspapers which were being published under the auspices of the Church. Due to the foreign missionary work of the Church, Utah, for instance, had always had a high percentage of foreign-born. In the 1870 census 54.7 per cent of Utah's population was foreign-born and in 1880 it was 44 per cent. In 1924 the foreign-born, foreign language-speaking groups constituted a smaller but important segment of the Church population, hence these two messages.

GREETING TO FOREIGN-BORN

Salt Lake City, Utah, September 1, 1924.

To Our Foreign Born Latter-day Saints:

We live in the day when the "Gospel of the Kingdom" has been restored, and it is being preached "to every nation, kindred, tongue and people" for a witness unto all nations. You, our brethren and sisters of foreign birth, who, converted to the truth of this Gospel message, have given heed to the "voice of warning," have now, in fulfillment of other predictions, come up to the Mountain of the Lord's House and have cast your lot and identified your interests with the people of God.

We know that, in addition to all the difficulties and obstacles which all Latter-day Saints have to meet and overcome, you have had to meet those which come to you by reason of your foreign birth and tongue. It often requires many years of earnest effort to overcome completely the consequent handicap and embarrassment; but we have observed with joy the success with which your faith and industry have been rewarded.

We shall soon be assembled in a general Conference of the Church. Many of you may not be able to understand fully the discourses delivered by the Servants of the Lord, who are called upon to address the congregation; we therefore send to you, through your own papers, published by the Church in your native languages, this greeting of goodwill so that you may be assured of the sympathetic interest which we feel in you and in all that pertains to your well being and happiness in the land of Zion. We say to you, as Paul once said to the Ephesians, "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners but fellow citizens with the Saints and of the household of God" and we want you to know that we feel for you who have come from afar the same fellowship that we do for those of our own America.

To assist and encourage you while you are adapting yourselves to local conditions and acquiring a knowledge of the English language, and to encourage and help your children to retain a knowledge of their mother tongue, for future missionary service in the lands whence you came, the Church now as for many years, publishes periodicals in your native languages, containing foreign and local news, editorials on current and timely topics, sermons on doctrinal subjects and other matter of a literary and educational nature. Many copies of these papers are sent into the mission field where they do much good. These papers have been maintained at considerable cost to the Church, but we believe that they can become more nearly self-sustaining if you will cooperate and heartily support them by extending the subscriptions. This we are sure that you will do.

For similar reasons, meetings of our foreign-born Saints have been organized in which opportunity is afforded to hear discussed, in your native tongues, the Gospel and its principles. It is our earnest desire that these papers and meetings shall be continued, for we realize that they are of great benefit to you and to the Church.

We rejoice in the progress of the work of the Lord at home and in the mission fields. Zion is growing; our numbers are constantly increasing. Encouraging reports come which show a growing interest everywhere in the restored Gospel of Our Redeemer. Let us therefore rejoice together, and look forward to the final triumph of the Great Cause of Truth, when Zion shall be redeemed and the honest in heart shall be gathered into the fold of Christ.

We extend to you our hearty greeting and best wishes for your continued prosperity and happiness; and we pray our Heavenly Father that you may grow day by day in the knowledge of the truth and in good works, and that you may eventually, as a reward for your continued love and devotion to Him and His Truth, receive the crown of Eternal Life which He has promised those who love Him.

Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS, First Presidency.
