James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Church periodicals in foreign languages, November 17, 1924

1924-November 17-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Office of the First Presidency Salt Lake City, Utah November 17, 1924. Pres. Joseph E. Cardon and Counselors, Logan, Utah.

Dear Brethren:

The Church is publishing, as for many years in the past, the following periodicals in foreign languages:

Bikuben-in Danish and Norwegian

Utah Posten-in Swedish

Salt Lake City Beobachter-in German

De Utah Nederlander-in Dutch.

The considerable expense involved has been gladly met, because of our desire to assist our brethren and sisters, converted through the efforts of our missionaries in the countries where these languages are spoken. These converts have come to Zion to be taught in the ways of the Lord and to walk in His paths, and we regard it a duty to render them assistance in overcoming e handicap occasioned by their foreign birth and tongue, especially while they are adapting themselves to local conditions and acquiring a knowledge of the English language which often requires many years of earnest and strenuous effort.

With this thought in mind organizations have been effected in many of the Stakes of Zion, for conducting meetings in which our foreign Saints may receive Gospel instruction and admonition in their native languages; and with the same purpose in mind the above mentioned periodicals have been and are being published. We are glad to say that by reason of this policy great good has resulted to the Church and to our foreign born Saints.

To give expression to the deep interest which we feel in the welfare of our Saints who have come from foreign lands, and in the hope that they may more fully receive the benefits and advantages to be derived from carefully supervised foreign language meetings and newspapers, we have appointed a committee, charged with the supervision of all foreign language organizations of the Church and with the management of the foreign language publications. This committee as at present constituted is as follows: John A. Widtsoe, chairman; Rulon S. Wells, vice chairman; John Wells; Nephi L. Morris; Serge F. Ballif; Franklin S. Davis, secretary.

Our purpose in addressing this communication to you is that you may be fully advised in this important matter and also to enlist your active cooperation with the Committee in its efforts to carry out the aims and desires of the Church in behalf of its members of foreign birth.

A communication on this subject from the Committee, a copy of which is enclosed herewith, is being simultaneously addressed to all the Bishoprics soliciting their assistance and cooperation. We hope that the number of subscribers to the foreign newspapers may be increased by awakening a new interest among the foreign Saints and missionaries who have labored in foreign lands. The Committee will communicate with you as occasion demands.

The active support which we feel certain we shall receive from you and from the Bishops acting under your direction, will enable the Committee to effect many improvements which will inure to the benefit of our brethren and sisters of foreign extraction, will directly assist you in building up the work of the Lord in the Stake over which you preside; will at the same time reduce to a minimum the financial burden of publishing foreign language papers and will help realize fully the purposes for which these periodicals are being maintained.

Sincerely your brethren, HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS.
