James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Relationships between the Church and four U.S. Presidents, December 16, 1924

1924-December 16-Original letter. Reed Smoot files, Brigham Young University, Archives, Provo, Utah.

President Grant was making frequent trips to New York and Washington on Church and other financial business. This letter was written en route home on one of these trips.

Of particular significance in this letter is the appraisal of the President of the Church regarding the relationships between the Church and four Presidents of the United States; namely, Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, Warren G. Harding, and Calvin Coolidge.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Union Pacific Train, Dec. 16, 1924. Hon. Reed Smoot, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C.

My dear Brother Smoot:

Many thanks for your letter of December 2nd, which reached me yesterday at Independence. I am on my way home and will arrive tomorrow morning. I received a telegram at Independence announcing the death of our beloved associate, Seymour B. Young.

I was pleased to hear that Allie was somewhat better. She has my constant and earnest prayers that the Lord will heal her and that she may yet have many years of health and happiness.

Sister Grant and I have read with interest your remarks about Mrs. Harding. You had already quoted to me President Harding's remark: "I do not know but what Brigham Young was right in his religion." I believe that Roosevelt felt that we were right. I think he was nearer converted to the truth than any man who ever occupied the presidential chair. I feel, Brother Smoot, that Roosevelt, Taft, Harding and Coolidge have been made friends of Utah more through your personal influence and devotion to your duty and at the same time your strong championship of the Gospel of Jesus Christ than any other single influence.

I have read with interest what you say about our missionaries in Norway, and shall write Brother Peterson, as soon as I get home, along the lines that you suggest. I am delighted that you sent President Peterson a copy of Minister Swenson's letter and that you wrote him. I am also glad that you spoke to Secretary Hughes in favor of keeping Swenson in his present position. I am grateful to the Lord that we have a man in the Senate that can have influence with the secretary of state as well as with the President of the United States, to help protect us in our missionary work.

Ever praying earnestly for your health and happiness, and that of your family, and wishing for you and them a very happy and enjoyable Christmas, in all of which Sister Grant joins, I am, Your affectionate brother, HEBER J. GRANT.
