James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Christmas pastoral epistle, December 20, 1924

1924-December 20-Millennial Star 87:40-42, January 15, 1925; also Deseret News, December 20, 1924.

In this annual Christmas message the First Presidency also announced the suspension of L.D.S. missionary activities in the Empire of Japan. The mission was closed June 12, 1924. (See IE 27:992.)

It was Heber J. Grant, as an Apostle, who had been called by the First Presidency on February 14, 1901, to open Japan to L.D.S. missionary work. He and his associates had arrived in Yokohama on August 12, 1901. The first convert to the faith was baptized at Tokyo on March 8, 1902. His name was Hajimi Nakazaha; he had been a Shinto priest. (See CHC 6:376.)

Now, 22 years later, Heber J. Grant, as President of the Church, had the task of announcing the suspension of missionary activities.

In opening the mission, Elder Grant had said to the people of Japan:

"In company with my associates sent to you from the headquarters of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in Salt Lake City, Utah, as an Apostle and minister of the Most High God, I salute you and invite you to consider the important message which we bear." (See Nibley, Presidents of the Church, pp. 300-302.)

GREETINGS FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

At the approach of another glad Christmastide our hearts go out in gratitude to the Giver of All Good for the manifold expressions of His kindness toward us and toward His people in general, during the year now drawing to a close. We esteem, among our choicest blessings, the affectionate and loyal devotion of our beloved brethren and sisters in the Church, and count it as a jewel beyond all price. Next to the birth of the Saviour-the great fact for which Christmas stands-this is our dominant thought as we extend to all, wholeheartedly, the customary greetings of the season.

The growth of the Lord's Work during the year 1924 is a cause for much rejoicing. A marked feature of it is the number of Stakes and Wards that have been organised, an increase carrying with it the necessity for additional officers, both men and women, to preside over and otherwise equip such divisions and sub-divisions of the Church, both in the Priesthood and in the auxiliary organizations. It has been our observation for many years, that the creation of Wards and Stakes, even when involving the partition of older units of like character, is invariably attended with benefits, not only to the Church at large but to every individual concerned. New Stakes and Wards mean, as a matter of course, more meeting houses and the additional expense of maintaining them; but the compensating results are more than equal to the outlay.

The splendid record made by our Church schools, seminaries, priesthood and religion classes, and by all the auxiliaries, merits more in the way of commendation than we have space for at the present time. But we cannot withhold an expression of appreciation of the enthusiasm exhibited by our young people who are taking advantage of the precious opportunities afforded in these worthy institutions. Such zeal and devotion speak well for the future.

The progress of Zion's cause in all parts of the world where our missions are established, has been such as to give joy to our hearts and prompt the invocation of continued blessings upon our faithful missionaries abroad, who, like the brethren and sisters serving at home, are doing their best for the onrolling of the purposes of the Almighty. May His blessings be with them all!

It has been deemed wise to suspend our missionary activities in the Empire of Japan. But this should not be taken as an indication that the Church has utterly and permanently abandoned that field of labour. "Out of every nation under heaven"-such is the language of revelation-shall yet come some of the seed of Israel, to help fulfil prophecy concerning the building up of Zion in the last day. And Japan is not an exception.

The temporary closing of the Japan Mission is offset by the reopening of the French Mission, and the extension of the work in other parts of Europe, notably in Germany, where for several years past the fruits of the proselyting efforts of our missionaries have been very encouraging. From other countries of the world, including the islands of the sea, also come reports of a favourable character.

The salvation of the dead is one of the cardinal purposes for which the Everlasting Gospel was restored, and the Church of Jesus Christ reestablished, in this day. The phenomenal interest manifested by the Saints in this very important phase of the Saviour's redemptive mission is a most promising sign. Our temples are thronged from early morning far into the night, by those intent upon redeeming their departed ancestors and helping to forge the link that will eventually bind the Gospel dispensations and bring together all things in Christ, both in heaven and on earth-a work peculiar to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. What happiness awaits those devoted labourers in the House of the Lord, when they pass into the Spirit World and there receive a rapturous welcome from those for whom they have rendered this inestimable service!

But whether in the Temple or out, if we labour for the honour and glory of God, for the furtherance of His purposes and the promotion of His cause, it is in effect the same. To those who do not now have the opportunity to work for the dead, but who will gladly do so when circumstances permit, we say: Be patient, bide the Lord's time, do your duty in the sphere where He has placed you, and you shall lose nothing. The God we worship does not hold men responsible for opportunities that they do not possess.

The current year has been an exceedingly dry one in Utah and in other parts of the West. The drought of the past summer, with its resultant losses and discomforts, is an eloquent reminder to us of our absolute dependence upon our Heavenly Father for the commonest necessities of life. We acknowledge His mercy, however, in giving us a harvest more bounteous than could have been expected, under the circumstances which have prevailed.

Christmas is proverbially a season for merry-making; but those indulging in its festivities should prudently bear in mind that it gives no license for excessive levity or dissipation. While partaking thankfully, with glad hearts and cheerful faces, of the bounties that Heaven has provided, let us reverently remember Him in whose honour Christmas is kept, and strive at all times to merit and retain His divine favour and approval.

In conclusion, we wish the Saints and our Father's children everywhere, a most happy Christmas and a very prosperous New Year! HEBER J. GRANT, CHARLES W. PENROSE, ANTHONY W. IVINS.
