James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 5 ( 1971)

Excommunications following plural "marriage" ceremony, September (?), 1925

1925-September?-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

While the copy of this statement used is not dated, its place in the files of the Church Historian's Library would suggest a date of September, 1925.

Charles W. Nibley, who signed the letter as second counselor in the First Presidency, was Presiding bishop of the Church until May 28, 1925, when, following the death of Charles W. Penrose on May 16, 1925, he was chosen and set apart as second counselor in the First Presidency. The letter refers to John Woolley, who was excommunicated from the Church for continuing to teach and advocate plural marriage after the 1890 "Manifesto" of President Wilford Woodruff and numerous subsequent statements by First Presidencies of the Church.

NOTICE

We are in receipt of official information advising that another so-called polygamous marriage has been entered into, and the parties involved in same have been duly tried in the Ecclesiastical Courts and they have been excommunicated from the Church. The man who performed the so-called ceremony in this case is one John Woolley, of Centerville, Davis County. For doing a similar unlawful and disloyal act some years ago he was excommunicated from the Church; he is consequently not a member of the Church and holds absolutely no authority to officiate in any way whatsoever.

This notice is published as a warning to all Latter-day Saints against the folly and the sinfulness of attempting to do what is contrary to the law of the land and the established rule of the Church.

We hereby advise all Stake Presidencies, and Bishoprics, that the integrity of the Church can no longer be trifled with, and that hereafter both men and women who are duly convicted of such immoral conduct as above mentioned must pay for their wilful acts by being deprived of their membership in the Church. HEBER J. GRANT, ANTHONY W. IVINS, CHARLES W. NIBLEY.
