125

shall “remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof” (verse 4). During the Japanese occupation there was a lot of cheating and malpractices in black market dealings, counterfeit goods and false pretences. Many who were poor before, by risking their lives and by fair means or foul, made good money. They became mushroom millionaires. When law and order was restored under the British Administration, so did those millionaire mushrooms dry up overnight!

Vision of the Woman in the Ephah

An ephah is equivalent to 8 gallons or 36 litres, being a Hebrew measurement of capacity. An ephah is used in commercial transactions, measuring whatever is bought or sold. When the lead cover of a talent’s weight is lifted up, from this ephah a woman is found seated inside. The angel said to Zechariah, “This is wickedness.” So saying “he cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.”

This vision is akin to the vision of the scarlet woman riding a scarlet beast. Here is spiritual adultery, ecclesiastical power married to political power. In this light, what is the woman sitting inside the ephah but commercial adultery? This is described in James 5:

Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten. Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you. (James 5:1-6)

126

The Minor Prophets

Another interpretation of the ephah is that all the sins of the Jews had filled the measure of God, especially the sin of idolatry. Matthew Henry says,

The wrath of God against impenitent sinners is what they cannot escape, and what they cannot bear up under. Guilt is upon the sinner as a talent of lead to sink him to the lowest hell . . . He sees the ephah, with the woman thus pressed in it, carried away to some far country. The instruments to do this were two women, with wings like those of a stork, large and strong, and to make them fly more swiftly, they had the wind in their wings . . .

There are all kinds of conjecture about these two women. We take it to be one of God’s order of angels, like women prison warders today, who take care of women prisoners. The woman in the ephah is transported airborne swiftly to the land of Shinar, even Babylon, where man’s first rebellion occurred in the building of the Tower of Babel. A house is built for the ephah of wickedness which means the wickedness which is taken out of Judah is returned to its own base. The Jews learned many wicked things in Babylon. Now that they were returned to the Holy land of their fathers they had no more dealings with Babylonism.
