Significance Of The Four Chariots

In his vision the prophet sees four chariots drawn by red, black, white and grisled and bay horses. These who are sent to walk to and fro through the earth (and report back on what they see) are the four spirits of the heavens. From these chariots with their coloured horses we are reminded of the four horsemen of Chapter 1:7-11. By comparison we must conclude the four horsemen are also spirits of the heavens. These reappear in Revelation 6, who are practically of the same category except for the riders who are described in greater detail.

What do their colours represent? In the order of the Revelation scenario, white signifies peace and prosperity, red war and bloodshed, black famine and pestilence, grey (grisled) death and hell.

We need not identify the countries the horsemen visit according to their colours. What we must know is that God is in sovereign control of every situation on earth, through the agency of His angels who are called ‘spirits’ in Hebrew 1:7. Therefore the white horseman in Revelation 6 cannot be the Antichrist as is commonly interpreted. Rather he is the angel of peace and prosperity until overtaken by the red horseman carrying a great sword to take peace away from the earth.

Insofar as we are concerned the key to the interpretation of Revelation 6 is to be found in Zechariah 6:5, “And the angel

128

The Minor Prophets

answered and said unto me, These are the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.”

The Symbolic Crowning of Joshua

From the visions given to Zechariah above, our scene changes to an acting out of prophecy.

Here comes three men from the exiled community in Babylon, bringing gifts for the rebuilding of the Temple. These three men are of Heldai, of Tobijah and of Jedaiah. Zechariah is commanded to take the delegation to the house of Josiah, son of Zephaniah. There they took the silver and gold and made crowns (rather a double crown) and set the crown on Joshua’s head. This was symbolic of the crowing of the coming Messiah, the King-Priest.

Zechariah the prophet then addresses Joshua in his coronation of One whose name is the Branch “who will grow up out of his place.” He shall build the (Millennial) Temple and he shall receive the glory and sit upon his throne and also be priest. He is the King-Priest. In the light of the mandate to the Branch to build the Millennial Temple, the notion that the Jews will build a tribulation temple before the coming of Messiah is untenable. That Messiah will be a King-Priest is a new idea to them.

The double crown was to be a memorial for Helem (Heldai), Tobijah, Jedaiah and Hen (another name of Josiah) and was to be placed in the Temple of the Lord until Messiah comes. The crown was to teach God’s universal purpose to use Israel as the means to reach the world. Messiah will bring both Jews and Gentiles together. This is the sign of His Messiahship. Amen.
