Obedience Is Better Than Fasting

Two years after receiving the visions in the aforesaid chapters, Zechariah was visited by a party of the exiled in Babylon. These Jews were led by Sherezer and Regemmelech “to pray before the Lord.” According to Deuteronomy 17:9 they were come to consult the priests and the prophets who were Zechariah and Haggai about fasting in the fifth month, in commemoration of the destruction of Jerusalem “these so many years.”

Now that the Temple was steadily rising under the hand of Zerubbabel the Governor and Joshua the high priest, those from Babylon wanted to know whether they should go on fasting and mourning as they had been doing the last 70 years. The fasting and mourning had become a burden to them.

God answered through His prophet Zechariah that all the fastings these 70 years were not instituted by Him but by themselves. Not only the fifth month to commemorate the burning of Jerusalem 586 B.C. (Jeremiah 52:12,13) but also the seventh month to mourn the assassination of Governor Gedaliah (II Kings 25:23-25; Jeremiah 41:1-3) these had lost their meaning. For, after the fasting they would eat and drink in abandonment, for themselves again.

Obedience beforehand was more important than fasting afterwards. It was better the people of Jerusalem had heeded the former prophets when they were well off to practise love and mercy. Then they would continue to prosper. Because they did not, so judgment came upon them in their being exiled to Babylon.

130

The Minor Prophets

Since these representatives from Babylon inquired, the same message the Lord had sent through the former prophets was repeated to them through Zechariah:

And the word of the LORD came unto Zechariah, saying, Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and shew mercy and compassions every man to his brother: And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the LORD of hosts hath sent in his spirit by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the LORD of hosts. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, saith the LORD of hosts: But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations whom they knew not. Thus the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned: for they laid the pleasant land desolate. (verses 8-14)

A modern example of the irony of fasting and mourning is how Roman Catholics commemorate the Death of Christ. In some South American countries, certain of them while reenacting the crucifixion of Jesus would get drunk and behave disorderly during the fasting season.

And in the commemoration of Christmas, there are those in Singapore who revel in fleshly lusts, not knowing what Christmas is.

As for Life BP Church, we make it a practice every year to give the Christmas offerings to needy and worthy members, missionaries and missions. God has blessed this remembrance of the needy, inasmuch as He has commanded, “But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind: And thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just” (Luke 14:13,14).
