Jerusalem On Top Of The World

Instead of fasting and mourning for a Jerusalem burnt down in 586 B.C. by the Babylonians, the returnees now busily rebuilding the Temple under Zerubbabel and Joshua are given a shining preview of things to come. Jerusalem will be on top of the world for God is returned to bless her again. Zechariah’s prophescope shows Jerusalem now become the City of Truth for God dwells in it once again. Jerusalem is truly the Holy City and Israel the Holy Nation.

Jerusalem is also the City of peace where her inhabitants live to a ripe old age, and families are prosperous, for her streets are overflowing with children playing. Jerusalem will become fully populated by returnees from east and west, that is from every part of the earth. This is elaborated by Isaiah to be “from the four corners of the earth” (Isaiah 11:12) and in 43:5,6 as, “I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west; I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth.” Ezekiel says, “And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land” (Ezekiel 7:21). Even Amos prophesied, “And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up

132

The Minor Prophets

out of their land which I have given them, saith the LORD thy God” (Amos 9:14,15).

This prophecy of Israel’s Restoration in the future was given to encourage the hands of the returnees as they were feverishly engaged in the rebuilding of the Temple, yea, even in the beginning when the foundation of the house of the Lord was laid.

Though there was a time before this when there was little to be earned by man or beast, for little work was available, and there was no peace or security in the land, God was returned to set the land at peace. God would bless the land with dew again that the vine should be fruitful and the ground yield her increase. The people would be affluent again. Instead of being a curse among the heathen, both Judah and Israel would be a blessing. So, let their hands be strong.

Instead of punishing them whose father had provoked the Lord to anger, the Lord has turned around to bless Jerusalem and Judah. In the light of all this:

These are the things that ye shall do; Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates: And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for all these are things that I hate, saith the LORD. And the word of the LORD of hosts came unto me, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts; therefore love the truth and peace.

Two more fasts were added to be abrogated, of the fourth and the tenth month, also concerning some event in the Fall of Jerusalem. Instead of fasts, let them turn them into feasts, in the light of peace and truth coming to Jerusalem.

Thus saith the LORD of hosts; It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities: And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the LORD, and to seek the
