135

Nebuchadnezzar for 13 years. The secular historian Diodorus Siculus wrote of Tyre, “Tyre had the greatest confidence, owing to her insular position and fortifications and the abundant stores she had prepared.” To conquer the island kingdom, Alexander built a causeway, that is, one like linking Singapore and Johore Bahru. Using the ruins of the old city on the mainland he dumped all the debris into the sea until it reached the island fortress. In seven months he attained his goal. He slew thousands of the island defenders and set the city on fire. (A lesson for little Singapore?)

Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin. The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots. And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land; And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes: And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter wailing. And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea? When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise. In the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths of the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in the midst of thee shall fall. All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee, and their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their countenance. The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt be any more. (Ezekiel 27:27-36)

The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord GOD;

136

The Minor Prophets

Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God: Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee: With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures: By thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast set thine heart as the heart of God; Behold, therefore I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness. They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the seas. Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I am God? but thou shalt be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slayeth thee. Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD. (Ezekiel 28:1-10)

Having conquered Tyre, Alexander presses on to take the whole of Philistia, a continuation of the Mediterranean seaboard. Except for Gath, these cities were taken: Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, Ashdod.

In the conquest of Gaza, the king or satrap was tied to a chariot and dragged around the city till he died.

Ashdod was replaced by a mixed people, hence the term “bastard.” It was Alexander’s policy, as with the Assyrians, to mingle conquered people together so as to break their resistance.

From here the prophescope is focused on the distant future, to the day of Christ’s Millennial Kingdom. Philistia will be converted from their idolatrous practices. They will dwell with the Jews like one people.

During the turmoil of Alexander’s conquest, however, God promises to protect His House and people. Thus, when Alexander passed by Jerusalem up and down in his campaigns, he left the Holy
