139

cornerstone (Isaiah 28:13) is a well-known symbol of the Messiah, “Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded” (I Peter 2:6). The battle-bow bespeaks of the Messiah as a Man of War (Exodus 15:3). The nail refers to the large peg in the tent on which many valuables can be hung. The peg speaks of the dependable one, even as Eliakim the Governor was called a nail in a sure place, and they shall hang their vessels and cups, etc. upon it (Isaiah 22:20-24). Messiah will have the qualities of the abovementioned, when He comes to rule. And He will cast out every oppressor from Israel. See Chapter 9:8.

In these verses we see the well-equipped horse noted as invincible warriors. They will vanquish their enemies who come on horses against them. The house of Joseph representing the Northern Ten Tribes, and the house of Judah the Southern Kingdom, will be brought back. They will be blessed, and their past forgotten.

Ephraim, that is another name for the house of Joseph, which refers again to the Northern Kingdom, will be brought back in the last days when the nation will be regathered. There is a great movement whereby the Nation of Israel, reestablished May 14, 1948 has now a population of over 6 million. Israel, that has been sown in the field of Gentile nations worldwide will be recalled and will return wholly to the Lord. Both father and children will witness the Restoration of their land. While Egypt and Assyria are mentioned as lands from which they will return, the term “far countries” (verse 9) is also mentioned.

Verse 11 says, “And he shall pass through the sea with affliction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all the deeps of the river shall dry up. . .” is surely fulfilled by the early returnees who gatecrashed by the boatloads. Under British Mandate, there was an yearly quota. Those who exceeded the quota were impounded on the island of Cyprus to wait for their turn. Many came defying such limitation, who landed under cover of darkness in shallow seas. What a stark contrast with those who now fly in comfort, Boeings 747!

140

The Minor Prophets
