141

when super-powers clashed with each other over their soil. Together with Israel, she came under the sway of Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, Persia, Greece and Rome in successive conquests. In modern times, Lebanon came under the control of the Ottoman Empire (1517-1917), but the French were the last to rule this Arab State, that is after World War I. In 1943, while WWII was still raging, Lebanon became totally independent and a member of the Arab League. Although a member of the Arab League, she did not participate in the 1967 and 1973 Wars with Israel. Nevertheless, 400,000 Palestinian Arabs made homeless by the Arab-Israeli Wars had crossed over into Southern Lebanon where many refugee camps were established. The PLO (Palestinian Liberation Organisation) used these camps as a training ground for Arab guerillas to launch attacks on Israel. In turn, Israeli forces counter-attacked, “eye for eye and tooth for tooth.” The trading of blows became so bad that the Israelis invaded Lebanon in a war that lasted from 1982 to 1985. The PLO was physically expelled from Lebanon, with much devastation to the Land.

While Isaiah had earlier prophesied the Babylonian conquest of Tyre and Sidon, chief cities of Lebanon; Zechariah, who lived 200 years after Isaiah, looked across two millenniums to another Lebanon. Zechariah sees a vision of another regathering of Israel: “I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and place shall not be found for them” (Zechariah 10:10). This same vision in wider perspective is seen also by Isaiah (Isaiah 11:11-13).

Now, the first return of the Jews took place 536 B.C. from Babylon after seventy years’ exile (under Nebuchadnezzar). The second return which both Isaiah and Zechariah predict took place, without a doubt, in 1948 when modern Israel was re-established as a nation. Connected with this second return in 1948, Isaiah sees a war of the new Israeli nation involving the territories occupied by the Philistines (Gaza), Syria (the east), Edom, Moab, Ammon (Jordan) and Egypt. This was serially fulfilled in the Six Day War of 1967 and

142

The Minor Prophets

the Yom Kippur War of 1973. But the latest War fought by Israel in the northern front was in Lebanon 1982-85. This was seen by Zechariah in Zechariah 11:1-6 “Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars. Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen; because the mighty are spoiled: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; for the forest of the vintage is come down. There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young lions; for the pride of Jordan is spoiled. Thus saith the LORD my God; Feed the flock of the slaughter; Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that sell them say, Blessed be the LORD; for I am rich: and their own shepherds pity them not. For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD: but, lo, I will deliver the men every one into his neighbour’s hand, and into the hand of his king: and they shall smite the land, and out of their hand I will not deliver them.”

Until the outbreak of Civil War in 1975, Lebanon was a prosperous country compared with her other Arab neighbours. Known as “Switzerland of the Middle East,” she was a favourite country of tourists. Beirut, with a modern seaport, had some of the most luxurious hotels. But the Civil War and Israel’s invasion has wrecked the cities and destroyed Lebanon’s previous prosperity. A centre of trade and banking, with over 70 banks for the Arab world, so that she was also called the “Zurich of the Middle East,” she is today reduced almost to shambles by 15 years of continuous bombing and bloodshed. Losses sustained in housing and trade amount to billions of US dollars.

If Isaiah had seen what has been fulfilled in the 1967 and 1973 Wars in the south, Zechariah confirms with a vision of war in the north. Following the return of Israel by sea through the Lebanese coast (Zechariah 10:10-12), the prophet is led in spirit to announce an open invasion of Lebanon (Zechariah 11:1-6). The high and mighty, the barons and tycoons, described as cedars and fir trees, are burned. The fire is the fire from guns and rockets. The war in Lebanon echoes across the Sea of Galilee to Bashan on the east.
