143

In verse 3 the howling of the shepherds refers to the Lebanese Government. It could do little to restrain the roaring young lions, the PLO fighters under Yasser Arafat. The country is in turmoil in the struggle between the Lebanese Government and the Palestinians. This resulted in the slaughter of refugees, who became a pawn in stronger hands, whoever they might be. For, apart from the PLO, there were the Druzes, Hizbollahs, Syrians and the Israeli Army. The whole land of Lebanon was a real mess.

In contrast with the anarchy mentioned above, there is Messiah the true Shepherd. The prophet then saw himself carrying out the duties of the Messiah in feeding the poor of the flock. He took two staves and named them, the first Beauty and the second, Bands. Beauty stands for Graciousness and Bands for Bonds. The first shows God’s restraint on the nations from destroying Israel. The second refers to the brotherly ties within Israel itself. With the coming of the Messiah Israel will be preserved from destroying nations while the brotherly bonds in Israel itself will be strengthened.

In one month the Shepherd found it necessary to cut off three undutiful undershepherds. This is a difficult verse to decipher. It is interpreted by some to refer to the three offices in the government of the people of Israel, viz: the office of prophet, priest and king (civil magistrate). Since there is no good government, the people are left to die of themselves in their sorry plight.

To symbolise the severing of certain relationships, the Messiah breaks His staff Beauty. This signals the breaking of covenant which God had made with all the peoples (not Israel). He had placed them under restraint, lest they hurt His own people. With the restraint removed, Titus, e.g., destroyed the Temple. Anticipating the fulfilling of this prediction, the prophet says the staff was broken “in that day.” Again it was the poor of the flock, the godly remnant, that suffered.

In order to test the gratitude of the people for the ministry of the Messiah, He asks the nation to give His wages. Instead of returning Him love and devotion, they gave Him 30 pieces of silver. According

144

The Minor Prophets

to Exodus 21:32 this was the worth of a gored slave. What an insult! The prophet is commanded to throw away the sum to the potter in the Lord’s house. This verse is quoted in Matthew 27:7-10 where the evangelist is recording Judas’ betrayal of Jesus and the cursed result of the betrayal. The difficulty here is that the prophecy was quoted as from Jeremiah, not Zechariah. The solution to this difficulty is probably this: This prophecy had been spoken (rather than written) by Jeremiah. Many years later, Zechariah could have adapted some of the language, handed down from Jeremiah by oral transmission (both men were priests) into his own prophecy concerning the value of the payment price” (The Defenders Study Bible).

Now the prophet acts out the final severing of relations with Israel. The staff Bands is cut asunder to show the separation of brotherhood between Israel and Judah. This was fulfilled in the siege of Jerusalem under Titus when internal strife was part of its downfall.

The Foolish Shepherd

Since the people rejected the Messiah they will have the Foolish Shepherd, such as Herod the Great and Ptolemy IV. The one finally to come is the Antichrist of Daniel 11:36-39, II Thessalonians 2:1-12 and Revelation 13:11-18.

The Foolish Shepherd is the Wicked One. He mistreats the sheep and will be punished. His power will be taken from him, and his intelligence to rule.
