Siege Of Jerusalem

From this chapter to the end of the Book we are introduced into one of the most remarkable prophecies on Israel and her destiny. “Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be saved out of it” (Jeremiah 30:7). The Lord God Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, is come to her rescue.

Though there will be gathered a multi-national army to fight Israel, particularly Jerusalem and Judah (which includes the West Bank), God will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling and burdensome stone against all who lay siege to it. The cup is a symbol of God’s wrath, and the burdenstone reminds of Jesus’ words, “Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner . . . And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder” (Matthew 21:42-44). Jesus is the righteous Judge sinners will have to reckon with.

In the present Peace-making between Israel and the Palestinians, the process is constantly shattered by Palestinian uprisings. Unless the Lord has been Israel’s Keeper, much greater damage could have been done. The power of God, ruling and overruling, will keep His own now and until the very end. The Lord may come in our lifetime. It is later than we think! Every Palestine intifada (uprising) is one more milestone on this troublous road to Armageddon.

146

The Minor Prophets

Nevertheless, a period of 3½ years of enforced peace under the World-Dictator will emerge (Daniel 9:27). This phoney peace will be broken in the middle of the last week of years, which will be followed by 3½ years of war. Then, when nuclear bombs and missiles will be hurled in a macabre grand finale, the Messiah must come to put down all rebellion.

During the last battle to take Jerusalem the enemy’s “horses” will be smitten with terror and with blindness. He will empower both Government and people of the Jews with strength to vanquish the invaders — like fire against wood and hay. In the process, the environs of Jerusalem, “the tents of Judah” will be saved first — by the Lord Himself. The Lord Himself will inspire the people of Jerusalem, even the weak and fearful, to astounding heights of courage like David, and the House of David will become like the angel of the Lord. God will destroy the nations allied together in their assault on Jerusalem.

In the welter of this final conflagration the Messiah will appear to the Jews who cry for His Help. As the pierced hands of Jesus are shown, the Jews, who all these centuries have rejected Him, will come to their senses. The blind now see what has been hidden from their eyes. Then will they mourn for their sin of rejecting the Messiah all through their history like mourning the death of their only son. This mourning will be as the mourning of Hadadrimmon (II Kings 5:18) in the valley of Esdraelon near the fortified city of Megiddo. This spot is famous in Israel’s past history (Judges 5:19) and will be the scene of the last battle according to Revelation 16:16, “And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon” (which means Hill of Slaughter). The mourning will be so severe that every family will keep apart between husbands and wives. This shows the depths of the Jews’ repentance, so much so that each soul would be alone with God during that hour, even between husbands and wives.
