Israel’s Repentance And

Climax Of Battle Of Armageddon

In this hour of mourning, the Jews who had rejected the crucified Saviour will gladly come for salvation and cleansing in that fountain filled with blood. William Cooper’s famous hymn, “There is a fountain filled with blood” is inspired by this very verse on forgiveness of sins to the repentant, Jew or Gentile.

The cleansing is immediately followed by the total destruction of remaining idols, the casting out of false prophets and mediums. The gift of prophecy will cease because the Messiah is come. Should any prophet arise to speak and he speaks of his own, it will be the duty of his next of kin, even father and mother, to stamp the evil out. All idolatry connected with Beast-worship or worship of the man of sin with the false prophet will be wiped out by the Living and True God (Revelation 13:10, 11-18). In the Old Testament the execution of false prophets was by stoning (Deuteronomy 13:6-10; 18:20). Here the guilty will be thrust through by a sharp weapon.

The false prophet, nevertheless, would carry on his cheating business no more openly, wearing a prophet’s rough garment, but disguised as a farmer. When it will be further asked, “What are these wounds in thine hands” (Hebrew: literally in between thine hands, i.e. on the upper body, on the chest), the answer the false prophet gives must refer to some disciplinary action taken by his parents. “Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends”

148

The Minor Prophets

cannot refer to Christ’s suffering, for He was not wounded in a house, but on the cross.

This refers rather to the false prophet himself, in counterfeit. While verse 6 refers to the false prophet, verse 7 refers definitely to our Lord. The words uttered here are spoken by the Lord of hosts. It is a prophecy on Jesus the Messiah, His shepherd, who will be under the sword, the power of the Roman government in judgment over Him. In contrast with the false prophet, the Messiah will be both Man and God. Being a fellow of God He is the second person of the Holy Trinity. Jesus applied “Smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered” to Himself (Matthew 26:31), but the scattering covers not only His immediate disciples but also Israel as a nation, in the light of the whole prophecy. Though the sheep be scattered, “I will turn my hand on the little ones.” The Lord will gather the remnants of Israel, an expression of His tender mercies on His chosen people.

“And it shall come to pass” suggests a great gap between verse 7 and verses 8, 9. Whereas the events of verse 7 refer to our Lord’s death, those in verses 8, 9 look forward to the Great Tribulation immediately prior to Christ’s Second Coming. Two-thirds of Israel will die in Antichrist’s attack on Israel, and only one-third will survive to go into the Millennial Kingdom. This is God’s purifying process which results in the survival of “the remnant,” the believing part. The remnant are those who will be saved because they will call on the Name of the Lord.
