Christ’s Return To Save Israel

And His Millennial Rule

This chapter describes in detail how the Messiah will come to save His own. The attack on Jerusalem cannot happen without His decretive will, hence it is said, “For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city” (verse 2).

In counter-attacking the enemy, the Lord Himself will descend from out of the blue. He will land on the Mount of Olives, as also predicted by the two Angels on Ascension Day, to Jesus’ disciples, “Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven” (Acts 1:11).

At the point of landing of the Saviour, an earthquake, God’s E-Bomb, will split the Mount of Olives, eastwards and westwards. A great valley now appears while the hill slides to the north and south. This valley is God’s provision for the remnants to escape through to Azal (probably on the eastern side of Jerusalem). The prophet compares this escape to an event also of an earthquake in the reign of King Uzziah, which event was mentioned by Amos, 200 years before Zechariah (Amos 1:1). In the intervening minutes of the remnant’s escape the Lord will descend with all his saints — to set up His Kingdom.

150

The Minor Prophets

In the confusion of war, with the discharge of guns and mortars and raining of bombs, the atmosphere will be so polluted that the light of day is shrouded as in twilight, or under a smog. This day will be a compound of day and night and known only to the Lord.

Suddenly living waters spring out of Jerusalem, which flows both to the Mediterranean Sea and the Dead Sea. This will be a perennial stream all the year round, summer and winter.

There is much talk in Israel today about bringing water from the Mediterranean to the Dead Sea by cleaving the earth, i.e. the construction of a canal. Here is an official discussion:

The water inflow to the Dead Sea has been reduced over the years by about 75 percent, because of various water diversion schemes carried out both in Israel and Jordan. This, combined with its high evaporation rate, has resulted in an extensive drying-out process, especially at the southern, shallow end of the Dead Sea. A response to this situation is the proposed Mediterranean/Dead Sea Canal. Plans call for a water conduit about 65 miles long, a pumping station and a hydroelectric power plant, powered by the 1,000 foot drop needed to reach the low level of the Dead Sea. Implementation of the project would have far-reaching effects: not only would the water level of the Dead Sea be maintained, but the project would open up opportunities for further development of the Negev and Dead Sea regions, as well as adding to Israel’s energy resources. (Facts About Israel, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Jerusalem, 1985)

Should this Mediterranean/Dead Sea Canal be constructed it might take Israel a decade to complete. With God, it is done in one minute by the Olivet Earthquake. For, as a result of the Quake we read in the following verse, “And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be” (Zechariah 14:8). While man’s A-Bomb or H(ell) Bomb is a deadly scorching fire, God’s E-Bomb releases an everlasting life-giving stream.
