151

The prophet Ezekiel sees living water coming out of Jerusalem more vividly in the day of Israel’s restoration as follows:

Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of the altar. Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side. And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters were to the ankles. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through; the waters were to the loins. Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over. And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river. Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other. Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed. And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh. And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it from Engedi even unto En-eglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many. But the miry places thereof and the marshes thereof shall not be healed; they shall be given to salt. And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed:

152

The Minor Prophets

it shall bring forth new fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine. (Ezekiel 47:1-12).

The description above of the life-giving stream cannot be the same as Revelation 22:1,2. It is a picture of Israel, not in heaven, but on earth. For Engedi, a favourite tourist spot today, is mentioned, and Eneglaim, another geographical location.

Food for thought: Will Israel build the Canal to bring in water from the Mediterranean? Or will water issue from Jerusalem to flow to both the Mediterranean and the Dead Sea, according to Zechariah’s and Ezekiel’s prophecies? We believe God’s Word shall prevail.

There is a symbolic meaning to the living waters coming forth from Jerusalem after the Messiah’s touchdown on earth. Here comes the Messiah to a sin-cursed earth, not only with healing in His wings (Malachi 4:2) but reviving from His life-giving streams.

When the Prince of Peace is come to earth, He will be King over all peoples.

During the Millennium all the land from six miles north of Jerusalem (Geba) to 35 miles southwest (Rimmon) will be a plain, but Jerusalem will be raised up. Thus the living streams will be able to flow throughout the land, eastwards and westwards. The inhabitants of Jerusalem will dwell safely, free from all destruction. No more war between nations, as given in Isaiah 2 and Micah 4.

In retrospect, those who fought against Jerusalem had been punished with a weird pestilence wherein “their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth” (verse 12). One economical way of defeating the enemy is to cause a great suspicion within the allied army, so that the different national contingents will fight one another and cancel one another. God used this tactic in the allied invasion of Judah under
