153

Jehosphaphat. The allied army of Ammon, Moab and Seir (Edom) suddenly fought among themselves. “For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another. And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness, they looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and none escaped” (II Chronicles 20:23,24). In the end, Judah got the upper hand, and instead of being plundered, “they gathered booty from the heathen—gold, and silver and apparel, in great abundance” (verse 14).

The plague that consumed away the flesh of the enemy troops in the battle of Armageddon that ended up in Jerusalem fell also on the “horse, mule, camel and ass,” beasts of war, even into their tents.

All the Gentile nations that came to attack Jerusalem being thoroughly vanquished, they will now submit to the Messiah’s rule. They will come annually to worship before the King, the Lord of hosts and keep the Feast of Tabernacles. The Feast of Tabernacles is one of the three big feasts, the others being Passover and Pentecost. The Feast of Tabernacles is the Feast of ingathering, joy, praise and thanksgiving. It was celebrated on the return of Israel from exile (Nehemiah 8:14-18). Every nation under the sun will be required to worship the Messiah in Jerusalem upon pain of no rain. As for Egypt, if she came not to worship and keep the Feast of Tabernacles, she will receive double — she shall be smitten also with a plague. The reason is Egypt has the Nile, so rain or no rain she can survive. Such a double punishment in Egypt will also extend to all nations that refuse to come up to keep the Feast of Tabernacles before the Lord.

“Holiness unto the Lord” will be the theme of life in the Millennium and there will be no more Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts. No more unholy person, indeed, under His rule.

154

The Minor Prophets

From Haggai we jump to Malachi because Malachi’s message is more akin to the other minor prophets we have studied thus far, while Zechariah stands out by itself by being an apocalyptic book with many visions on the last days of Israel.

Malachi is the last of the O.T. prophets. As Haggai and Zechariah exercised their ministry to Zerubbabel and Jeshua in the first return from exile, Malachi exercised his in the time of Nehemiah, the third return, particularly during Nehemiah’s absence from Jerusalem about 433 B.C. During this period, that is Nehemiah’s absence from Jerusalem, many things went wrong which are recorded in Nehemiah 13. These involved the sanctity of Temple worship, the offering of tithes, the keeping of the Sabbath and the mixed marriages between Jews and Gentiles.

Malachi means “My Messenger.” Nothing more is known of the prophet. But he was a strong and courageous man who spoke the truth without fear or favour. He plainly rebuked the people, even the priests, for their sins, calling a spade a spade.

Although the Temple was rebuilt a hundred years before, and a religious revival occurred under Ezra and Nehemiah (Nehemiah 10:28-39), the nation relapsed into their old ways of complacency and moral laxity. When Nehemiah returned from the Persian court to Jerusalem he saw “the dog return to their vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire” (II Peter 2:22). This incited both Governor (Nehemiah) and Prophet (Malachi) in a joint crusade against the culprits. Though the unrepentant argued back in a
