155

sevenfold “Wherein” (1:2,6,7; 2:17; 3:7,8,13), they could not escape the four charges levelled against them by the prophet.

According to Scroggie they are as follows:

I. Religious

The people were all astray through the degeneracy of the

priests. Hosea had said, ‘like people like priest’ (iv.9), but the order is here inverted to the utter shame of the Tribe of Levi. They called God their Father, but they did not honour Him; they said He was their Master, but they did not fear Him; on the contrary they went to the furthest extremes of profanity and sacrilege in their vaunted worship of Him. Polluted bread, blind, lame, and sick sacrifices, and grudging, greedy service, were what they brought Him. The prophet incisively says: ‘You would not dare to treat those who are over you in civil affairs as you are presuming to treat Jehovah your God; the very Gentiles, whom you despise, will be accepted before you.’ It is not enough that we worship, we must yield spiritual worship, for ‘God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth.’

II. Moral

Sorcery, adultery, perjury, fraud, and oppression (iii.5)

were rife at this time, and against these the Lord’s face is set; but the people had said, ‘Everyone that doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them’, and, ‘where is the God of judgment?’ the Prophet then tells them plainly that the God of judgment will come and cast them all into the refining pot, and make the fire to burn fiercely until the dross is separated; a process of intense pain, but it must so be. Religion is spiritual, but it is also intensely ethical, a fact too often disbelieved or neglected in our own day. God has regard to all our social and civic relations, and injustice, bribery, and oppression will most surely receive their fitting recompense.

III. Social

One of the greatest sources of sin and corruption in the

history of Israel had been their connection and compromises

156

The Minor Prophets

with the strangers around them. They had been separated from the nations and placed in the midst of them in order to be a witness to Jehovah the One God, in contradistinction to prevailing polytheism; and in order to remain pure it was necessary that they married only within their own nation, for the introduction of strange wives often meant the introduction of false worship (c.f. I Kings xi.1-13). Ezra and Nehemiah both had spoken and acted very severely in regard to this, but the people fell back again into this sin and Malachi lifted up his voice in pointed denunciation. They were divorcing their Hebrew wives and marrying foreigners, and the tears of the divorced covered the altar, so that the Lord would have no further regard for the offerings of these cruel husbands. How could the seed be holy if the stock was unholy; and how could family blessing and prosperity be expected so long as a man dealt treacherously with the wife of his youth? With these charges and challenges the prophet made the people face their sin.

IV. Material

The offerings which went to the maintenance of the

Levites had been stopped, and the tithes were not brought into the storehouse to the Lord, and poverty ensued. No doubt in many instances there was a literal observance of the precepts respecting the ‘tenth’, but the observance was perfunctory and grudging. The consequence was that, as in material things they dishonoured God, in material things they were made to suffer (ii.). When we become Christ’s our money becomes His also, and while we may yield a part to Him consistently, it is only to indicate that the whole is His, and at His disposal. The value of a gift to the Lord is determined by the spirit of the giver, and he values our offerings according to what it costs us to bring them.

Malachi’s indictment of the people was fourfold,

Religious, Moral, Social, and Material, covering the whole life; and the judgment was in the ratio of the neglect.
