11

Introduction

Hosea is first of the Minor Prophets, though chronologically he is preceded by Obadiah, Joel, Jonah and Amos. The Minor Prophets are so called not because they are of lesser importance than the Major Prophets (Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel). They are called Minor Prophets because their writings are shorter than those of the Major Prophets.

Jehovah is likened to a Father to the people of God in the O.T. More often he is called her husband to show the endearing relationship between the Lord and His chosen ones. In Isaiah 54:5,6 God returned to His estranged people (in spite of their sins):

For thy Maker is thine husband; the LORD of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called. For the LORD hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.

In the Book of Hosea we see not only the message of Jehovah being Israel’s constant loving husband preached, but acted out in flesh and blood. The prophet is commanded to marry an adulterous woman, Gomer by name. Three children were born to them. Would you not expect the wife to be faithfully committed to her husband henceforth? Sorry to say, No! She went on in her adulterous escapades as before. This is a picture of Israel who goes a-whoring after other gods, time and time again, oblivious of her Redeemer. Worshipping other gods and their idols is spiritual adultery.

12

The Minor Prophets

Because the love of God for His people is unchanging even as His holy character remains constant without fail, so Jehovah is willing to accept his erring ones back to His fold, when they repent. This message vividly acted out by the prophet and his family is in line with Isaiah, who declares, “Behold, I and the children whom the LORD hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion” (8:18).

Hosea prophesied after Amos to the Northern Kingdom about the time Isaiah and Micah ministered to the Southern Kingdom. From this tumultous sad life living with an adulterous wife he is called the broken-hearted prophet of the Northern Kingdom as Jeremiah is called the weeping prophet of the Southern Kingdom. While Hosea was a faithful husband even to an unfaithful wife, in Israel there were many religious leaders who were the reverse (Malachi 2:12-14). Every minister of God must take care how he lives, not to self and and sinful pleasure, but to God and to His glory.
