An Adulterous Wife And

Three Abandoned Children

To have a clearer idea of the times in which the prophet lived, refer to your charts of kings and prophets. Take note of King Jeroboam in verse 1. He is Jeroboam II, not the First.

The level of morality in Hosea’s days is no better than our day. In other words it is hard to guarantee any bride’s virginity on her wedding day in his time as it is in our time. Promiscuous and pre-marital sex has taken its toll. This is reflected in the days that follow. “Easy come, easy go.” In the western world one out of two marriages ends up in divorce. Singapore is catching up as our divorce rate rises from year to year.

In Hosea’s case, he is specifically told to marry an unchaste woman in order to act out God’s magnanimous saving plan. (A Christian minister whom I knew married a woman of ill-fame. He excused himself by hiding under Hosea’s case. Such argument is like a wicker basket that holds no water.) Gomer his wife bears him a son and God tells him to call him Jezreel. Jezreel! This was where wicked King Ahab had his palace built, but became the “killing fields” when his 70 sons were executed by Jehu whom God raised to punish Ahab. “So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he left him none remaining” (II Kings 10:11). Though Jehu did a good job, he had “overkilled.” In turn the house of Jehu would be judged.

14

The Minor Prophets

Now a second child, Lo-ruhamah a daughter was born, which means “No Mercy.” As Jezreel the “Killing Fields” is to be judged, so will the whole house of Israel be mercilessly dealt with. Judah the Southern Kingdom, nevertheless, will be spared.

Finally a third child, a son is born and he is called “Lo-ammi,” “Not My People.” Israel is to be cast off.

Inasmuch as God is the Father and Husband of His people the prophet is given a vision of the restoration of the divided kingdoms under one head. Jezreel, “Killing Fields” will be a changed place in the future, “for great shall be the day of “Jezreel” (1:11). This looks forward to the Millennium.
