Spiritual And Political Adultery

The unhappy domestic life of the prophet passes out of sight and Jehovah is now taking up the case against Israel, who like Hosea’s wife, has been unfaithful to Him. Like the adulterous wife going after her lovers who lavish their gifts on her, Israel has left her Lord for material gains. This is political adultery. Israel did not realise it was their God who gave them good seasons and fruitfulness, yea, even gains of silver and gold. Israel had forgotten what Moses told their fathers, “But thou shalt remember the LORD thy God: for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day” (Deuteronomy 8:18). Instead of returning a portion to the Lord they rather offered them to Baal. This is spiritual adultery.

Can we not learn a lesson from this? When a Christian is blessed by God with material wealth, instead of thanking his Lord and worshipping with greater fervency, he backslides instead. He begins rather to love the world, and when he loves the world the love of the Father is not in him (I John 2:15). He withholds his tithes which Malachi denounces as robbing God (Malachi 3:8).

To remedy this situation God must chastise us.

Baali is the heathen name for my Lord and Ishi is the Hebrew name for my husband. The name of God must be properly addressed. For example the Chinese call God the Heavenly Grandfather. Christians call God Heavenly Father.

16

The Minor Prophets

Verses 18-23 after chiding Israel for her lewdness looks forward to the day when idolatrous (adulterous) Israel will be totally cleansed and she will live in peace and plenty. God will call them “Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God.”

Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax given to cover her nakedness. And now will I discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of mine hand. I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts. And I will destroy her vines and her fig trees, whereof she hath said, These are my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them. And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burned incense to them, and she decked herself with her earrings and her jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith the LORD. Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. And I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope: and she shall sing there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt. And it shall be at that day, saith the LORD, that thou shalt call me Ishi; and shalt call me no more Baali.
