27

Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices (Proverbs 1:24-31).

She is now left to the mercy of her enemy. Since the death of Jeroboam II there has been a spate of assassination of king after king while their worship of idols in silver and gold went on unabated. But the calf of Samaria will cast them off and in turn it will be broken to pieces. The calf of Samaria is a false God. The law of Divine retribution is the punishment for sin being often a greater facility in sinning. Wind expresses what is empty and fruitless. Israel is swallowed up, a vessel devoted to vilest uses or smashed up as worthless.

Israel is like a wild ass known for its lust and seeks strange lovers to its own shame. As for the purity of religion Israel from the beginning had only one altar where the whole nation came together to worship. There was no alternate place of worship. But now she has multiplied altars. The worship of God was degraded into the sensuous — approaching Baal-worship. What they like to eat themselves they sacrifice. But these acts of will worship are not acceptable to God.

The proliferation of temples by Israel and the increase of fenced cities by Judah would end up in their destruction. Except the Lord build the house they labour in vain that build it (Psalm 127). The sign of old-age are upon him. He does not know his approaching death. Like a silly dove Israel while paying homage to the Assyrian power was also making alliance with Egypt the other super power. The result of this double-dealing was disaster from the hand of God.

I have written to him the great things of my law, but they were counted as a strange thing. They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat it; but the LORD accepteth them not; now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins: they shall return to Egypt. For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and buildeth temples; and Judah hath multiplied fenced cities: but I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof. (Hosea 8:12-16)

28

The Minor Prophets
