61

The Unconscionable Sin Of Betraying A Brother

And Exulting In His Downfall

(A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city: and their

contentions are like the bars of a castle. Proverbs 18:19)

Obadiah is the shortest Book in the Old Testament. It is written by one who wishes not to be known by other than that he is “Servant of the Lord.” Obadiah just means that. Such a spirit is like St. Paul’s, “For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake” (II Corinthians 4:5).

As little is known of the author so is the time and place of the writing of this prophecy. As a rule conservatives tend to date it early and critics date it late. We believe it to be an early date because it is placed early in the canon, after Amos, suggesting a pre-exilic origin.

The prophecy is about Edom’s destruction, though at the time of the prophetic utterance Edom was proud and secure. As for Judah, though the reverse was true and there was no love lost from his elder twin brother, the day would come when the tables would be turned.

The purpose of this prophecy is to pronounce God’s judgment upon Edom because of his unconscionable treatment of a blood relative against even the dictates of nature.

* * * * *

The prophet’s message to Edom comes in the form of a vision from the Lord. This is one method whereby God’s Word is made

62

The Minor Prophets

known to man. In the case of Joseph it was by dream. As to Moses it was from mouth to mouth (Numbers 12).

This prophecy is for the people comprising the descendants of Esau, Jacob’s twin brother. The enmity between the two brothers is traced to Genesis 27 in the stolen blessing. Throughout the centuries that followed, Jacob and Esau remained alienated, to say the least.

Edom having carved a kingdom for himself out of the rocks was proud of his impregnability. But God would bring down this pride. The present day ruins of Petra, the capital city, proves this. While thieves and robbers will take what they want, and grape gatherers will leave some behind, God’s judgment will be total.

Moreover Edom’s allies and friends will deceive him (in retribution) from God. Their wise men will be overtaken. The mighty will be dismayed. They will be destroyed. Teman was a city in Edom.

That Edom would be destroyed was due to his unnatural crime of violence to his twin brother. Edom treated Jacob the very opposite Jacob was commanded to treat Esau (Deuteronomy 23:7).

When Jacob was in trouble, instead of coming to his brother’s relief he stood rather on the enemy’s side. “Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard” (Proverbs 21:13). “Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: and he that is glad at calamities shall not be unpunished” (Proverbs 17:5). “Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth: Lest the Lord see it, and it displeaseth Him, and he turn away his wrath from him” (Proverbs 24:17,18).

The day of retribution would soon come. “As thou hast done, it shall be done to thee.”

The drinking here refers to the drinking of God’s wrath. The drinking of the heathen will be continually to the very last dregs of
