The Superscription (1:1)

Superscription means that which is written above or on the outside. By this superscription to the messages the prophet has verbally delivered, which he now puts to writing, Micah gives us a clear picture of his person, his ministry, and the times in which he lived.

Micah calls himself the Morasthite. That is, he comes from the town of Moresheth in the southwestern part of Judah near the border to the Philistine territory. It is also called Moresheth-gath to pinpoint its location as near to Gath, a Philistine city. Can you find it on the map? As Moresheth-gath is mentioned but once in the Bible, in Micah alone, it must be an insignificant place. But God is no respector of places, nor of persons. God can use you even if you come from the jungles of Borneo.

“In the days of Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, kings of Judah” circumscribes Micah’s ministry within the longer one of Isaiah, whose ministry preceded Micah’s by one king, viz., Uzziah.

We can be certain that he delivered his message in Samaria before the fall of this capital city of the Ten Northern Tribes of Israel, 722 B.C.

We are strengthened by Micah’s boldness to speak to the highest authorities in both Samaria and Jerusalem. If he a nobody from some country farm had courage, under God, to testify to governors and kings, to withstand the hierarchy of false priests and prophets, let us

76

The Minor Prophets

be strong in our witness even to the leaders of our nation. There is a ministry to the poor, the common people. There is also a ministry to the rich and the powerful. Before God they are the same, of a lost mankind.

This reminds us of the Divine Commission to the apostle Paul: “For he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles and kings, and the children of Israel. For 1 will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name’s sake” (Acts 9:15,16).

Our Lord had earlier warned the disciples: “And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.” (Matthew 10:18,22).

Message Of Doom To Samaria (1:2-8)

Though Micah belongs to the Southern Kingdom of Judah, he has a message from the Lord to Samaria, capital of the Northern Kingdom of Israel. He is so indignant at what is going on in Samaria that he calls to earth and heaven to witness against them. He calls upon the Lord God Himself who will pour out His pent-up wrath on a hypocritical nation. God will send, says the prophet, such terrible punishment as will leave the land utterly desolate. The description of the coming destruction is that of an earthquake, of a volcano and avalanche. (verse 4).

Why such a holocaust? Israel is judged for her sin of apostasy from her monotheistic faith. Instead of worshipping Jehovah, the living and true God, Samaria has become a den for all kinds of graven images and idols. The importation of Baalism into Samaria since Ahab’s reign has persisted like a cancerous growth to Micah’s day. Neither can Judah escape this indictment. So Jerusalem gets a side-jab from the prophet at this point as well.

Idolatry is spiritual harlotry (verse 7). Judgment on these idols is sure to come in the pending Assyrian invasion. These idols unable to
