77

save their worshippers, much less themselves, will be taken by the Assyrian king Sargon. He says, “Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?” (Isaiah 10:11). The destruction of Samaria is further described as a heap of ruins (verse 6), though Jerusalem was spared until 150 years later.

Today, we might not have idols in the Protestant Churches (though there are plenty in the Roman Catholic Church), yet we are exhorted to keep ourselves from idols (I John 5:21). Covetousness, says the Apostle Paul, is idolatry (Colossians 3:5). It also has an image, and it is the $ sign. A Church that looks to riches, and not the Lord God, commits idolatry.

In the light of the impending Assyrian invasion the prophet sees himself “stripped and naked”, like a mourning refugee or captive (of Isaiah 20:2-4), but will his warning be seriously taken by his hearers? “But, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish” (Luke 13:5).

So, “Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon” (Isaiah 55:7).

Message Of Doom To Jerusalem (1:9-16)

Having denounced Samaria in the strongest possible terms, Micah’s prophescope now swings over to Judah and its capital city Jerusalem. But the invasion of Judah described here does not coincide with the Assyrian. It is something yet future. It took place 150 years later under the sway of Nebuchadnezzar and the Babylonian hordes.

In this prophecy of a latter time, the prophet sees twelve Judean cities and townships in the vicinity of his home town, Moresheth, taken. A good number of these townships cannot be found on the map. Suffice us to identify the better known ones such as Gath and Lachish.

78

The Minor Prophets

“Declare it not at Gath, weep not at all” (verse 10) is lament after David’s mourning of King Saul (II Samuel 1:20), lest the Philistine enemies of Judah rejoice. As to Lachish, it is the most important of the cities enumerated. It was fortified by Rehoboam and was sought as a refuge by Amaziah from the conspiracy formed against him in Jerusalem. After the capture of its Holy City by Nebuchadnezzar, Lachish alone remained (with Azekah) of the defenced cities of Judah. It appears from its position as a border city to have been the channel for the introducing into the kingdom of Judah the idolatry set up by Jeroboam in Israel (Ellicott).

Now, on the names of each of these towns there is a word-play, for example, Aphrah (verse 10) rhymes with the Hebrew word aphar = dust. So to the people of Aphrah comes the prophet’s taunt to roll in the aphar (dust). Then for Achzib there is the Hebrew word achzab = deceptive. So the people of Achzib are denounced to be a lie to the kings of Israel. By way of local illustration, Singapore’s name was changed to Syonan during the Japanese occupation of World War II. As Singaporeans under the Japanese were restricted in their movements, we called Singapore a Bird Cage, since Syonan rhymes with Chiolang, which means Bird Cage in the Teochew dialect.

It is not necessary for us to go into the word-play in each name of the twelve towns. It is enough to know that such word-play is a form of effective rhetoric in the prophet’s message.

The concluding verse (16) sees Judah going finally into captivity, naked like the bald head of vultures.
