A Golden Age To Come After

The Babylonian Captivity

One characteristic of Old Testament prophecy is that the prophet, while lamenting over the evils of his day, would invariably look forward to that day when restoration should come to this sin-cursed earth. Of particular prominence are the glowing terms by which that Golden Age is described in Micah. Micah 4:1-3 = Isaiah 2:2-4 almost word for word. Micah’s description transcends even that in Isaiah with verse 4: “But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree: and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it”. This verse is reflective of the zenith of prosperity attained by Israel in the earlier part of Solomon’s reign, which was a foreshadowing of the Greater Solomon in His millennial rule. Observes New Bible Commentary: “This indicates that the final world order will not be any kind of socialist or Marxist state ownership of all property, but every man will remain undisturbed in the enjoyment of his own personal property” (p. 756).

Before the Golden Age comes, Israel must go through many sufferings, even into exile after exile, when the Lord will come to their rescue and be their King. Before the final regathering, however, Judah must be taken into captivity by the Babylonians (verse 10).

The prophet leaps forward into the distant future again where he sees many nations gathered against Mount Zion. God who is Israel’s secret defence will equip Israel with “iron horns” and “brass (bronze)

84

The Minor Prophets

hoofs” (verse 13), with such powerful offensive and defensive weapons that will repel their invaders. The many wars Israel has won against her enemies since her independence 1948 are progressive fulfilments of this divine guarantee.

In view of the fact that regathered Israel today is fast fulfilling the Messianic prophecies, do you not realise how momentous are the days in which we live? The coming of the Messiah, even our Saviour Jesus Christ, is so near that it may take place any day now. Are you ready to meet Him? What have you done for His Kingdom?
