By The Advent Of The King Of Kings

The prophet sees at the beginning of this chapter a national crisis in which the judge of Israel is smitten. Zedekiah the last Jewish king was thus humiliated by the Chaldeans (II Kings 24). Possibly verse 1 was fulfilled when Aristobulus the Jewish king was defeated by Pompey in 63 B.C.

In contrast with this vanquished king, a new Jewish Ruler is seen to arise from the little town of Bethlehem (ancient name, Ephrathah, c.f. Genesis 35:19; Ruth 1:1,2). This new ruler is no ordinary human being for His origin is from everlasting. Who is this other than Jesus the Babe of Bethlehem?

Since this Ruler is to save His own people, God will for the duration give up the Israelites for disciplinary judgments. The seed of the woman promised in Genesis 3:15 is to be born in travail (from the womb of the Virgin). (verse 3).

Christ will now defend His people against their enemies, Assyria being the representative in Micah’s time. And Christ will defend His people with seven shepherds and eight principal men who are the heroes of faith in sacred and Church history. As far as Church history is concerned, we must count from the apostles, and those who are raised in successive ages should surely include leaders like Athanasius, Augustine, Wycliffe, Luther, Calvin, Knox, etc.

86

The Minor Prophets

The end times appear in the remaining verses of this chapter. Assyria is symbolic of the area formerly held by the hostile world power. Nimrod was the first founder of Assyria.

The true believers of Israel will be a blessing to all mankind as refreshing showers upon the grass, as they disseminate the Gospel in that Day (verse 7).

The victory of Israel over the Gentile powers will not come from the arm of flesh. All their horses and chariots (armoured cars and tanks today) and fortifications will not count in their victory through the power of God (verses 8-11).

God’s people will also be cleansed from all idols and heresy. The climax is reached when the wrath of God will be rained down upon a rebellious world, such as the world had never seen before.
