Repentance Prerequisite To Restoration

(6:1 - 7:10)

This long section calling for repentance from their many sins is addressed both to Judah and Israel. While the mention of Omri and Ahab (6:16) had direct reference to Israel, nevertheless, through Athaliah the daughter Baalism was spread also to the Southern Kingdom.

The mountains and hills have witnessed God’s mercies upon His people from the days of the Exodus to the present. So they are called to testify as the prophet remonstrates with his generation. Their apostasy in yielding to the wiles of Balak and Balaam is one ancient sin mentioned here against them — idolatry and fornication.

Sacrifices costing much money and expense cannot take away sin without repentance. Interestingly verse 8 was chosen by Jimmy Carter at the time of his installation as President of the United States. And what is the use of giving to God on the one hand and cheating one’s neighbour on the other (verses 11,12)? Therefore God will smite the hypocrites with famine and heavy losses in their land cultivation (Malachi 3:8-10).

On behalf of true Israel, Micah further confesses her sins before God, while there is a mourning for fruitlessness in their productivity efforts.

Morality and integrity have so degenerated as to disappear from the scene. Crime and intrigue run rampant. Princes and judges are corrupt, and he who bribes well is covered up. The best specimen in

88

The Minor Prophets

the community is no better than a brier and a thorn hedge. The watchmen, i.e. the prophets, warn against their wickedness but in vain. No one can be trusted, not even one’s wife. In the family there is strife between the older and younger generations so that a man’s enemies are the men of his own house (7:6).

With this confession the prophet can look to God for salvation. Entrusting himself to God he can face his enemies and their ridicule.

The Restoration (7:11-20)

Micah’s preaching is herewith concluded with another glimpse of the end-times that lead to Christ’s millennial rule on earth.

In that day when the walls of God’s Kingdom will be built, its boundary will also be extended: decree in KJV is translated boundary in NIV. (c.f. Isaiah 54:1-3). God’s Kingdom on earth in Micah’s time will be extended far beyond the borders of Palestine. Her widely scattered exiles from sea to sea will return. Converts from all over the world will join with believing Israel.

There will be a terrible destruction of the earth because of the deeds of her inhabitants. After the destruction of the rebellious world powers the Shepherd will take charge of Israel, now converted. (Israel today is in deep trouble because she still rejects Christ). Israel will have full enjoyment of her land, the good land of Bashan and Gilead as in olden days, and not be shut up in Carmel.

God will perform miracles to save Israel as He did in Moses’s day. All the Gentile nations will be reduced to the dust before the manifestation of God’s mighty power.

Remembering his name Micah, the prophet exults, “Who is a God like unto thee?” Not so much in respect of power, but rather of mercy. So the prophet declares his confidence in His compassion. God will “cast all their sins into the depths of the sea” (7:19). God will do this because He is a covenant-keeping God, who has sworn to Abraham and Jacob. This is the gospel of the Kingdom, the everlasting gospel unto the end of days. Amen.
