89

The Book of Nahum must be read in conjunction with the Book of Jonah. Both deal with the ancient super-power of Assyria, whose capital city was Nineveh.

The Book of Jonah tells the story of how as a result of the prophet’s preaching, the Ninevites, from king to commoner, from man to beast, repented in sackcloth and ashes. “Yet in forty days Nineveh shall be overthrown” (Jonah 3:4) . . . “And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not” (verse 10). So Nineveh which would be destroyed like Sodom and Gomorrah, was spared.

As the way of all flesh is, Nineveh repented but not for long. Jonah (825-782 B.C.) prophesied to Nineveh in the heyday of Jeroboam II, king of Israel. Although there is no date given to the Book of Nahum, it is believed that a century or so after Jonah, God had to warn through the new prophet of total destruction without mercy coming to Nineveh in the next generation. A thousand years in God’s sight is but as yesterday. To predict some disaster coming in the next generation is equivalent to a couple of hours. The message of God must be received with utmost concern the moment He proclaims it.

The message of Nahum is ominous as it comes from nowhere. Some scholars think he originated from Capernaum. ‘Capernaum’ means the village of Nahum. Did he reside here? It is more likely he wrote and died abroad.

90

The Minor Prophets

His name shows he was a ‘Comforter,’ not to Nineveh, but to Judah, which for decades was harrassed by Assyrian kings before Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came on the scene.

As the theme of Nahum is Nineveh’s destruction it is well to study the background which justifies the judgment which is told by Graham Scroggie as follows:

Nineveh

The City

Nineveh lay on the eastern side of the Tigris, and was one

of the greatest—if not the greatest—of the cities of antiquity. It had 1,200 towers, each 200 feet high, and its wall was 100 feet high, and of such breadth that three chariots could drive on it abreast. It was 60 miles in circumference, and could, within its walls, grow corn enough for its population of 600,000. Xenophon says the basement of its wall was of polish stone, and its width 50 feet. In the city was a magnificent palace, with courts and walls covering more than 100 acres. The roofs were supported by beams of cedar, resting on columns of cypress, inlaid and strengthened by bands of sculptured silver and iron; its gates were guarded by huge lions and bulls sculptured in stone; its doors were of ebony and cypress encrusted with iron, silver, and ivory, and panelling the rooms were sculptured slabs of alabaster, and cylinders and bricks with cuneiform inscriptions. Hanging gardens were filled with rich plants and rare animals, and served with other temples and palaces, libraries and arsenals, to adorn and enrich the city; and all was built by the labour of foreign slaves.

Cruelty of the Assyrians

These people ruled with hideous tyranny and violence

from the Caucasus and the Caspian to the Persian Gulf, and from beyond the Tigris to Asia Minor and Egypt. The Assyrian kings literally tormented the world. They flung away the bodies of soldiers like so much clay; they made pyramids of human heads; they sacrificed holocausts of the sons and daughters of their enemies; they burned cities; they filled
