91

populous lands with death and devastation; they reddened broad deserts with carnage of warriors; they scattered whole countries with the corpses of their defenders as with chaff; they impaled ‘heaps of men’ on stakes, and strewed the mountains and choked the rivers with dead bones; they cut off the hands of kings, and nailed them on the walls, and left their bodies to rot with bears and dogs on the entrance gates of cities; they cut down warriors like weeds, or smote them like wild beasts in the forests, and covered pillars with the flayed skins of rival monarchs (Farrar): and these things they did without sentiment or compunction.

From these details we see that the city appeared

impregnable, and the people unconquerable, after having exercised power for some six to eight hundred years.

The Fate of the City and People

Read the Book of Nahum in the light of the foregoing

facts, and surely it will be felt that this utterance is not one of insensate vengeance, but of retributive justice. Just because God is God this had to be. The destruction of Nineveh, the defeat of the Assyrians, and the overthrow of the Empire were sudden and complete. Within half a century of the prophecy (in all likelihood) so completely did Nineveh perish that no trace was left of where it once was. Alexander the Great marched over its site, and did not know that a world-empire was buried under his feet, and nearer our own time (18th century) Niebuhr, the traveller, rode through Nineveh unknowingly. This was the first instance in the history of mankind of a Power so great perishing so instantly, and for ever.

Before this event, and since, cities have remained while

empires have passed away, as witness, Rome, Athens, Istanbul, Damascus, Alexandria, Venice, and other cities, but never before or since, has a city suddenly disappeared as Nineveh did.

‘The fiery empire of conquerors sank like a tropic sun. Its

wrath had burned, unassuaged, “from”, (in their own words)

92

The Minor Prophets

“the rising to the setting sun”. No gathering cloud had tempered its heat or allayed its violence. Just ere it set in those last hours of its course, it seemed as if in its meridian. Its blood-stained disc cast its last glowing rays on that field of carnage in Susiana; then, without a twilight, it sank beneath those stormy waves, so strangely raised, at once and for ever. All, at once, was night. It knew no morrow’. (Pusey)

Added to human conflict—which could not have had such

an issue—were the elements of water and fire.

‘The gates of the rivers are opened,

And the palace melts away’ (ii.6).

In 625 B.C. the Tigris had overflowed, and despairing of

the safety of the city, Assur-bani-pal ‘made an exceeding great pile in the palace, heaped up there all the gold and silver, and the royal apparel, and having shut up his concubines and eunuchs in the house formed in the midst of the pile, consumed himself and all the royalties with them all’ (Pusey). Nahum predicted that again fire would assail Nineveh, which it did twenty years later, in 606 B.C.

‘Fire shall devour you;

It shall devour you as the locust does’ (iii.13,15). Rawlinson says that ‘recent excavations have shown that

fire was a great instrument in the destruction of the Nineveh palaces. Calcined alabaster, masses of charred wood and charcoal, colossal statues split through with the heat, are met with in parts of the Ninevite mounds, and attest the veracity of the prophecy.’

The Great Lesson of the Book

Nahum has but one theme, and this is that kingdoms built

on the foundation of force and fraud shall certainly be destroyed; and that the Kingdom of God, reared on the foundation of truth and righteousness, is bound to triumph. Nineveh represented worldly power in antagonism to Yahweh, and so it had to perish. This is the theme which Nahum insists on with concentrated passion. ‘He strikes but one chord in the
