95

“The just shall live by faith” in the context of Habakkuk’s vision is the answer to his perplexity in 1:12-17. The Babylonians, because of their new found power over all other peoples, were puffed up in their own conceit: like the Germans and Japanese at the beginning of WWII. The way of Might is Right, though flourishing for a season, is the way to final destruction. This happened to the Assyrians who were subdued by the Babylonians, and after seventy years, history repeated itself when the Babylonians were conquered by the Medo-Persians, and so forth. On the other hand, the just and the righteous (who humbly trust in the Almighty) shall live by faith. Faith, truly, means “Forsaking All I Take Him. “The just shall live by faith” becomes the watchword of the 16th Century Reformation, and rings true to this day. It is the battle line between true Protestants and the Church of Rome, whose salvation dogma includes works, works, works. The Romanists anathematise those who go by faith alone. The ECT (Evangelicals and Catholics Together) Document of 1994 is therefore a complete repudiation of God speaking through his prophet Habakkuk, “The just shall live by his faith.” This verse Habakkuk 2:4 is, nevertheless, key to the whole book and is the central theme on salvation in all the Scriptures.

According to Hastings Dictionary of the Bible, the Book of Habakkuk may be divided into six sections, the first four containing two dialogues between Jehovah and the prophet, whilst the last two contain confident declarations springing from and expanding the Divine reply.

(1) 1:1-4. Habakkuk, compelled to live in the midst of violent

wrong-doing, contemns of religion manifesting itself in the

oppression of the righteous by the wicked, complains strongly of

the silence and indifference of God.

(2) 1:5-11. He receives an answer that a new and startling display of

the Divine justice is about to be made. The Chaldaeans, swift,

bitter, and terrible, are to sweep down and overwhelm the whole

world. No fortress can resist their onslaught. The incredibility of

this must lie, not in the fact that the Chaldaeans are the

96

The Minor Prophets

aggressors, but rather that Jerusalem, spared so long, is now to

share the fate of so many other cities.

(3) 1:12-17. Some time may now be supposed to elapse before the

next prophecy is spoken. During this period the prophet watches

the progress of the Chaldaeans, who have now (2:17) penetrated

into Palestine. His observation raises a new and insoluble

problem. This reckless, insolent, cruel, insatiable conqueror is

worse than those he has been appointed to chastise. How can a

holy God, so ready to punish the ‘wicked’ in Israel, permit one

who deserves far more the name of ‘wicked’ to rage unchecked?

Are wrong and violence to possess the earth for ever?

(4) 2:1-4. The prophet, retiring to his watch-tower, whence he looks

out over the world, to see it in ruins, receives an oracle which he

is bidden to write down on tablets for all to read. He is told that

the purpose of God is hastening to its fulfilment, and is

encouraged to wait for it. Then follows the famous sentence,

‘Behold, his soul is puffed up, it is not upright in him: but the

just shall live in his faithfulness.’ The meaning of this is plain.

Tyranny is self-destructive, and carries within itself the seeds of

doom. But while the evil-doer passes away, the just man,

steadfast in the face of all contradiction, shall live, and last out

the storm of judgment.

(5) 2:5-20. Content with this message, the prophet utters,

triumphantly, a five-fold series of woes against the pride, the

greed, the cruel building enterprises, the sensuality, the idolatry,

of the heathen power.

(6) Ch. 3. Finally, in a magnificent lyric (a triumphal song), which,

as its heading and close prove, has been adapted for use in the

Temple worship, the prophet sings the glorious redeeming acts of

God in the past history of the people, and in the certainty of His

immediate appearance, bringing hopeless ruin on the enemy,

declares his unwavering trust.
