110

The Minor Prophets

Historical Background Of The Post-Exilic

Prophets (Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi)

According to Jeremiah’s prophecy in Chapters 25 and 29 the Jewish POWs who were taken by Nebuchadnezzar to Babylon would return after 70 years. As there were three batches of captives led away during a 20-year siege, 606, 598 and 586 B.C., so there were three batches that returned: 536 (Zerubabbel), 458 (Ezra), 445 (Nehemiah).

Haggai and Zechariah were among the first to return to Jerusalem under Zerubbabel and Joshua the high priest. Malachi was the last to return under Nehemiah.

Not only was Jeremiah’s prophecy of the Jews’ return after 70 years fulfilled, there was also Isaiah’s prophecy on the rebuilding of Jerusalem by the decree of Persian king Cyrus. “Had there been no return from Babylon, Judah would have shared the fate of Israel, and have blended with the East; the Hebrew Scriptures would have been lost; many of them now possessed would never have been written” (Scroggie).

The First Return registered 50,000. We might call them the Pilgrim Fathers of the Jews. By Cyrus’ decree to return and rebuild their Temple, all those sacred vessels of silver and gold for temple service numbering over 5,000 were brought back to Jerusalem. The richer Jews and those born in Babylon during the captivity remained behind, like those living comfortably in America today, and were absorbed or dispersed elsewhere.

Historical Background Of The Post-exilic Prophets 111

By way of recapitulation, the leaders of the First Return in 536 B.C. were Zerubbabel the governor and Jeshua the high priest. Zerubbabel was of royal blood, a grandson of King Jehoiachin, grandson of good king Josiah. Zerubbabel means born in Babylon. Being the pioneer leader the difficulties he faced during his tenure of office were overwhelming.

Jerusalem was in ruins. Much of the land was usurped by Edomites. Israelites who intermarried with other races after the destruction of Samaria, the northern capital, became a mixed people called Samaritans. Such peoples were hostile to the Jewish returnees.

Being weaned of idolatry the Jewish returnees were zealous to revive the ancient worship by rebuilding of the Temple destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. Wisely they began by first erecting the Altar, where they could offer sacrifices to their God immediately. After one year, in 535 B.C., they laid the foundation of the Temple, amidst rejoicings mingled with wailings of the older Jews who were used to the splendour of Solomon’s Temple.

There is a Chinese Christian saying, “When God works, Satan also works.” No sooner were the foundations laid than opposition arose from every quarter. First it came disguised as condescending patronage. When the half-caste Samaritan’s offer of help was rejected because of their part-heathenism, they flared up in open opposition. Through their accusations before the Persian authorities the building of the Temple was halted for 15 years! The initial zeal of the Jewish returnees was dampened to say the least. Some even gave up the thought of rebuilding.

In order to revive the work on the Temple, God raised up two prophets, Haggai and Zechariah. From the text of Scripture we find that Haggai was the older prophet (Haggai 2:3) and Zechariah the younger (Zechariah 2:4). God is displeased when His House is unbuilt, sitting in the cold. “Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the LORD” (Haggai 1:8).

112

The Minor Prophets

You will notice from Chart 103 of Scroggie’s The Unfolding Drama of Redemption that Haggai’s revival ministry to the returnees lasted only four months. This shows his messages were very effective for it did not take too long to get the people moving. There were four messages he preached recorded in his book. These may be outlined as follows:

I. A Word of Rebuke (1:1-11).

II. A Word of Encouragement (2:1-9).

III. A Word of Blessing (2:10-19).

IV. A Word of Confirmation (2:20-23).

I. A Word Of Rebuke (1:1-11)

The troubles that have come upon the returnees were manifestation of God’s displeasure on them. Why? Because while the people built themselves luxurious homes, the Temple of God was barely begun. God would be pleased with them and bless them when they would start building again. The message was well received by the returnees who responded to build in 24 days (verses 12-15).

II. A Word Of Encouragement (2:1-9)

Before long, the people got discouraged again, as is the way of all flesh. To encourage the returnees Haggai assured them God would supply all their needs, “The silver is mine and the gold is mine.” Moreover the Lord was with them. Though the Temple they were
