113

rebuilding could not compare with Solomon’s, God would see to it that a greater Temple, even the Millennial Temple, should rise out of great catastrophe before “the desire of all nations shall come.” By these words the people’s resolve to build was strengthened.

III. A Word Of Blessing (2:10-19)

By putting two questions to the people so as to elicit their answers and teach them a lesson, the prophet showed why the work of their hands was fruitless because they were unclean, and because they obeyed not their God. Nevertheless (if they would repent) the Lord should turn their curse into blessing.

IV. A Word Of Confirmation (2:20-23)

The prophet sees a great shaking of the Gentile powers to come. As for Zerubbabel His appointed servant to rebuild His House, he would be confirmed in his appointment. He was God’s signet, for “I have chosen thee, saith the Lord of hosts’ (verse 23). What a comfort to every servant on whom God has set His seal.

CHART 103

THEMINISTRIESOFHAGGAIANDZECHARIAH

B.C. 520-518

B.C. 520 B.C. 519 B.C. 518

MONTHS MONTH

Silence

6th 7th 8th 9th 11th 9th

1 2

Haggai Haggai Haggai

Zechariah Zechariah Zechariah

i. 2-11 ii. 1-9 i. 1-6 ii. 10-19 i. 7- vii-viii

ii. 20-23 vi. 15

114

The Minor Prophets

Introduction

Zechariah means, “the Lord remembers.” He, together with Haggai, and Malachi, are post-exilic prophets.

Born in Babylon of a priestly family, he was among the first contingent of 50,000 returnees, sent under the decree of Cyrus, Emperor of Persia to Jerusalem to rebuild the Temple. His colleague, an older man, was Haggai. Zechariah was both a priest and prophet, like Jeremiah and Ezekiel.

Zechariah began to prophesy two months after Haggai (Haggai 1:1; Zechariah 1:1). This was in 520 B.C. His ministry, like that of Haggai was to encourage the returnees to rebuild the Temple. Zechariah’s ministry, however, extended far beyond that of Haggai. And his prophetic horizon was far wider than that of the rest of the Minor Prophets. He had much more to say about the Messiah and His work.

Since Zechariah is a post-exilic prophet the promises of future glory cannot refer to the return from Babylon. As his book contains a good number of visions, it is called an apocalypse. It is sometimes referred to as the Revelation of the Old Testament.

The Book can be divided into two large sections. (I) Chapters 1-8, (II) Chapters 9-14.

In Section I we have a series of eight visions with the Prophet’s contemporaries particularly in view.
