Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

Acknowledgments

The welcoming invitation of women who had confidence in asking me to share my experiences and viewpoints with them has made this book possible. Elder Marvin J. Ashton, chairman of the board of Deseret Book, kindly inquired, "When are we going to have a book from you?" Editors and staff of Deseret Book, Eleanor Knowles and Sheri Dew, Kent Ware and Emily Watts, opened the door further with their design and editing skills.

Relief Society study guides, especially those cultural refinement lessons on personal virtues, reinforced ideas taught in my home—look for the best in the world around you, seek the finer things of life. Shirley W. Thomas, formerly a counselor in the Relief Society general presidency, nurtured and encouraged my thinking, without regard to cost in time or effort to herself. My son Bill has been a sounding board for my ideas through the years.

Carol L. Clark, presently Relief Society administrative assistant and longtime friend, with a genius for probing meanings of words and applying scriptures to present-day needs, has helped me clarify my expression and bring new insights to classic topics. Helen Pehrson has provided untiring service in typing manuscripts and keeping the president's office running smoothly. Mary Gifford in the Church Historical Department continues cheerfully and efficiently to research sources and provide background information. Board member Cherry Silver has competently selected, arranged, and given first editing to these chapters.

About this Book

One of the greatest challenges of the Church in our day is the diversity of its members. Worldwide expansion and rapid growth, coupled with the complexities of modern society, can generate misunderstandings and misperceptions. More than ever, we need to work at seeing eye to eye and communicating heart to heart.

Elaine L. Jack, general president of the Relief Society of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, rejoices in the diversity of women while at the same time acknowledging their feelings of unity. In Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart, she invites readers to perceive others as the Savior would. Her discussions of such Christlike qualities as hope, gratitude, charity, and joy help point the way to the unified sisterhood that is an expressed goal of Relief Society.

"What we as human beings do within our spheres of influence are generally small things. . . . But the sum of such small things creates powerful results," writes Sister Jack. "Our gestures of kindness to each other, our pledge to live good lives, our efforts to make our homes solid and nurturing—all these contribute to the unfolding of God's eternal plan." She encourages women everywhere to contribute in their own unique ways, thus enriching the world and creating bonds of love that transcend cultural harriers.

In Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart, Elaine Jack combines a sweeping vision of women's possibilities with a warm, personal view of women as individuals. The resulting perception makes it clear how, even in a church that covers the earth, we can come to see eye to eye and understand each other heart to heart.

About the Author

Elaine Low Jack was born in Cardston, Alberta, Canada. Growing up half a block from the temple, surrounded by aunts, uncles, cousins, and grandparents, besides her own immediate family, she had opportunities early in life to develop a strong sense of values. After two years of schooling at the University of Utah, she married Joseph E. Jack in 1948. They are the parents of four sons.
