Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 2

Charity

I suppose that when the Relief Society general president talks about charity, an image of a woman carrying a loaf of homemade bread to a neighbor comes to mind. You may even have thought of two visiting teachers bringing a casserole to a new mother, or visualized women serving in the welfare canneries of the Church. These are stereotypes I don't mind at all because they are images of women giving.

But I want to expand your view of Relief Society and your definition of charity. Charity is all those acts of service, but it is more. It is a condition of the heart.

I hope you won't think of charity as guilt-imposing "musts," but as the quality correctly defined in the scripture as the pure love of Christ—something personally validating and glorious and peaceful and joyful too. It is all of those things to me.

Charity is one quality worth developing because it endures always. "But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with [her]." (Moroni 7:47.)

Charity is a critical quality—an essential, bedrock part of our lives. But how we develop and exercise it varies as much as each life does from another.

In February 1991 I was in Australia and visited with several sisters in their homes. One sister in Sydney, Marilyn Jones, proudly showed us a picture of her handicapped son, age sixteen, and told us how hard she had worked for eight years to get a neighborhood recreation facility for her son and other children with handicaps. She had to get zoning changes, private funding, volunteers, play equipment, and government grants, but she finally was successful. When we arrived she had just returned from the facility, where she is now employed a few hours a week. She said, "I think I liked it even better when I wasn't paid."

I marvelled at her persistence. She had looked at her life and figured out what she could do. I thought of Moroni 7:45, "Charity suffereth long, and is kind." There is much more about charity in this scripture, but that phrase struck me. I'd like to share some of my thoughts about it.

Have you ever wondered what it means to say "charity suffereth long"? It doesn't mean that charity is a painful process. To "suffer" in this context means to wait patiently, to tolerate, to hold out, to allow. Charity is patient; it doesn't give up on others. However, I do not equate "long-suffering" or "patient" charity with submissiveness to others or lack of energy. Just the opposite—charity is energetically persistent in reaching its goals. It is submissive only to the Spirit of the Lord.

Sometimes the most important thing we do for others is to suffer long in their behalf. An English teacher helps a fourteen-year-old boy through Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet"; a father takes on the Boy Scout troop; a woman serves as president of a Primary of 250 children; a grandmother helps her grandson learn to ride a bike; an employer teaches a new staff member in the midst of the busiest season of the year. In these and hundreds of such cases we have opportunity to "suffer long."

This is the suffering that works understanding. It reminds us that others have been patient with us, that the process of individual growth means we take turns suffering long and being suffered for.

Charity is also kind. That word kind suggests the simple actions, the tender way of speaking, the gentle touch—all of those effective ways of influencing others, which we can do as a habit every day when we have developed the charitable way of thinking.

Think about the little things that can bring joy to people's lives. My sister is one who does such things for me. When I'm crunched she'll look for a blouse, or leave some soup and bread at the back door when I've been away, or entertain at her house when we have guests. Those little actions become big blessings.

So are the words we say. At risk of sounding unrealistic and Pollyannaish, I think we can always find something kind to say if we try. Joseph Smith taught: "Nothing is so much calculated to lead people to forsake sin as to take them by the hand, and watch over them with tenderness. When persons manifest the least kindness and love to me, O what power it has over my mind." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976], p. 240.)

When my sons were sixteen years old they were a challenge to me. Mary Ellen Edmunds shared an idea that might have helped me through that trying time. She suggested that parents could try complimenting their adolescents honestly like this: "Son, you breathe really well. I like the way that you breathe, in and out, in and out, so regularly and nice." In most cases, we can find something honestly kind to say. Charity really is the sum of all these small acts of kindness.

Perhaps one of the most renowned givers of charity, Mother Teresa in India, has said, "We wait impatiently for the paradise where God is, but we have it in our power to be in paradise with Him, right now; being happy with Him means:

To love as He loves, To help as He helps, To give as He gives, To serve as He serves." (Love, A Fruit Always in Season, Dorothy S. Hunt, ed. [San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1987], p. 110.)

We have our own Mother Teresas who translate that concept into real life. There is no publicity when you share, week by week, the same blessings of kindness in your own way. I have a dear friend in my neighborhood who brings me flowers every week of the spring and summer—as long as there is anything in bloom. She leaves them on the front porch or at the back door, and sometimes I get a cheerful note or an interesting excerpt from her journal with them. I took inside the first daffodils and tulips of spring, and left the big tub of magnolias and apricot blossoms on the porch so the neighbors could enjoy them also.

Another friend, Sharon, wondered what she could do to comfort a neighbor whose son had been killed in a motorcycle accident. The neighbor was not an active church member and Sharon was anxious to help but didn't know what to do. She offered a prayer that she could bring some solace, and went without anything in her hands. In her visit she felt impressed to bear her testimony of the Atonement and the opportunity to live with a loving Heavenly Father. That assurance was just what the neighbor needed. She said, "I have prayed to know where my son was. Nobody has ever told me. That's what I needed to hear."

Being kind is nothing more than reaching out with gentleness and understanding. How desperately that is needed in this brash, coarse, insensitive world! Kindness suggests offering help without demanding something in return, being able to sense others' needs.

Modern Latter-day Saint women remind me of exemplary women from the scriptures. I think, for example, of Rebekah, the wife of Isaac and mother of Jacob and Esau. Rebekah's great experience started because she was charitable when she met a stranger and his caravan at the well.

Rebekah was kind to the servant of Abraham. Without knowing him, she politely drew water for the thirsty traveler and also for his camels. She led him to her brother's house and, when she introduced him, discovered that he was the servant of her uncle. Rebekah learned that he was on an epoch-making errand to find a wife for his master's son Isaac. Her drawing of water was the sign prompted by God. What a happy reunion and rich reward followed for her, because of an act of kindness.

This story tells us something about our own acts of charity. The chance to serve came while Rebekah was at work watering livestock, a normal task for a young woman of her country. She observed a need. Respectfully, she offered an act of service—and a new world of relationships opened.

We too will find opportunities for charitable service all around us in the course of our days' activities. We need to be observant of needs. And we will find that our acts of kindness open wonderful friendships.

One of the greatest examples of charity I know was shown by some Latter-day Saints in Choteau, Montana, who rallied to help my young friend Robin after a disastrous car accident in which her sister and nephew were killed. She was seriously injured herself, and on arrival at the hospital in their town she asked for an LDS bishop to give her a blessing. After the branch learned of her condition there wasn't a moment when a Relief Society sister wasn't sitting with Robin, ready to give comfort and help. The whole branch came to see her off at the medical evacuation flight, brought a corsage, and sent her cards after she returned to Calgary. Six months later, Robin and her new husband stopped in Choteau on their honeymoon to go to church and thank those Saints. I think charity is most effective when it springs from within, naturally and cheerfully. That is why we talk about developing and exercising charity.

Lynanne wrote a letter from Denver to my counselor Chieko Okazaki describing her charitable career:

Currently I am tutoring a little girl in reading twice a week. . . . She is in the second grade and was held back once. She can barely read on a first-grade level independently. So I felt compelled to help. Her mother is a single mom who runs a day-care business in order to be at the crossroads for her family the best she can. I do get paid . . . slowly. But that's okay. I only hope I can help the little girl. When she goes off track for the summer I am going to meet with her everyday because I think she needs daily help. (Letter to Chieko Okazaki, May 10, 1990.)

Our service varies according to the seasons of our lives. At each age there are different strengths and opportunities. We can't do everything all the time, but if our hearts are right we don't need to feel guilty. My daughter-in-law Jill, age twenty-six, served as a counselor in Relief Society with a president age seventy-eight. Jill encouraged taking casseroles to new mothers because she could see that need. The older president was alert to the challenges of illness and living alone. All viewpoints are useful.

We find many excuses not to reach out to others. Most of us are occupied with our personal responsibilities. We are afraid we may interfere in others' lives. It's sometimes more comfortable right where we are—far away from the suffering. Yet when we act, rewards come to us and to others. Sometimes we may reach out physically to do. Other times we can be most charitable if we don't. For example, refusing to make or join in speculative, critical, or irresponsible public comments is a great act of charity.

I hope that we will catch the vision that, although Christ's teachings are not always convenient to fulfill, the blessings of charity allow us to really know joy. The Lord loves women. He is mindful of each one of us. He simply asks us to do what we can and do it lovingly. This is confirmed in Revelation 2:19: "I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to be more than the first." To me this scripture says that we add to our works the personal qualities of charity, service, faith, and patience. We do what we can. Then our works will be more enduring; they will be an evidence of our pure love of Christ.
