Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 3

Sharing the Joy

As most Latter-day Saints do, I always conclude my prayers "in the name of Jesus Christ," but often I conclude them "in the name of our Savior, Jesus Christ." When I say these words I visualize Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane, seated beside a large rock, hands folded before him, pleading with the Father. The scriptures describe it like this:

"And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and kneeled down, and prayed,

"Saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.

"And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.

"And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." (Luke 22:41-44.)

Joy in the Savior

The word Savior and the thought of the Atonement stir such feelings of gratitude and awe that I can hardly express them, but whenever we sing "I Stand All Amazed," it rekindles those feelings. I love that hymn but am so touched by the words that I can hardly sing it for tears:

That he should extend his great love unto such as I, Sufficient to own, to redeem, and to justify. Oh, it is wonderful that he should care for me Enough to die for me! Oh, it is wonderful, wonderful to me! (Hymns, no. 193.)

Shortly before Jesus was crucified he met with his disciples. He didn't have a long time to be with them. Some of his final words to them were:

"And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you.

"And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

"Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full." (John 16:22-24.)

How can our joy be full? Joy comes from what we receive when we ask the Father in the name of Jesus Christ. Our joy may be full as we accept the Savior and his teachings, as we pattern our lives after his example. We cannot do this by merely reading the scriptures about him. We must actually experience the situations he encountered, react in the way he did: by not judging, by loving the sinner, by serving when it is not convenient. Our Relief Society motto "Charity Never Faileth," encompasses this kind of action. We give charitable, Christlike service because we have accepted his teachings.

The people of Alma in the Book of Mosiah understood the joy that comes through accepting the Savior. In fact, they jumped for joy at what they received. Alma had gathered a group of people together and was about to baptize them. He carefully explained the covenant they were about to make, wanting to be sure they understood:

"And now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light;

"Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life—

"Now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you?

"And now when the people had heard these words, they clapped their hands for joy, and exclaimed: This is the desire of our hearts." (Mosiah 18:8-11.)

If you have had any experience with missionary work you can imagine Alma's joy at having been able to share with this group that which had brought him so much happiness and peace.

One of my favorite books of scripture is Third Nephi. I think of the glorious experience of having the Savior descend after the crucifixion in Jerusalem, saying to the multitude, "I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world." (3 Nephi 11:10.) I try to comprehend the words that evoked verses fifteen through twenty-one in the seventeenth chapter. When Jesus realized that the multitude could not bring themselves to leave him, he was filled with compassion, and he blessed the sick and afflicted, gathered the little children around him, and prayed to the Father. These verses give a glimpse of what he might have said, and the joy of it.

Joy in This World

Do you think it is possible to be truly joyful and happy in the world we live in? Is it possible to enjoy life amidst all the confusion, war, sadness, and corruption? When was the last time you "jumped for joy"?

Joy is the easiest of emotions to experience when everything is going right. But there are also hard times in life. This is an imperfect and frequently tragic world. Some of its wretchedness sooner or later is bound to break on our emotional shores. We get discouraged and feel depressed. In these times we need God's help to be joyful, positive, and constructive.

I was interested in the title of a book that was published a few years ago about the city of Calcutta, India. This city has an almost overwhelming collection of human misery. Millions live in horrendous slums. Countless thousands eke out a wretched existence on a few square feet of sidewalk. For so many who live in this city, life must be unspeakably dreadful. Yet the book is titled City of Joy. You see, amidst all that is so horrible and miserable, there is an extraordinary amount of love, sharing, helping, and giving among those people. Individually, the situation might be hopeless. But many have found ways to gather together and help each other. They don't deceive themselves about the misery—but they also don't magnify difficulties. In facing facts, they make the most of what they have. And they are happy! In so many ways it is a city of joy.

Let me share some things in my life that bring me joy.

Some years ago I was friends with an elderly woman who was not only a talented performer on the piano but also a piano teacher. I met her when I was her visiting teacher in New York City. Back in Utah, she came to see me nearly every week and would teach me when I had time for lessons. I will ever be grateful to her for the way she expanded my mind and increased my appreciation and understanding of more-than-ordinary classical music. She died in 1986 but daily continues to share great joy with me through the fine music that I wouldn't have known but for her—and because she willed me her grand piano.

In our family February 5, 1991, was a "D-day." That was the day one of our sons got the results of his CPA exams: "Don't call me, I'll call you" day. He passed! Another son graduated from medical school a few years ago. What a joy that was! It was all the greater because of the traumatic application process he had gone through for two years. When he didn't get accepted the first year, Dave did not permit himself to be discouraged. He took more and more classes and worked nights at the post office. Twice he was on the alternate list at two medical schools. The day his acceptance arrived almost rivaled the thrill of graduation. Since he earned his medical degree, I realize an even greater joy when I see him leaving family parties without complaining and treating his patients at all hours with compassion, sensitivity, and great skill.

Regardless of whether an achievement in my family is grand or small, it still gives me a warm inside joy. One Saturday afternoon I got an exciting telephone call from my grandson Robert in Massachusetts. "Gramma, I just called to tell you that my Pinewood Derby car won in all the regions today. I came in first in the pack, and then second in the district, and then today I won the fastest out of 250 cars in the region." That was a big "share the joy" day.

In early March 1991 I was in Tahiti—a joyful visit among wonderful people. Two things about that trip stand out. One was seeing luxuriant, verdant growth and prolific blossoms everywhere, and the other was hiking in the rain up a muddy path to a tropical waterfall hundreds of feet high, supporting a huge philodendron leaf over my head for an umbrella. I find great fulfillment in the beauties of nature—fulfillment that is both physical and spiritual. The beauties of nature are some of the most compelling reasons for my belief in God, the creator of the earth and all that is in it.

When our son Gordon graduated from the University of Utah in accounting, he began looking for a full-time job. He was married, his wife was pregnant, and both had been working part-time. That situation obviously needed to change. He had been diligent in searching for work. On his last two interviews, he was told he was being considered, but no firm offer came. We knew it was time for a family fast and special blessing. About a month later he telephoned, "Can I borrow $150?" He had been invited to come to San Francisco for a job interview. It was successful. Someone asked how the firm knew to call him. Gordon answered, "They didn't. But I was sending letters and resumes to every feasible company in the yellow pages. The day my letter arrived, an employee resigned. Until that moment they didn't even know they needed a new accountant." Certainly the Lord responded to our prayers. That brought spiritual joy.

Many years ago my mother came to Boston where we were living to have an operation on her heart—a very new procedure at that time. The risks were high; the doctors explained the options and told her she had a 50 percent chance of survival. Her doctor was amazed when mother stated confidently that she was willing to take that risk. She was willing because of the priesthood blessing she had received before leaving her home in Canada, which stated: "Whether your recovery be instantaneous or over a period of time, it is a miracle." We had mother with us for seventeen years longer than we would have without the surgery. I was blessed not only to be close to my dear mother longer but also to be assured once again that the Lord hears and answers the prayers of his loving children.

I am also touched by the philosophy of a respected friend, Donna Lee Bowen, who says, "All the things that really matter, that determine who we are—spirituality, access to the Lord through prayer, humility, obedience, patience, and so on—are traits that are largely invisible to the outsider. It is very difficult to discern their presence unless you reach out to a person in love, and then you see them."

My first counselor, Chieko Okazaki, tells of an experience she had as a little girl in Hawaii, years before she joined the Church. Someone in their little village put together a Christmas pageant and assigned her to be an angel, and her line was: "Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy." (Luke 2:10.) She was a Buddhist at the time and it was years before that little girl came to know what those good tidings of great joy meant to her personally. Do you know what they mean to you personally? The message is to all of us and each of us: "Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy!"

I know there have been and are and will be times when we mourn and struggle, but we have reason to be joyful—to rejoice, to enjoy, to "jump for joy." I know God lives. What comfort and joy this sweet sentence gives!
