Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 4

Gratitude

A few years ago, one of my friends who has built a cabin up Ogden Canyon was working there chopping wood. Something prompted her to go into the kitchen, where she found the heater in flames. Instinctively she picked up the heater and threw it out the door, saving the cabin. In the process one hand, which had partially shielded her head, and much of her face were severely burned.

When I called to express my sorrow at the accident, she was not bemoaning her fate. She was full of gratitude. Although she had been in a great deal of pain, she said, "It could have been so much worse. I was really blessed. I look like a prize fighter, but I was afraid I'd lost my dogs, and they were safe." In this painful and sobering experience, she was contemplating her blessings, not her losses.

President Ezra Taft Benson gave this counsel: "We need to be more grateful. I think there is no true character without gratitude. It is one of the marks of a real strong character to have a feeling of thanksgiving and gratitude for blessings. We need more of that spirit in our homes, in our daily association, in the Church, everywhere." (God, Family, Country [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974], p. 202.) These are the words of a prophet, as important as if Moses or Jeremiah or Samuel or Alma had said them. In fact, Alma did convey a similar message in these words: " [Ask] for whatsoever things ye stand in need, both spiritual and temporal; always returning thanks unto God for whatsoever things ye do receive." (Alma 7:23.)

I believe there is a definite link between gratitude and spirituality. To begin to feel gratitude, we first have to recognize and be aware of the blessings around us. Those who are unaware of their blessings miss the opportunity of rejoicing in the goodness of God, the richness of life, and the diversity of others. It is difficult for such people to reach out to bless others. I believe that personal peace and increased humility often follow our expressions and feelings of gratitude.

I remember one beautiful, sunny October afternoon when I had gone home early. I was setting the table in the dining room, anticipating a gathering of my family, which is always a joyful occasion to me. The red maple tree outside the window was vividly framed against a larger tree with yellow leaves tinged in green. There was a softening autumn haze in the air, and flowers were still blooming on the balcony. I thought of the words of Edna St. Vincent Millay: "O world, I cannot hold thee close enough!"

It is not difficult to give thanks for that which is good and beautiful, if we take time to notice. But what about nature when Hurricane Hugo wreaks devastation or the San Francisco earthquake destroys homes? How can we be thankful for wars or big-time operators who prey on the finances of others?

Many are familiar with the story of The Hiding Place, a book written about two Dutch women who were imprisoned during World War II for harboring Jewish refugees. Corrie and Betsie lived by the precepts of Christ and found comfort in reading the Bible. Their prison barracks were dimly lighted, dirty, foul-smelling, crowded, and constantly patrolled by Nazi guards. Worst of all, they were plagued by fleas. But as soon as the sisters arrived, Betsie found cause to give thanks to God. First she rejoiced that she and Corrie were together. Next she praised God that no inspectors had taken away their Bible. Then she found good in the crowding because many more women would hear the word of God as they read it. But when she went on to express thanks for the fleas, her sister Corrie impatiently interrupted. That was too much. Betsie urged patience, citing Paul's counsel to the Thessalonians: "Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you." (1 Thessalonians 5:16-18.) In giving thanks for everything, they acknowledged that even unpleasant circumstances could be a gift from God.

And so it proved to be. The fleas discouraged inspections, which in turn protected them from having their Bible confiscated. They were able to hold worship meetings and share Christ's message with their fellow prisoners. In expressing their gratitude for all things, they learned how much the Savior loved them and how mindful he was of their welfare. (Corrie ten Boom with John and Elizabeth Sherril [New York: Bantam Books, 1971], pp. 197-99.)

I suggest a mental exercise, following the example of Betsie and Corrie. Think of three things you are thankful for. Then think about three things you are definitely not thankful for. Give thanks daily for those three negative things as well as for the positive ones. I tried this experiment. I'm not thankful for my husband's annoying habit of chewing ice. Then again, I am thankful it's not candy. I'm thankful he has teeth in good condition. I'm thankful we have ice.

Why do this? God can use our changed attitudes to change facts. If we are unaware of his blessings, we miss the opportunity of rejoicing in the goodness of God, the richness of life, and the diversity of others.

There are many ways of expressing thanks. Perhaps each person does it in a little different way. Consider the synonyms for gratitude used by women and men in the scriptures.

Mary, the mother of Christ, pronounced a beautiful psalm of praise: "My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour." (Luke 1:46-47.) The verb rejoice is found frequently in the minutes of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo as counselors Elizabeth Whitney and Sarah Cleveland and others expressed their good feelings at uniting together in charitable works and sisterly association.

Nephi's thanks for the Redeemer rings changes on the verb delighteth. It is a happy word, speaking from his inner being:

"Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ. . . .

"And also my soul delighteth in the covenants of the Lord which he hath made to our fathers; yea, my soul delighteth in his grace, and in his justice, and power, and mercy in the great and eternal plan of deliverance from death.

"And my soul delighteth in proving unto my people that save Christ should come all men must perish." (2 Nephi 11:4-6.)

Hallelujah is a Hebrew word meaning "praise ye the Lord." It has been used as a shout of thanksgiving. Perhaps we should make our first words of the day and our last each night some such word of gratitude.

In my family we say, "Aren't we blessed!" to express our intensely thankful feelings. This was true the time we came home from a drive to find that the windows had been closed during a rainstorm. We use it on those occasions when the family is all together, especially for a holiday. And our son Gordy exclaimed it when his eighteen-month-old baby had finally slept through the night every night for two weeks.

When I read Alma's counsel to ask "for whatsoever things ye stand in need, both spiritual and temporal; always returning thanks unto God for whatsoever things ye do receive" (Alma 7:23), I sometimes wonder about my needs. I seem to have no problem defining my temporal needs, but I feel that I can keep my temporal needs and wants in bounds only as I define my spiritual needs. They are somehow harder to focus on. I need patience, discipline, humility, more sacrifice. I need to remember, as the saying goes, that "we are not human beings having a spiritual experience; we are spiritual beings having a human experience."

We are literally sons and daughters of a Heavenly Father who loves us, and I love him. I believe we each have divine qualities that we have to work to develop. The Spirit of the Lord can bear witness of what we must do to develop these spiritual qualities.

There is a definite link between gratitude and spirituality.

—When we are aware of our blessings, we can reach out to bless others.

—When we rejoice in the goodness of God, we find opportunity to rejoice in the richness of life and the diversity of others.

—When we express our gratitude, we feel increased humility and personal peace.

As the Lord said to Joseph Smith and the Saints in Missouri, "My friends, fear not, let your hearts be comforted; yea, rejoice evermore, and in everything give thanks." (D&C 98:1.)
