Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 5

Building Love

In August of 1990, I was in California for the blessing of our eighth grandchild. Three of our four children with their families were there, and being together with them made me realize that love was my favorite subject. It is the thing that I enjoy talking about the most, and the loving relationships that I have with my family and friends are some of my greatest blessings.

I was blessed to grow up in a small community with grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins all living close by. The activities of the whole town were based on the standards and programs of the Church. From these people I learned early on about the love of the Lord and the love of others.

I learned that love meant spending time together, laughing together, supporting each other, and helping each other in our work. That meant that I was trained early in life how to do laundry, how to mend, and how to clean house by a mother whose standards of cleanliness were very high. I was often sent down the street to help my grandparents with a task or errand. They were special friends and wonderful role models, immediately at hand.

We all enjoyed family get-togethers, especially in the summer and at Christmastime. These involved music and eating and lots of reminiscing.

Even more important than the recreation together, the love of the Lord and of the gospel of Jesus Christ pervaded all family living. In the covenants of the Church is a binding power that draws us into the circle of God's love—as individuals and as families.

As I look at the troubles in the world, I am convinced that they all stem from lack of genuine love for one another. When love is displaced by greed, hatred, or desire for power, people suffer. We begin to solve problems by building love in our own intimate circle, in our families.

What is a family? In a society where traditional families headed by father and mother with children at home are almost a minority, we need to enlarge our definition of family to include single people, couples alone, single-parent families (both male and female), blended families, part-member families, divorced families, families with foster children, grandmothers raising grandchildren, and sometimes extended families living together.

In all of these families there are joys and there are stresses. How do we learn about healthy family relationships? Where does the support come from? In my growing up near many relatives, it was aunts and uncles and grandparents who provided the role models. Relatives supported each other when new babies came, or the workload was particularly heavy. We were involved in each other's family processes. As President Gordon B. Hinckley has wisely counseled, "We need each other—sisters, husbands, sons, daughters. We need parents, brothers and grandparents. We are woven together in a tapestry of love, tears, laughter, frustration and joy." (Regional Representatives Seminar, April 1, 1988.)

For those of us without extended family members nearby, these relationship blessings must be provided by others. Brothers and sisters in the Church can sustain us. Relief Society can strengthen families, every kind of family. It must.

As Norma B. Ashton suggests, "The young mother who feels that the days of diapers and dishes will never end, the single woman trying to find her niche, the middle-aged woman with wrinkles and arthritis starting to appear, and the older woman who wonders where she fits in, all need to ask, 'What does this situation require of me?' Then we can choose a course of action and pray for strength and faith to find the joy promised to us wherever we find ourselves on the path of life." (Women of Wisdom and Knowledge, ed. Marie Cornwall and Susan Howe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990], p. 22.)

Let me share three ideas that will help us build love for one another in our homes:

We had a full schedule, gathering together school books and homework papers and lunch money before the school bus came in the morning for two of them. Then I turned my attention to the preschoolers, pushing Doug and Marianne in the tire swing and letting them play with neighborhood children. Doug went off for half-day school, and I put Marianne down for a nap. With the return of the school bus came a demand for snacks—in fact, I think I prepared fifteen snacks each day plus treats for after supper. We ended the evening unitedly working on a solve-the-mystery book and laughing over each other's antics on a video. There was joy in that association, but I was reminded that serving a family requires ingenuity and endurance. It is not the easiest or the simplest or the least demanding way to live, but it is a most rewarding way.

Early in our marriage Joe and I decided that family was our first priority and that we would demonstrate this by making our time together meaningful and pleasant. Working together as a family is important to me, even though sometimes that brings stressful moments (for example, when we were encouraging our sons to finish their assigned yard work or their newspaper deliveries).

As a family we took up hobbies, not realizing that they would be such bonds of family togetherness as they have turned out to be. Our idea of the world's greatest family vacation has always been to go skiing or golfing together. Earlier years included backpacking and a shared enjoyment of wilderness areas. Now that we have a new generation of Jacks coming along, naturally they are learning the same sports that we have come to love so much.

When we've played together we have learned about each other. We have enjoyed each other's company and have shared family jokes. We have developed healthy competition and good relationships. I have seen our sons each learn golfing and skiing from their father, and I have seen them pass him up although he is still in competition because he is steady. After nine holes the constant cry is "What's the score?" The scorekeeper says, "Dad's one up on strokes and you're two up on holes."

Things of the world, business concerns, friends, and other pressures can pull family members apart, but if we find things that we can enjoy together and in which everyone can participate, even though each has an individual life, we can form lasting bonds. My husband has made time for his sons, who know that they are every bit as important as his profession. The work ethic of many men demands full time for career, sometimes at the expense of family. But an awareness of the importance of family life on the part of both mother and father can build love in a way that nothing else can.

I take regular early-morning walks with a good friend. We have been neighbors for many years and walking companions many mornings in the spring, summer, and fall—and even in the winter when it is not too icy. During these many years of walking we have had great talks about our growing families and now mature and married children and grandchildren. We don't consciously decide to talk about the gospel, but I realize that our conversations are based on the desire we have to serve the Lord and to help our children live the gospel. It has been wonderful for me to have someone I could talk to about my feelings for the Church and the questions that I have in my own attempts to progress.

There were years when several women from our ward congregated at 7:00 A.M. on the corner to walk together. In fact, the mailman labeled us "The hiking honeys of Holladay." One summer my neighbor Joye wanted to join us but she had a new baby and couldn't. One day she telephoned me and said, "On your walk tomorrow stop by my mailbox." When we did, we found a note written on a piece of lined school paper. It was her "gospel lesson from the mailbox." Usually a scripture with a question or a bit of wisdom to ponder, this discussion topic led us daily to share our insights and to encourage and enlighten each other. At the end of the summer, we compiled these notes into a booklet called "Notes from the Mailbox" by Joye Billings.

I wish I could say that my family had wonderful success in morning scripture reading. We haven't done it consistently, but there were a couple of years when we were pretty faithful and we completed the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. I have to admit we didn't have stimulating, sparkling discussions on the meanings of the scriptures in the early morning with our young boys, but we did do the reading together, and it oriented us as a family to receiving guidance and direction from the scriptures.

Many people view "Dear Abby" as a source of wisdom, and if you operate your life according to her advice, you can't go too far wrong—according to public opinion. But even though Abigail Van Buren is a woman of great common sense and even compassion, her advice column is not a source of celestial counsel. There is a difference between measuring behavior by today's standards of decency and using the measure of eternal truth. We learn eternal truths by learning more about the gospel every day.

A few years ago I realized that as much as I loved such children's books as Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day and There's a Monster in My Closet, there was something more enlightening I could do for my grandchildren, even though they were far away. So I purchased some tapes and recorded stories from the Bible to send to them. In such ways I can reinforce with my grandchildren how important the gospel is to me.

I find that as my husband and I talk daily about individual scriptures or concepts in lessons, it draws us closer together. Sometimes I miss the things he reads and emphasizes, so from listening to him, I gain new insight. He is especially good at using the study guides and background information to enrich our scripture reading.

I enjoy my grown sons and their wives with whom I can also share the gospel. I watched one daughter-in-law, who had graduated from Brigham Young University, expand her perspective as she moved to North Carolina. She was entering a world of discovery. At first she talked about the strange ways of the South; then that feeling evolved to "I feel sorry for people who have never lived any place but Utah." I saw her listen to different points of view and exercise wisdom and tolerance toward others. When she moved to New York she was instrumental in organizing a playground volunteer system for the apartment building in which she lived. Watching Judean reach out so personally and so energetically to others has taught me a great deal about important gospel principles of love and service.

My friend Carol Clark opens each of her prayers with the words, "Heavenly Father, we love thee." She has learned the value of expressing her love for God at every opportunity.

An elderly friend who was a stroke victim lost his facility of speech. He is having to relearn the facial and vocal motions necessary to produce sounds. During this tedious process, he wrote in his notebook, "I need to speak to tell everyone how much they mean to me." That is a lesson for all of us. Often as I look out my kitchen window at the beautiful mountains, the colorful trees that I see there, I tell the Lord how grateful I am for the eyes he has given me, for my love of his beauties, for my knowledge of the gospel, and for my membership in his church.

To summarize—these have been my suggestions for increasing love:

In the last few years Church leaders have dedicated several new temples. Any event of this character calls for personal rededication. So said President Spencer W. Kimball and his counselors, writing to priesthood leaders before the dedication of the Jordan River Temple. They urged stake presidents and bishops to call upon all members to prepare their hearts and minds for this historic event: "Use this occasion as an opportunity to cleanse their lives of anything displeasing to the Lord, eliminating from their hearts any ill feelings and feelings of envy or enmity and seeking forgiveness for anything that is amiss in their lives." (First Presidency Letter, September 28, 1981.) These barriers to love must be overcome.

If the troubles in the world stem from lack of genuine love for one another, the simple yet profound commandments given by the Savior are the answer. The greatest commandments deal with relationships: "Love one another, as I have loved you." (John 15:12.) Our loving interaction with others—with family, friends, business associates—will heal the world. Such interactions call for more understanding among us and increased ability to communicate. We all can strive to improve our sensitivity in relationships. Love begins in families, families in all their dimensions. The bottom line is that we care about each other and are willing to show it.
