Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 7

Strengthening Families

When you hear the word family, what do you picture? What does a family look like? How does it feel?

I'll tell you what family looks like to me. To me family means the people I love the best, the ones who can cause me the greatest concern, the ones who bring me the greatest joys, the ones I laugh the most with, pray the most about, miss the most when they're gone. Family is a tremendous source of happiness to me.

You will note that I did not say that family relationships are always easy or pleasant or satisfying. It's hard work to create a good marriage, to raise children and make a home. But in that process of creating a family, some of the most extraordinary events of life can occur.

In the world of each of our homes, our families have the most remarkable capacity to bring us joy, humor, spiritual insights, work, and more types of challenges than we could enumerate. I enjoy reading family cartoons in the newspaper. In a recent one the mom walks into the living room saying, "What is it now?" Her daughter complains, "Ditto is telling Trixie a secret and he won't tell me." Mom's response: "No more whispering and no more teasing, OK?" Ditto says, "OK, does that mean we can go back to screaming and fighting?" Families are like that, aren't they? Sometimes as parents we think the choices are obvious; our family members remind us there are many ways to look at the world.

Perhaps this is why our Heavenly Father made such a point of identifying us as part of his family. Have you ever considered how many times the men and women in the scriptures are identified in terms of their place in the Lord's family? Or how many times we are likewise named as sons and daughters of God? Let me share a few examples.

Our Heavenly Father said to Moses, "Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty . . . and, behold, thou art my son." (Moses 1:3-4.)

Matthew began his account of our Lord's ministry by calling it "the book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham." (Matthew 1:1.) It was critical to place the Savior in terms of his earthly father's lineage before Matthew could share the account of the Savior's heavenly lineage.

President Spencer W. Kimball said, "The family is the basic unit of the kingdom of God on earth. The Church can be no healthier than its families. No government can long endure without strong families." (Ensign, May 1978, p. 45.) This prophetic statement deserves our closest attention, for it is true. I often think of President Kimball's words in personal terms: My ward is no stronger than my family. My neighborhood is no stronger than my family. Our son served a mission in Taiwan and often quotes Confucius's saying: "Strengthen oneself; build the family; govern the nation; peace under all the heavens." To me this means if we control ourselves and build our families, the nation will be governed, the world will be ordered, and all under the heavens will be peaceful.

President Kimball also told us over a decade ago that "the time will come when only those who believe deeply and actively in the family will be able to preserve their families in the midst of the gathering evil around us." (Ensign, November 1980, p. 4.) I admire my friend Lois, who told her adult children: "Our speaker in sacrament meeting suggested that each of us should develop a passion for something righteous. You, my children, are my passion. I am passionately interested in your welfare, spiritual and temporal, and I will continue to passionately pray and work for your welfare." Imagine the effect such a statement had on those children, now raising families of their own.

President Ezra Taft Benson has given us equally potent counsel about families. He said: "If we continue with present trends, we can expect to have more emotionally disturbed young people, more divorce, more depression, and more suicide. The family is the most effective place to instill lasting values in its members. Where family life is strong and based on principles and practices of the gospel of Jesus Christ, these problems do not as readily appear." (Ensign, November 1982, p. 59.)

I believe this counsel from our prophets. I also know that many sisters bear the burden of family members who have turned away from the gospel or turned on each other or turned hearts inside out because of their actions or inaction. I hope they will understand what I share in the loving spirit with which I intend to convey it. I speak from my heart when I say we must revere and honor the family, even when our family members bring us pain. No family is perfect, because no person is perfect. And the source of steadiness is always the Lord, who loves us all, no matter what our circumstance.

No matter what goes on in our families, we should remember that family relationships are powerful. They can grow into mighty fortresses, bringing us great strength in times of personal conflict. I'd like to share ten ways to help our families grow in the strength of the Lord.

As a mother introduces me to her family, I can tell something about their relationship. Very often that same mother will speak lovingly of her family when we're alone together. I know that a good mother has the Spirit of the Lord with her. I know because the "fruit of the Spirit is love." It is also "joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Galatians 5:22-23.)

When those things occur in your home, point out to your family that such wonderful feelings are the fruit of the Spirit. Sometimes when children are touched by the Spirit, they may not know what they are feeling. Don't let those moments pass without gratitude and comment. When a child feels the joy of accomplishment, or you have a peaceful Sabbath, or an older sister is longsuffering with a younger one who just destroyed her new nail polish, that's the fruit of the Spirit. Invite it. Then acknowledge it in prayers, in blessings, and at other times.

I like that idea of counseling together as a family. "Where no counsel is, the people fall" (Proverbs 11:14), states the scripture. Isaiah reminded us, "Take counsel together." (Isaiah 8:10.) I think family councils are important for three reasons:

—They give each family member opportunity to participate with an equal voice. If you vote about a vacation spot, the three-year-old's vote has the same weight as the sixteen-year-old's.

—Each family member becomes responsible for the decisions and feels part of the process of making them.

—Each family member feels part of a family entity and acknowledges family relationships as being important.

A family council is effective in many types of families. These councils work for families with father, mother, and children at home. But they work equally well for family members who no longer live together, for a single parent and children, or for roommates. They work because they are based upon mutual respect, good communication, and the desire to develop meaningful relationships. Since we are sons and daughters of our Heavenly Father, we need to invite him to participate in our deliberations too, by praying together before and after these meetings.

Joe and I referred to the family council portion of our weekly home evening as "family business." It has always been a favorite part of home evening. Everyone was so anxious to get to family business that it was hard sometimes to concentrate on the lesson. I loved having each family member unfold his plans and needs for the week. We used to talk about who would get the car when, what kinds of food the boys wanted me to buy, and on and on. It was a weekly highlight for us all.

I still rely on my son Bill as one of my best sounding boards. When I am working on a talk or some other major project, I often call him and talk it through with him. This pattern of reliance on his good judgment began in our family councils many years ago. Bill lives across the country now, but because of the relationship we built, in part through family councils, we communicate very effectively with a fax machine and a telephone. Bill blesses my life in many ways, especially as we continue to counsel together.

A family I know well consists of a widowed mother and two grown children. They tell me their best humor comes when they kneel together in preparation for their nightly prayer. They circle a huge, overstuffed Queen Anne chair which they call the prayer chair. Kneeling there together, they often begin to tell funny stories about what has happened during the day. Pretty soon they're laughing and carrying on. This custom brings the day to a positive close and prepares them to thank the Lord and seek his blessing through prayer. They go to bed with lightened hearts and a happier perspective.

My counselor Chieko Okazaki plays the ukulele and tells us regularly to "Lighten up!" It's very good advice.

I grew up with lots of family reunions, and they remain one of my favorite events of the year. One summer I asked my grandson James, who was twelve, to keep our journal of the reunion. It was his job to see that everyone participated in writing something for our family record. I cannot claim that the journal worked too well, but at least James knows that keeping a record matters to me.

A sacred family tradition is the giving of blessings on important occasions. Joe is never more eloquent than when he gives one of the family members a father's blessing. Before our oldest son, Dave, left for Saudi Arabia to serve with the Desert Storm troops, he asked Joe for a blessing. Dave then gave a blessing to his wife, Gayle, and to their daughter, Charlotte. These blessings were sustaining for all of us.

If you wonder if you have any family traditions, ask your family sometime. You may be surprised what traditions they remember from the times you have all been together.

I believe that one major reason many people get themselves in trouble is that they do not know who they are. They don't stand for anything. I suggest you consider setting some standards that identify your family. Family mottos are one way to create a sense of identity. Another is to create a family crest. That's what we have done. Our crest has representations of the blending of the American and Canadian cultures. These two emblems join to portray our Scottish heritage. The treble clef symbol depicts our common love of music and harmony within the family. Wheat reminds us of the law of the harvest and of the fertile plains of southern Alberta, Canada. The temple reminds us we are a covenant family, eternally linked together.

The importance of the sense of identity shown in our family crest does not lessen over time. In fact, I've learned that I am drawn to my roots now more than ever. I have reached the age where I understand Erma Bombeck's story about putting on a sweater and watching her mother's arm come out the sleeve. My niece who just lost her mother a year ago wrote to me, "I still think about my Mom and miss her every day. Especially now that I see myself doing so many of the things she did in her young married life. I'm even starting to say things to Hailey that she said to me. Now I just hope I can be the kind of mother she was." My family identity truly affects me and all I do.

I think of a schoolteacher who made the effort to find us while we were on a family vacation to Disneyland. She had just learned of a scholarship she thought our son would have a good chance of getting. The application was due while we were gone, so she went to the effort of finding us. How grateful we all were for her efforts.

My friend Doral visited one day when our youngest son was about fourteen years old. He wasn't happy with anything or anyone and I felt very frustrated about his attitude. Doral said, "Just love him." It was exactly what I needed to hear. Carol Clark was an interested "big sister" who helped my two youngest sons get through high school English.

As a parent and grandparent, I feel very blessed that so many good people have helped my family. My grandparents lived two houses away from me while I was growing up. I live two thousand miles away from my grandchildren. Who will help them? I grandmother the Jensen children next door, and I am grateful for those in Massachusetts who take an interest in my grandchildren.

A friend talks about her father's idea of work. There was one way to do a job—his. And that meant to do it well. And there was one best use for holidays: family work parties. She recalls painting the house on Labor Day for many years. (Her father relished Labor Day because they could observe it so literally.) Everyone would have an assigned area to paint, and Dad would come around to comment on the work. If the painters didn't measure up to his expectation he told them, and then showed them how to do it properly.

Behind their dad's back, the brothers and sisters vowed they would never subject their children to such tough work, especially on holidays. Now, married and parents themselves, every one of them works on holidays and to the exacting standard they learned from their father.

There is more than one kind of work. President Benson has told us, "Every family has problems and challenges. But successful families try to work together toward solutions instead of resorting to criticism and contention." (Ensign, May 1984, p. 6.) Working through problems and working on relationships can be demanding for all of us. But this work is a lot more important than painting the house. Relationships are the essence of this life, after all. The gospel of Jesus Christ is based on laws governing our relationships with the Lord and with each other. We must never subordinate our work on relationships to other kinds of work.

I play lots of games with my grandchildren now when I have a chance. I have to admit that playing five straight games of Candyland is a bit tedious, but I never weary of that relaxed, fun time with my family.

Joe prays with great meaning, and I think our boys learned a lot about the power of the priesthood they bear from listening to their father pray and give blessings over the years. I have a strong testimony of the blessing of fasting and praying together as a family. It works.

Learning together does not always involve parents teaching children. When I typed my sons' high school and college papers, I learned many things. Bill's paper on holography and Dave's on the Bible provided two of my best moments of learning.

We used to take short family trips to local places like Golden Spike Monument and ghost towns in Utah. These were wonderful mini-adventures and great learning experiences as well.

Throughout this chapter I have written a lot about my family because it's the one I know best. My family isn't perfect. I have only told you the good parts—and as I remember them. Let me share with you a son's version: "She experimented with paying us to memorize worthy literary quotations, tried to instill responsibility and growth with job charts, and, with Dad, struggled to have regular family home evenings. Each attempt succeeded to a degree, but I don't remember many parts of my childhood which would qualify for the perfect parenting examples found in the back of the Ensign magazine."

Be that as it may, the principles discussed are sound. As you go over these ten points, you can adapt them to your own family circumstances. We can be—and must be—united in bringing comfort, love, and peace to each person and hence to each family. My vision of Relief Society is a glorious one, for the Lord has given us the opportunity and the means of becoming a force for good greater than any before seen among women in the history of the world. Let us joyfully engage in the work of strengthening families.
