Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 10

Building Bridges

In a recent Life magazine article, author Roger Rosenblatt wrote, "So many problems of national consequence roll through the country these days, begging for a forum, a stage, a someplace where we might spread them before us and talk them through. But either the someplace does not exist, or we have no interest in looking, content or discontent to let thoughts on the most painful, complicated problems of our lives go unexpressed." ("Can We Talk?," Life, August 1991, p. 18.)

In my roles as wife, mother, grandmother, church worker, and community volunteer I see Mr. Rosenblatt's lament lived out much too often. I fear he is right that too many people are too busy or frightened or self-interested to talk things through. I believe that if people would get together and talk with each other in a spirit of mutual respect and caring, most problems in this world could be solved.

The nineteenth-century German poet Goethe said that the things that matter most should not be at the mercy of things that matter least. I imagine that most of us agree with that thought, but it's harder in the living than in the saying. One of the things that matters most is building bridges, that is, creating opportunities where loving discussion can take place between family members, co-workers, fellow volunteers, and others in our arena of life.

Aileen Clyde, a good friend and counselor, talks about her husband Hal's explanation of building a bridge. He says it's really the art of getting it in your head where to put the legs and then being sure both ends meet in the middle. The bridging that takes place in good communication is like that too—it requires some real sharing and thought and risking.

The first step in building a bridge of communication involves knowing ourselves and being willing to risk saying what we really feel. Only when we recognize our true present feelings are we able to learn and grow in our views.

The second step is entering into discussions where our thinking and feelings may be challenged. Superficial chat is much safer and easier—and lonely, because we are listening only to the surfaces of life. When we refuse to participate in and partake of real discussions, we abdicate responsibility for becoming informed. To reach out to other human beings, we need to listen to others and be willing to form different opinions. We need to assimilate new information, weigh it against what we already know, and decide what to keep. This is the process of education—the ongoing education that enhances life.

After planting these footings, we are ready to build the part of the bridge that links one person to another. We are ready to try to understand others' feelings and beliefs, without passing negative judgments. When my friend Anne traveled to Ireland to meet her son at the end of his mission, she visited a Relief Society homemaking meeting and was surprised, even dismayed, to find a group of women engrossed in watching a video of "The Little Mermaid." She quickly judged that these women did not comprehend the purpose of homemaking meetings. The president explained, "We don't always do this. Sometimes we go bowling." Still inwardly critical, it took Anne some time to reflect that for these sisters, living long distances from each other in a politically unstable community with few luxuries in their homes and little pocket money, coming together in sisterhood to relax in a rare hour of entertainment fostered the renewal they craved. Relief Society was meeting their needs. This homemaking activity was worth the effort.

If you have ever built a new house, you know that the structure has to settle. There are creaks and groans sometimes as a house settles in. Relationships are like that—sometimes as we build true understanding, we feel a few aches.

In August of 1991 I traveled in Africa, where I learned much from listening and observing. The first black stake Relief Society president in Nigeria responded to a letter from the Relief Society general offices, "Your letter arrived and lit a candle of joy in our minds. We are mothering the first stake in Nigeria."

In our hemisphere we don't carry babies on our backs, as they do in Nigeria. While I don't understand everything about being a woman in Africa, I can understand a lot about mothering. And I can apply her image to reaching out to others with care and concern.

There are eight hundred languages spoken on the continent of Africa. How would you communicate in that environment? Economically, ecumenically, and in every other way the number of languages poses seemingly insurmountable challenges to forming relationships. No wonder there are tribal misunderstandings that lead to contention and violence. It is not uncommon to find reports in our newspapers each week of tragic deaths in a South African township or a central African republic.

Local leaders now encourage Church units in Africa to adopt one language per country. This seems an obvious solution, but it's still difficult. Older women depend on a tribal tongue. I feel for them because I know the frustration of trying to get something as simple as passport clearance when I cannot understand the language or voice inflections.

Lots of times we use the same words, but we don't mean the same thing. It has taken me a long time to figure out that when one of my relatives says, "That's fine," she may really mean, "I'm too tired to come up with a better solution," or "I really don't like it, but I won't object on this one," or "I don't care," or "I don't choose to deal with this issue right now."

The knack of communication goes far beyond words. If we only accepted the literal meaning of words, we might miss most of the true meaning. We have to learn to read body language and listen for innuendos.

I do better in a relationship where I don't feel I must walk on eggs. I am happiest when I can just say what's on my mind and hope the listener will understand my meaning even if my words are not as clear as I mean them to be.

Even a bridge built with good materials can fall if it is anchored in sand. So it is with communication—our bridges should be built on bedrock so our efforts will stand despite the storms that come. For young couples getting started in life—as we did, for example, building a medical practice and raising a family—life resembles a major hurricane. Sometimes in our early married years we felt good to have just survived the day. The trick of keeping equanimity, I've found, is to focus on what matters, to sink your foundations deep in strong values, and to enjoy what life offers.

I have learned relatively recently how hard it is to dig deep enough within to find and risk real feelings. The challenge for me is to open those real feelings to Joe, my spouse of forty-three years. I would suggest that one of the things that matters most is to make that spousal relationship number one, to build a bridge there that transcends every other link you create. If you and your spouse remain thoughtful, trusting, respectful, and communicative, most other things will fall into place.

To return to the image of bridges, remember they are built from shore to shore and must meet in the middle. "Building" is an active word. It implies effort. We must take initiative.

I suggest this exercise. Write down one thing that matters very much to you. When you have jotted this idea down, think, "How can I communicate that to my spouse? to my children? to my friends?" This mental exercise marks the beginning of action.

Goethe was right, of course. We should never let what matters least get in the way of what matters most. The trick is to know what matters most, then to plan how to live by that, how to make it known. The goal is to have our most important value etched clearly in our mind and heart, where it provides the tensile strength of our life's bridge.
