Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 11

Stability in These Times

Our times have been termed the days of miracle and wonder. Supersonic airliners cross the ocean from Paris to New York in four hours. Implantation of artificial organs extends human life. Thanks to telecommunication satellites, telephone calls and faxed messages can encircle the globe almost instantly. Computing networks make possible storage and retrieval of vast networks of information. These are technological wonders.

Such innovations have made the impossible possible. At the same time, they have made our life more complex. We live at a tremendously accelerated pace of life. The power to extend human life has forced us to ask when life should be extended. And the constant bombardment of information requires that we process more and often conflicting data.

And the complexities multiply. Our world is not the same place today that it was last year or even yesterday.

The same is true within our individual lives. What a change a year or two—or even a few months—can make.

I am a very ordinary woman who has spent much of my life dealing with the day-to-day complications and joys of being a wife and a mother of four sons. Complications, like keeping enough milk in the refrigerator; joys, like having an even number of socks come out of the dryer. Complications, in managing a home with busy high school students and a bishop husband; joys, in seeing my sons prepared to serve missions, prepared for life. In the middle of the mothering phase of my life, I was not thinking about issues or forming philosophies. I was just dealing with one day at a time.

But there is life after sixty. The aging process may bring wrinkles and rigidity, but it also brings a time to contemplate. As I get older, I can see how the world has opened up because of many innovations, yet it's sometimes hard for me personally to make the changes necessary to take full advantage of them. In my own daily life I am constantly assaulted by much that is new.

I do my writing on a typewriter and pencil in my corrections. I have seen my secretary make the same changes in seconds on a computer. I can see how easy it is, but I still like a pencil. I am hardly used to the idea that a letter can be faxed over the telephone, and it is still embarrassing to be told by a car, "Your brake is on!"

We all have areas where we are resistant to change. I hear similar echoes in our society. The bywords of this time are coping, stress, future shock, megatrends, the lonely crowd. These bywords are daily reminders of our insecurity with the confrontations of change. Why do we resist change? What will give us the confidence necessary to accept change and incorporate that which is good? Stability.

As I define stability, it is not inflexibility or resistance to positive change. It does not mean exercising fewer choices or avoiding challenges. Stability is constancy of character or purpose, tenacity, steadfastness, reliability, and dependability. It is a grounding, a rooting, an anchor. Unfortunately, stability seems rarer as life goes faster.

One of the great joys of living in this age is the opportunity to create stability in our own lives. It can be a happy challenge. Five anchors have helped stabilize my life: testimony, relationships with others, charity, progress, and maturity.

My testimony developed early. I was blessed to grow up two doors away from my grandparents, who were guided throughout their life by impressions that I know came from simple, righteous living and complete faith. Their belief in the tenets of the gospel was so internalized that it was the foremost consideration in every circumstance, whether it was giving a healing blessing to an ill child, abandoning insurance selling to become custodian at the temple, or searching for the names of Scottish ancestors. Grandpa's "impressions" even prompted a move of a thousand miles to a new country, Canada. He wrote in his journal: "I prayed for guidance concerning my future. Then one spring morning in March of the following year, from a pamphlet which came in the mail, I read of a settlement in Raymond, Canada, and turning to my wife said, 'Mary Ann, I feel impressed to move to Raymond, Canada.' My wife felt as I did that the impression was from the right spirit."

This is my heritage, a firm foundation. Like my grandparents, I believe in a God who strengthens me, helps me, and causes me to stand by his righteous, omnipotent hand. This belief is the basis of my life.

Stability is the fruit of internalizing the gospel, of listening, praying, searching, lifting up our voices to attain wisdom from the Lord. In Proverbs 2:2-5, we read: "Incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding; yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding; if thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God."

Even though I have a heritage of gospel belief, I have made the choice to develop a testimony. I accept the responsibilities that go with my choice to follow the living prophet, to embrace currently revealed and emphasized truth.

Testimony is a result of choice, not of circumstances. This world is full of soul-troubling injustices: homeless children, innocent victims of war or ignorance, people alone and unloved. The wonderful thing about life is that despite the injustices of this world, each of us still has the choice to believe.

Some people equate stability with ease. The two are not the same. A friend pointed out that while we sympathize with trying and testing situations, positive circumstances can be difficult also. She said, "Women who have stable, happy lives are made to feel almost scorned." She had been at lunch with friends—one who was having serious problems with a son, and another whose husband's business was failing—and they said to her, "What do you know of trouble? I wish all I had to worry about were Christmas stockings for my grandchildren." My friend said she felt almost guilty to admit in this group that her children were successful and happily married, and that her grandchildren were healthy. Perhaps trials or the lack of them have been individualized for our own personal growth, "customized challenges," in the words of Elder Neal A. Maxwell.

We hear often that the Lord gives trials to those he loves, that those who have trials are thereby proven worthy. I believe that the Lord does love us as individuals, whether or not we have great trials. In good circumstances or bad, we can make choices that will build our testimonies.

We must seek a testimony. Actively seeking involves more than just looking. The prophet Jacob tells us, "Remember that ye are free to act for yourselves." (2 Nephi 10:23.) At some point in life, we must each make a decision, "I will do this with my life." Then we do not let circumstances determine our actions or drive us away from the truth. In all seasons of life, testimony is a conscious choice that gives meaning to everything else.

My second anchor is my relationships with others. Friends are valuable to me. One of my favorite ways to spend an evening is to invite six diverse, but compatible, friends to my home for dinner and a lively visit. Cultivating a variety of friends, including those in my immediate and extended family, has brought me stability. I love the stimulation of developing friendships with many types of people, and I value what they teach me.

Friends multiply my store of knowledge in the most pleasant ways. I can hardly wait to see an attorney friend when I have read about a legal issue and have questions. I solved many of the world's problems with my friend Donna when we walked together in the mornings. My son, a biochemist, sent me a book titled DNA for Beginners so we could converse intelligently about his work. Three of my friends who are outstanding scriptorians open up my mind and pour in their understanding. There is so much I want to learn, and with friends I am free to ask questions and to be nurtured in an encouraging way. I can provide the setting for this in my home or in the park or in a car on the way to a symphony performance. It doesn't take an expensive menu or a lavish centerpiece. I have had some wonderful conversations over curdly soup and rolls that have burned on the bottom and are doughy in the middle. I have had a fascinating discussion about a trip to the bird refuge with my grandson over a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. I could not live in isolation. I respond to family and friends. They encourage me, they buoy me up, they make me feel worthwhile. Friends are gifts from the Lord that bring stability to my life.

Friendships are enhanced through exercising charity—another of my anchors. All life is enriched through charity. The high status of charity is extolled by Paul in the thirteenth chapter of First Corinthians. No quality is as enduring or comforting as charity. Charity never faileth. Charity is a constant, dependable, reliable, stable force.

I have learned over the years that charitable people have all the real fun. They are the people others are drawn to. They expend their energies in positive ways that bring light and energy to others and themselves. This could be an actual description of my friend Carolyn, who works in the Young Women office. I have seen her give a treasured shell to encourage an unhappy employee. I watched her rejoice with a handicapped former student who proudly reported getting A's and B's at the community college. I am aware of her deep concern and constant caring for aged parents—even though it is by long distance. Nearly every Church employee knows Carolyn, and I suspect they make many more trips to her office than necessary, to bask in the light she radiates.

It is a marvel to me that charity can be exercised in the smallest ways. We find stability as we take small opportunities to serve and get support from others. I was comforted by a hand-delivered note from my Relief Society president when she knew I was nervous over an important assignment. On the other hand, I felt the joy of serving when I tended a newborn baby so her parents could attend a sunrise Easter service. As we serve, we tacitly send the message: "You are okay and I am here." I remember feeling the overwhelming goodness and support of others when our first son went on his mission. He received encouragement from such unexpected sources that it intensified my awareness of the love that was shown.

Charity is the context for all we do, for it is our major means of becoming Christlike. If charity is the pure love of Christ, then learning its laws is the way to know more about our Savior. No pursuit will bring more stability to our lives than this.

I can feel good about myself if I can detect that in some way I am a better person today than I was a year ago. This is my fourth anchor. An awareness of progression, even if it is small in the eyes of the world, provides a stabilizing sense of worth. The challenging part is to separate real progress from that which only appears to be moving forward.

By whose criteria do we measure? The Church's? Society's? Progression is so individual that each person must set an individual plan. For example, if the criteria for progress were having a good husband and a large family, some women would feel they had lost out. If our criteria were academic, a mother of many small children might feel that she was not progressing because she was not continuing with a formal education. An older woman could feel useless because she lacked a career opportunity; a couple, if they were not serving on a mission. Happily, progression is measured in many more subtle ways than counting numbers of children or degrees.

Several years ago we read about Molly Mormon and Patty Perfect and laughed—maybe a little painfully—because we all understood the stereotype. In these extremes we saw how easily we create barriers that stymie our individuality and our true progression.

Do you remember Aesop's fable of the lazy grasshopper and the prudent ants? During the summer the ants are busy gathering a store of food for the winter while the grasshopper, despite the ants' warning of a long, cold winter ahead, sings, dances, and plays his fiddle. At the BYU Women's Conference in 1987, Louise Plummer gave some thoughts on "being a grasshopper" based on this fable. She said, "I always wondered if there was room in a family of ants . . . or room in a church of ants for a grasshopper. . . . [I] fear that ants will not accept me unless I am just like them." (A Heritage of Faith, ed. Mary E. Stovall and Carol Cornwall Madsen [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1988], p. 189.) She concludes that both grasshoppers, whose work may be bringing happiness to others, and ants who store the food are necessary. We just need to remember that "grasshoppers work differently from ants." Nourishing the body is necessary, but the soul needs to be fed too. Our methods of feeding either may vary.

Based on someone else's standards, we might all be losers. When we measure ourselves against arbitrary standards, we tend not to progress because we are focused on the wrong kinds of things. In such circumstances we might be compared to those Jews described in the Book of Mormon whose blindness came from "looking beyond the mark." (Jacob 4:14.) Stability comes in my life when I focus on the things that are mine to do.

We discover what our own life tasks are by asking the right questions. Perhaps the most important question we can ask is, "What is the Lord's will for me?" That is our gauge for progression.

Ponder the questions prophets have asked, as noted in the scriptures: "How is it possible that ye can lay hold upon every good thing?" (Moroni 7:20.) "What think ye of Christ?" (Matthew 22:42.) "What manner of men [or women] ought ye to be?" (3 Nephi 27:27.)

And then relish the answers: "By faith . . . lay [ye] hold upon every good thing." What think ye of Christ? "He is the Lord." What manner of men ought ye to be? "Even as I am."

The answers I have found as I've asked about my own mission and path of progression have brought boundless stability to my life. They have given me a sense of purpose and vision, a sustaining nourishment of body and soul. Progress is an individual matter. Our achievement should be measured against our own past accomplishments. Progression brings stability through the satisfaction of accomplishing goals. There is much more happiness in becoming something than in getting something.

My fifth anchor is maturity. I found it delightfully refreshing to hear Barbara Bush, wife of the president of the United States, say on nationwide television at her husband's inauguration, "See this styled hair? See this designer suit? Take a good look because you probably won't see them again." Women loved it because she was saying, "There is no artificial standard. I am comfortable with myself as I am, and I want you to know it." That's maturity—the ability to happily face yourself. Maturity is what allows us to accept ourselves even when we are not all we would want to be.

We should never abandon the quest for a better self. But neither should we allow ourselves to become immobilized, thinking we are nobody. One of Satan's greatest tools is to convince us that we are worth nothing, to lead us to deny our divine heritage. He would have us "be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27.) It is stabilizing to be able to say, "This is who I am, and I am happy to live with me."

Such maturity allows us to accept who and where we are. This same maturity can give us the moral courage to make our actions consistent with our knowledge of right and wrong, that is, to be "doers of the word." I think a "doer of the word" is that person who has become integrated—sufficiently mature—to act on her beliefs, especially when they don't conform to the popular views of the day. James says it this way: "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was." (James 1:22-24.)

Mature people, regardless of age, are able to face themselves and act in positive ways despite flaws they may see. We all have parts of our character we don't like. Mature people "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and all men." (2 Nephi 31:20.)

Another scripture that is meaningful to me comes from First Corinthians. It is compelling to me that at the end of Paul's marvelous discussion of charity is a statement about maturity: "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things." (1 Corinthians 13:11.) As we put away childish things, as we mature spiritually, we understand what we see, we know who we are, and we act upon what we believe.

Stability is possible in our lives. Through testimony, friendship, charity, progression, and maturity we can maintain lasting stability, which will endure despite the clatter of these changing times.
