Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 12

Heroes and Heroines

I must admit that I think every woman I have ever met is great. Strength and capability and talent abound in every woman, not just in those who've been written about in history textbooks. The women I admire show resilience in the face of problems; they overcome great odds; they demonstrate resourcefulness, courage, the pioneer spirit, and other magnificent qualities.

We've all had women in our past who have touched our lives deeply—perhaps a mother, sister, aunt, schoolteacher, church member, or a friend so close that we are what Anne of Green Gables called "kindred spirits." It's usually someone we admire, someone who has given something to our spirits, someone we love deeply. These special women in our lives touch people, they lift, they help us see our worth. They are the "givers" of the world.

Certain women like this have had their stories documented because what they've done is remarkable or praiseworthy. Esther of the Bible is a good example. When she decided to try to save her people from Haman's plot to kill all the Jews, she showed great courage and faith. For added strength, she asked the Jews and her "maidens" to fast for her for three days. Her commitment to her people was so great that she said, "So will I go in unto the king, which is not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish." (Esther 4:16.)

Another woman of great courage was a thirteen-year-old pioneer named Mary Goble. Her family was converted in Sussex, England, and she left with her parents and five brothers and sisters to travel to Utah. Despite a hard ocean crossing, with seasickness, a mutiny on board, and thick fog for several days, the family landed safely in Boston. They then took the train to Iowa City, where they purchased two yoke of oxen, one yoke of cows, a wagon and a tent. In Iowa Mary's small sister, not quite two, who was suffering from measles, got wet in a fierce thunderstorm and died. They had to bury her there.

Mary wrote:

We traveled [on] . . . till we got to the Platte River. That was the last walk I ever had with our mother. We caught up with the handcart companies that day. We watched them cross the river. There were great lumps of ice floating down the river. It was bitter cold. The next morning there were fourteen dead in camp through the cold. We went back to camp and went to prayers. They sang, "Come, Come Ye Saints, No Toil Nor Labor Fear." I wondered what made my mother cry.

That night my mother took sick and the next morning my little sister was born. . . . She lived six weeks and died for the want of nourishment.

Not long after, Mary went to get some fresh water from a spring for her mother, but got lost in the deep snow. Her legs and feet were frozen by the time the rescuers got to her. They rubbed her legs with snow to revive the circulation, but her feet were badly frostbitten and could not be restored. The weather continued to be cruel. A few days later her sister May was frozen to death. Her brother James died three days later. Her mother died the day they arrived in Salt Lake City.

A kind bishop took the remaining family members to a house in his ward and fed them. Early the next morning Brigham Young and a doctor came to see them. Mary wrote, "When [Brigham] saw our condition, our feet frozen and our mother dead, tears rolled down his cheeks. The doctor wanted to cut my feet off at the ankle, but President Young said no, just cut off the toes and I promise you, you will never have to take them off any further."

But instead of Mary's feet getting better, they got worse. The doctor advised her to have them amputated, but she said no, and told him what Brigham Young had promised. The doctor told her there was no chance her feet could be saved. But she had faith.

One day I sat there crying, my feet were hurting me so, when a little old woman knocked at the door. She said she had felt that someone needed her there, and asked me what was the matter. I showed her my feet and told her the promise Brother Brigham Young had given me. She said, "Yes, and with the help of the Lord we will save them yet." She made a poultice and put it on my feet . . . every day. At the end of three months my feet were well. ("Life of Mary Ann Goble Pay," as quoted in Improvement Era, June 1970, pp. 40-41.)

I am uplifted by Mary's courage, but I also appreciate the fact that a loving sister behind the scenes was inspired to help a young woman she didn't even know. She exemplified the words of Emily Woodmansee: "The errand of angels is given to women, and this is a gift that as sisters we claim: To do whatsoever is gentle and human, To cheer and to bless in humanity's name." ("As Sisters in Zion," Hymns, no. 309.) We have much to salute in the women of the past. There is a great nobility in women.

There are other remarkable women whose names we do not even know who possess heroic characteristics. Take, for example, Nephi's wife. We know she was one of the daughters of Ishmael. When she and Nephi were married, the families of Lehi and Ishmael were living in the wilderness in a tent. (1 Nephi 16:6-7.) (From my backpacking days I know what that is like!) She bore her children in the wilderness. She traveled to a new land where she built a home and raised a family. I know that feeling, too. When I was first married I moved with my husband to New York City. To a woman who had grown up in a small town of two thousand souls, New York was a strange new land.

Nephi's wife belonged to an extended family whose relationships were very stressful. When her brothers-in-law tried to kill her husband and were continually disagreeing with him and contesting his counsel, she strongly supported Nephi. On shipboard on the way to the new land, after Laman and Lemuel bound Nephi, he said, "and also my wife with her tears and prayers . . . did not soften the hearts of my brethren that they would loose me." (1 Nephi 18:19.) How that woman must have grieved when she saw her husband abused and her mother-in-law sick! I think Nephi's wife was a great woman. She must have been, to endure the life that was hers to live and to be so supportive of her husband.

Some other heroic women in the Book of Mormon were the mothers of the 2,000 stripling warriors who fought with Helaman. Scripture tells us that these sons "did obey and observe to perform every word of command with exactness; yea, and even according to their faith it was done unto them; and I did remember the words which they said unto me that their mothers had taught them." (Alma 57:21.) We don't know the name of any one of those mothers, and yet the story of their sons' courage and faith is a direct reflection of the teachings of these good women—heroines every one. Our own mothers may rank with these women as heroines in our lives.

I'd also include as a heroine Abish, the Lamanite woman who was a servant to Lamoni's queen when Ammon gave his powerful testimony and the household of King Lamoni was converted. Remember that King Lamoni lay as if dead. The queen sent for Ammon, who told her the king was not dead, and she believed him. I love his response to the queen, "Blessed art thou because of thy exceeding faith; I say unto thee, woman, there has not been such great faith among all the people of the Nephites." The king did arise, as Alma had said, and the testimony he bore was so powerful that he and the queen, and even Ammon "sunk . . . with joy . . . being overpowered by the Spirit." And Abish, the servant, was the only one left standing. The scriptures tell us that she had "been converted unto the Lord for many years, on account of a remarkable vision of her father." I think Abish recognized her opportunity—that "by making known unto the people what had happened . . . , it would cause them to believe in the power of God, therefore she ran forth from house to house, making it known unto the people" that the household of King Lamoni had found the true faith. (Alma 19:10-17.) I think her name should have been Sister Abish, an early missionary.

Abish reminds me of Yen, a Chinese friend who lived much of her life in South Africa. When she returned to Taiwan she married and she and her husband were converted to the Church. That was more than seventeen years ago. Since that time she has divorced and is supporting her teenage daughter and living in southern California. Yen has been a stalwart in defending the teachings of the gospel. She has clung tenaciously to her faith when it has not been popular with her family. They derided her for the devotion, time, and money she expended for the Church, while they were financially very successful. But she quietly practiced her religion. After all those years Yen told me recently, "Elaine, my sisters have come to respect me." I class her as a heroine.

I like to remember the obscure heroes and heroines because they do important things without having to travel the world or make a lot of money or be famous. The people that I most look up to are those you would probably never hear of any other place, like my mother, Lovina, and my grandfather John, my neighbor Pete next door, and Sharon, the ward Relief Society president. They are names you wouldn't know, but their actions you would acknowledge and admire just as I do.

I like to include the wives of the General Authorities as unsung heroines of our generation because of the strength they add and their behind-the-scenes support of their husbands doing an important work. In my case, it is the other way around. I couldn't do my job without the support of my husband. He doesn't do dinners, but he does everything else. General Authority wives willingly sacrifice family life with their husbands and keep their families together, generally by themselves. They are often sensitive to feelings and happenings that their husbands might miss. I was particularly aware of this when Sister Barbara Perry brought the wives of seven military leaders to our building so we could tell them a little about the auxiliaries of the Church. Sister Perry was entertaining these wives while Elder L. Tom Perry was holding some strategic meetings with their husbands. The outcome of those meetings would be influenced to quite an extent by the impressions of those seven women, only one of whom was a Latter-day Saint.

If we and our family members wish to profit from having heroes and heroines and role models to emulate, we have only to open our eyes to those around us. Reflect on your own life experiences. Was there a favorite teacher, or maybe a person in your neighborhood, who made life better for you when you were a child? Is there someone you have worked with who has made a difference? Whom do you look up to in your family?

I often speak admiringly of my sister Jean. I am always flattered when somebody tells me that I look like her. Because of my love and respect for her, I want to have her approval. Those closest to us are the ones we tend to admire because they're the ones we know the best. I realize that the better I know people, the better I like them and the more I admire them.

Since we're most likely to model ourselves after the people we know the best, we ought to get to know the best people. We should choose friends who love the Lord and read the scriptures and go to church and live the laws of God. Then we need to be the kind of people that others will seek out because we do those things ourselves.

Think about the times when you yourself have been an unsung hero. Maybe you were in the shadows, doing the work for which someone else took credit, or holding the curtain while someone else took the bows. My office staff fits into this category. You don't know their names, and you don't know their contributions, but I do. I have several unsung heroines who knock themselves out on my behalf, but it is my picture that gets into the paper.

Was there ever a time when you fell back so someone else didn't have to be last? Perhaps it was in a family race or a competitive game. I know my grandpa lost a lot of games of checkers so I could win and gain confidence. Maybe you chose to be last—to bring up the rear—so you could be sure that no one got lost along the way.

In this world where media productions bring new faces and names into the headlines every month, it is hard to isolate what is real and lasting. To my way of thinking, fame is fleeting, but heroism is something that endures. Heroism is based upon truth, that is, upon the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which encompasses all truth. Fame is Madonna; heroism is Helen Keller. Fame is Oprah Winfrey; heroism is Mother Teresa. Fame is Joe Montana; heroism is Spencer W. Kimball. Heroism is basing your life upon things that last.

To live heroically is to understand that there is a difference between making a difference in the world and making a splash. I want the women of the Church to make a difference. I want you to make a difference because you can and because, without you, the world would be a darker place.

We do not lack for heroes or heroines today. They are all around us if we look for them. They are you.
