Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 13

"Distinguished for Their Zeal"

The relationship among Relief Society sisters means a lot to me. I like the words from Jacob 1:19: "And we did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day."

Can you imagine what it would be like in Relief Society if each sister took full responsibility for her neighbors, her friends, those she visit teaches? The world would be different. I would like to see each Latter-day Saint, without being asked, take responsibility for the well-being of every other individual.

One of the points of emphasis in the mission statement of Relief Society is to "Bless the Individual Woman," whether she is nineteen or ninety, single, married, tall, short, with red hair or black hair, brown or blonde.

My friend and counselor in the general Relief Society presidency, Chieko Okazaki, shared an interesting concept about perspective. When you sit on a mountain top and look at a valley of trees below, all you see is an ocean of green beneath you. No one thing stands out. But if you come down from the mountain and walk into the valley, you can see that each tree and bush is different. Some are short, some tall, some have broad leaves, some have unusual bark. Each is distinctive.

As I look into a sea of faces, I can't determine exclusive differences in people, but I know that each is an individual. I think about the value of distinctiveness, about the value of personal spiritual and mental preparation, and about each one taking responsibility for magnifying her office.

A wonderful verse in the book of Alma describes the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi, those Lamanites who were converted to the Church and moved to the land of Jershon: "And they were . . . numbered among the people who were of the church of God. And they were also distinguished for their zeal towards God, and also towards men; for they were perfectly honest and upright in all things; and they were firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end." (Alma 27:27.) I'd like to adapt these words to describe us, the people who make up the church of God in these days.

What does it mean to be "distinguished for their zeal"? The dictionary says that having "zeal" means to pursue with passionate ardor, to be ardent, to have earnest intent.

There's a difference between having zeal and being a zealot. Traditionally, a "zealot" has been someone who was extreme in his or her beliefs and actions. To be "zealous," on the other hand, is to be ardent and eager in our work. It connotes a sense of balance and understanding of how what we do and say and think fits into the broader context of what is going on in the world. To be zealous is to be Ezra Taft Benson. To be a zealot is to be Saddam Hussein, out of touch and out of control.

One way to illustrate this concept is to compare two leaders from the Book of Mormon: Captain Moroni and Amalickiah. Amalickiah is described as "a man of cunning device and a man of many flattering words, that he led away the hearts of many people to do wickedly; yea, and to seek to destroy the church of God, and to destroy the foundation of liberty which God had granted unto them, or which blessing God had sent upon the face of the land for the righteous' sake." (Alma 46:10.)

Moroni, on the other hand, wrote upon the title of liberty, "In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children." The scriptures say that when he had fastened on his own armor, he took the title of liberty upon its pole and "bowed himself to the earth, and he prayed mightily unto his God for the blessings of liberty to rest upon his brethren, so long as there should a band of Christians remain to possess the land." (Alma 46:12-13.)

What a difference between these two men! Amalickiah, the zealot, sought for his personal gain at any cost. Moroni, the zealous, sought for the good of his brethren and for the cause of righteousness.

We need to be zealous in the same causes that motivated Captain Moroni. The things he wrote on the title of liberty are the best things in life for which to be zealous: our belief in God, which is the bedrock of all things we do; our religion; the freedom that allows us to exercise our religious rights; and our peace and families. These are the great causes—causes that are worthy of our laying our lives on the line.

What is it that distinguishes us? When we say that people are distinguished we generally mean that they bear themselves well, they dress well, they handle themselves well. What does it mean to be distinguished for something? We talk about distinguished artists, distinguished composers. How about being known as the distinguished Christian, a woman distinguished for her charitable service? How can we be distinguished for our zeal?

Barbara Winder, our former general Relief Society president, immediately comes to my mind. She is a compassionate soul, tender and caring and willing to work. She was released from her calling as president to go help her husband direct the mission in Czechoslovakia, from a two-room apartment, standing in lines to get such common foods as cauliflower and potatoes.

As we examine the areas of our lives where we exercise zeal, do we find that we are most zealous in professional pursuits? Or zealous about perfect make-up? About earning money or shopping? Are young women more zealous about getting a degree or getting a date? How about as a daughter or a mother or a Sunday School teacher? In what areas are we distinguished for our zeal?

Just like the people of Ammon, we need to choose what we will be distinguished for. And if we choose as they did to be "perfectly honest and upright in all things" and "firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end," we will be zealous in all the best causes.

Sometimes we misinterpret zealousness as busyness. Like the great distinction between being zealous and being a zealot, being engaged in many causes does not necessarily mean we are engaged in the best causes.

Let us be clear about what it is that deserves and demands our zeal and not dissipate our energies—spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical—in any old cause, but rather in the best cause. There are many good things vying for our attention, but the good and the better need to be subjugated to the best. I like the saying, "It is not enough to be busy. What are we busy about?"

I believe that in order for us to be distinguished for our zeal as Christians, as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we must be clear, we must be focused, we must place our energies into the best things.

If you have served a mission and have gone through the Missionary Training Center, you likely know Mary Ellen Edmunds. Mary Ellen is single and serves on our Relief Society board. At age twenty-two, she served her first mission. Her focus in life ever since has been great and enduring missionary work and humanitarian service. She has served in Thailand, the Philippines, Taiwan, Africa. This has been her lifetime cause. It is reflected in her countenance and in her interaction with people. When I greet her, "How are you, Mary Ellen?" she inevitably responds, "Happy." It seems to me that the people whom I would define as being distinguished for their zeal are living out their commitment to their covenants and to the gospel of Jesus Christ. They are both leaders and followers.

Let us be distinguished for our zeal. Let us be known as women who have chosen the best.
