Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

Tools for Touching Lives

CHAPTER 14

The Mission of Relief Society

We are on the threshold of a new decade and new things are happening. In the years since 1980, dramatic advances have taken place in the Church: new temples have been built, our meetings have been consolidated into a three-hour block, many missions have been opened.

For the decade ahead we have refocused the mission of Relief Society. The organization and the goals are the same, but we have expanded our focus in order to address the changing needs in today's world. We have to consider worldwide implications.

I want to share with you what we consider to be the mission of Relief Society for this new decade and how it is going to meet the needs of our sisters. As you read the following points that make up our mission statement, I would encourage you particularly to think how it blesses an individual and how each part of it encourages individual action.

Build Personal Testimony

The first point of our mission statement is to Build Personal Testimony. That is the foundation for everything else we do. I have grown to realize what a difference my personal testimony makes in my life.

Since my call as general Relief Society president, many people have asked about my younger life: what I did that prepared me for this job, and what influential people made a difference in my life. I have welcomed those questions because they have helped me recognize more than ever the events in my life that have led me to my personal testimony.

I was raised in a small Latter-day Saint community in Cardston, Canada. The temple was just a half block away from my house, so you can imagine its influence in our neighborhood. Everybody shared the same values. Everybody participated in the social events. We were all friends. I thought this was a way of life for the whole world. My testimony was formed even before I was aware of it.

But I do remember the exact moment when I became aware that I had a testimony and how much difference it made in my life. It wasn't until my husband and I had moved to New York. I remember thinking, "You do believe in the gospel of Jesus Christ. You believe what you are hearing or you wouldn't make all the effort to go to church." It was an instant of realization that made all the difference to me. My testimony didn't stop growing then, and I didn't stop realizing and appreciating it.

I try to walk every morning with my good friend. I think I notice with greater appreciation than ever the beautiful world that Heavenly Father has provided for us. That is part of my testimony. The flowers seem more perfect every year; the children are more precious; the music is more thrilling; the grass is greener; the mountains are more beautiful. I feel that every time I acknowledge these wonders, every time I notice them, it is a way for my testimony to grow. We have to be aware of what is around us, aware of the Lord's blessings.

In Thornton Wilder's play "Our Town," the character Emily was allowed to come back to earth for one day after her death. As she prepared to return to the cemetery, she looked around at her beloved Grover's Corners and said good-bye to everything. Then she asked the stage manager, "Do any human beings ever realize life while they live it—every, every minute?"

There is no reason why we can't realize and value the wonder of life. Sometimes we simply don't notice. We have to desire a testimony and look for it in everything that we see.

Another way to build personal testimony is by reading the scriptures. It is an inspiring way to know what the Lord would have us do right now. We pray, we ponder, and we go to the temple. Beyond that, we share our testimonies, and that is a wonderful way to help them grow. This doesn't mean that we have to stand in testimony meeting, or that we say exactly some prescribed words. Sometimes sharing a testimony is as simple as saying, "I really believe that." But this can only happen as we have interaction with other people. It is important for us to be together and seriously talk—talk about things that are in our hearts that really matter. It is a way to develop testimony.

In addition to studying the scriptures, pondering concepts from books is a great way to build testimony. I can't think every original or grand thought in this world, but I am grateful for others who do. I read such inspiring thoughts, they add something to my life and give me the opportunity to seek and to increase my testimony.

"Actively seeking" implies much more than just looking for a testimony. Building personal testimony has to be a high priority in our lives. Then, when we experience an event or some instance or moment of truth, the Spirit bears witness to us. As Jacob said, "The Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not." (Jacob 4:13.) The Lord said also, "By my Spirit will I enlighten them." (D&C 76:10.) We can share, we can motivate, we can talk to each other, but the Spirit is what builds testimony.

It is through everyday experiences of appreciating the world, of talking to our friends and loving them, and of giving service that we build testimony. We seek and we notice our blessings. In everything we do in Relief Society we make personal testimony paramount.

Bless the Individual Woman

The second point of our mission statement is to Bless the Individual Woman. Do you remember the story in Third Nephi when the Savior visited the people on the American continent after his crucifixion? As recorded in chapter 11, he introduced himself and then said some very important things: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world. And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world." First he announced himself, and he could be easily seen. You would think the multitude would believe he was indeed the Christ. But then he said this, "Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world."

Then this significant event took place: "And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth." (3 Nephi 11:10-11, 14-15.) That was a big crowd—a multitude. They all felt his hands and feet, one by one. This experience wasn't just for some. It wasn't just for those who didn't have children, or for those who didn't have other occupations. One by one, every one of them went up. The Lord is concerned about every individual. That is what he tells us in the scriptures. In Relief Society, we too desire to bless each individual woman.

Wonderful letters come to our office from women throughout the world, including this one from a happy mother in Denver:

I love being a mother. I love reading with my children and teaching them the gospel. . . . They are two of my best friends.

I am grateful for the creativity and imaginations of my children. They have been playing with a large cardboard box for several months now. It is a time machine, a space ship, a computer, an airplane, and a hover craft. I am grateful for their ability to enjoy such things. Of course, they also love to watch a video, go to a friend's house where they can play Nintendo and play computer games. That's okay. At least they understand the culture or a bit of it of the day. But it is not their mainstay. On the other hand, a Nintendo game is a lot easier to keep clean than two laundry baskets filled with dress-up clothes and stuff. We don't have a computer, but I am sure it is easier to keep track of than paints, markers, crayons, paper, etc. I have to keep reminding myself that I am caring for two wonderful spirits entrusted to me by the Lord and in thirteen short years, Hanna will be eighteen and there won't be anyone to spill the dress-up baskets all over the floor. I am very grateful to Heavenly Father for sharing that insight with me.

Now let me cite another letter from a Relief Society president in a singles' ward. She writes of her concerns for her sisters and how she wants to bless them:

In the past several weeks, my concern and that of the other leaders of the ward has heightened as the most stalwart of my worthy sisters, not numbering a few, have reached a point of resignation in their discouragement. These are temple workers, Sunday School teachers, Relief Society teachers, faithful visiting teachers, and intelligent, attractive women, varying in age, many over the age of thirty. It is frightening and saddening to me. I desire to serve these women effectively. Perhaps as women there is more we can do to be an influence for good things, that our ward may be united in purpose, love, and kindness one to another; that collectively we may learn to foster correct choices; to know our Father's will and do it.

Isn't that a plea? I know she is going to succeed with that attitude, for she feels deeply her responsibility.

I include a letter from Massachusetts. This sister said:

Ever since I joined this wonderful Church five years ago, I felt that Relief Society was definitely not for me. You see, my life has always been oriented towards raising my sons. I have spent most of my fascinating womanhood practicing soccer or wrestling or exploring mucky caves or building bonfires for cookouts or helping to design better paper airplanes. I really have had a hard time identifying with Relief Society. I really do bake bread but my eight-year-old son loves to knead it and we end up with flour everywhere. When we have fish for dinner, it means that Mom helps dig the worms and show the boys how to hook them on the line. The fish we eat are often very tiny and sometimes a few scales end up on our plate. None of this is covered in the Relief Society manual.

What stands out in my mind about those three letters is that each writer has a common theme. Each of them is serving as she is able, according to the needs around her.

We associate certain words with our aim to Bless the Individual Woman. One is diversity. Think about the Relief Society sisters whom you know. Are any two of them alike? They are not. I am concerned about valuing diversity because we have an increasing diversity of women in our Church. We need to give our attention to the individual woman, to think inclusively, instead of exclusively. We need to think in terms of "the one," not just of singles or young mothers or the elderly as groups.

The transitions of life are important to remember too. Women in transition need special attention. Young Adults moving into Relief Society from the Young Women's program may need a particular welcome and assurances that they belong. Divorce is a common kind of transition. Sometimes the newly married have a hard time adjusting, as do the newly widowed or mothers with new babies. All are in stages of transition.

I am in a state of transition in my neighborhood. It really hit me hard one Saturday when my friend Amy died. Amy had been the mainstay of our neighborhood, and her passing was easier to accept because she had been terribly sick and she was eighty-five years old and she had lived a fruitful, wonderful life. But the neighborhood somehow is not going to be the same without Amy. So, even though I accepted her death in my head, I thought, "I need to go for a walk. I haven't had any exercise. I'll call JoAnn, she'll go with me." I called JoAnn and she said, "I really haven't been feeling very well today, Elaine. I don't feel like walking." I thought, "That's all right; I'll go get Dorothy." I went by Dorothy's house, but I could see that she had company. My long-time walking partner, Donna, had recently moved away. So I went walking by myself, having discovered that this time of transition was harder than I had imagined it would be. We all need a little extra help at such times.

Develop and Exercise Charity

Consider the motto of Relief Society: "Charity Never Faileth." It thrills me to hear women around the world say those words, because I know they believe them. They are powerful words. "Charity Never Faileth." Charity is not something we do now and again. It's a way of thinking, a way of living. It is an attitude that we adopt.

My counselor Chieko Okazaki taught me something about this. She said, "We have to be 'kigatsuku."' I said, "Chieko, I can't even say it. What is it?" "Kigatsuku," she said. "You know. When I was a young girl my mother taught me to be a 'kigatsuku' girl." When Chieko's mother was doing the dishes she would say, "Now, if you were a 'kigatsuku' girl, what would you do?" Chieko would think, "I would get the dish towel and wipe the dishes." "Kigatsuku" means looking around for things to do and then going ahead and doing them without being told. That is what it means to have an attitude of charity.

How do you give service in your neighborhood? People in your area need whatever you have to give. We have to look for needs and then make ourselves available to fill them.

The whole Relief Society program is a wonderful tool for serving individuals. Homemaking meetings and Sunday classes, visiting teachers and individuals, all can be vehicles for charity. When we give service it unites us together as sisters, teaches skills, and builds self-esteem. Service accomplishes the purposes of Relief Society.

One wonderful example of using a Relief Society meeting as an opportunity for service was when sisters of a stake in Draper, Utah, decided they would make quilts for the women in prison. In one day they put up and finished seventy-five quilts, which they later took to the women at the prison. Think of the implications of that. Think of what happened when women came together to do something for someone else. Think of what happened to those who received this lovely gift: they learned that someone was thinking about them, when they could easily feel forgotten. Wonderful things can happen when service is given and received.

When I think about charity, I think also about my own visiting teachers. Shortly after I was called to this position, one of them, Judy, came to see me at ten o'clock at night. She said, "Elaine, I haven't been able to get you before now, but I wish I could share with you the feeling that came over me when I heard your name called in conference. I just sat there stunned and this feeling came over me that said, 'I've got to take care of that woman."' How I appreciated that! How important visiting teaching is to the whole concept of exercising charity.

Charity is right in the middle of our mission statement. We put it there intentionally, because we think charity in Relief Society acts as the keystone does in an arch. Charity is what holds everything else in the program together.

Strengthen Families

Our fourth point is to Strengthen Families. The variety of families in the Church is staggering. Think of the kinds: traditional families, single-mother or single-father families, combined families, part-member families, less-active families, families with or without children. All families need strengthening.

One woman wrote to me:

I am a single mother with two small boys, and I've been divorced for two years. In that amount of time I've found out how cruel it can be to be alone. I have no family. . . . I pay a full tithe, attend the temple regularly, my boy has been ordained a deacon, we've done baptisms for the dead together, my younger boy is in Scouts, I teach Sunday School, read the Ensign from the front to back cover, read the scriptures, clean my house, mow the lawn, weed the garden and sit alone, night after night. People in my ward know I'm single; yet my bishop has never visited my home, nor have the elders. I'm alone on Christmas and Thanksgiving. Yet I cook goodies and give them away. We are never invited to go anywhere or do anything, and we feel we've been cast aside.

Doesn't that hurt your heart? Do you know a family like that? What could you do to help strengthen such a family?

We want also to strengthen and support mothers who have chosen to stay at home with their children. These families need special attention, love, and encouragement. Mothers at home need acknowledgment that they are accomplishing some of the greatest work that they'll ever do. They know that, but it is nice to know that others know it as well. Strengthen families.

Enjoy a Unified Sisterhood

The fifth point of the Relief Society mission statement is to Enjoy a Unified Sisterhood. What a satisfying, hopeful idea that is—to enjoy each other's friendship, benefit from each other's insights! The Lord taught, "If ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.)

A friend told me a story about a visual demonstration of the power of unification. For a Relief Society lesson, a teacher brought in a big fish net and spread it on the floor. When all the sisters came in, she asked them to stand around the fish net and lift together. Then she had some of the sisters raise their hands high. She said, "What happens to this fish net when some of you lift it up? What happens when some of you let go?" They did several things with the fish net. Then she said, "Everyone hold on with both hands and pull it toward you gently. What happens to our net?" It was tight and strong. She said, "Isn't this just like our sisterhood in Relief Society? When we are all pulling together, it comes together in a wonderful way."

I can't think of anything that I could wish more for a sister in Relief Society than that she would feel that kind of bonding, friendship, love, encouragement, and support. Relief Society exists to help us show these feelings for each other.

The aims of Relief Society are nicely summarized in Doctrine and Covenants 123:17: "Therefore, dearly beloved [sisters], let us cheerfully do all things that lie in our power; and then may we stand still [and recognize, appreciate], with the utmost assurance [that we have done all that we can do, that we have blessed the lives of our sisters], to see the salvation of God, and for his arm to be revealed."
