Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 15

Temple Blessings

"A Million Dollar Temple to Be Built in Cardston, Canada!" came the joyous news in 1913 from the First Presidency of the Church. The temple was to be built of granite, and the ground-breaking would occur at once. By July 1914, my grandfather John F. Anderson, a skilled stonemason from Aberdeen, Scotland, was in Cardston ready to dress stone for the building of this temple. He continued to work on the temple until its completion. His was the honor of acting as the master mason at the laying of the cornerstone in 1915 under the supervision of Apostle David O. McKay. Grandpa laid the last stone to complete the Alberta Temple. He recorded, "It was not the capstone, but a small stone at the front gate entrance."

Grandpa Anderson and my grandmother were two of the first ordinance workers set apart to officiate in the newly completed temple. "This is the greatest calling that has ever come to us," Grandpa wrote in his diary. My grandmother was also set apart as assistant matron of the temple. She recorded, "We were happy of the honor bestowed upon us." Grandpa was caretaker of the temple and served as a patriarch and ordinance worker until his death at age eighty-seven.

My mother and dad were in the first group to be sealed in the Alberta Temple after its dedication in August 1923. I roller-skated around the temple block, played on the lush lawns when I was a child, strolled the grounds with friends and boyfriends. I did baptisms for the dead there often, getting out of school for part of a morning. We removed our shoes at the door and walked on warm carpet to the cold marble floors of the baptismal room. I was always awed by the massive oxen supporting the font of warm water. When I was in high school I helped Grandpa Anderson by transcribing the patriarchal blessings he gave, doing that in a quiet room in the temple. I received my endowments in the Alberta Temple and was married there, too, surrounded by loving family members, emotionally stirred at the sanctity and beauty of the ceremony.

How grateful I am for temples!

The significance of temples is linked to the foundations of the Relief Society. When the Saints founded Nauvoo, the Lord commanded them to "build a house unto me." (D&C 124:31.) The Saints were so anxious to have this house of the Lord that almost all the men of Nauvoo worked feverishly to complete the building. The women were equally desirous to help in erecting the temple.

In Sarah Kimball's parlor, her seamstress, a Miss Cook, expressed her desire to help. The two joined forces so Miss Cook could sew shirts for which Mrs. Kimball provided fabric. They invited the neighbors to join in this service of making shirts for the temple workmen. This combined effort of the women prompted the organization of Relief Society two weeks later, on March 17, 1842. In future decades several Relief Society general presidents served as matrons of the Salt Lake Temple.

Our temples have always been hallowed. My grandparents, the men and women of Nauvoo, and the Saints who settled the Salt Lake Valley represent the many others who serve so lovingly in the Lord's house. We are told in the vision given to President Joseph F. Smith, documented in Section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants, that "choice spirits . . . were reserved to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the great latter-day work, including the building of the temples and the performance of ordinances therein for the redemption of the dead." (D&C 138:53-54.) Women and men both were reserved for this day to help accomplish this important work of salvation. In the dedication or rededication of a temple, we see the continued fruits of righteousness. Those who attend are the Lord's elect in that part of his kingdom.

Dedication does not only mean dedicating a structure to the work of the Lord. It means dedicating ourselves to the service performed within its walls. Individual blessings will come to those who render such service.

On the Sabbath following the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet Joseph told of the Lord's acceptance of the building and quoted His words: "Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house." (D&C 110:9.)

It is because of the nature of "the blessings which shall be poured out" that the temple is the most sacred place on the earth. This is one place where we surrender worldly cares and inclinations as we dress in white to prepare, symbolically, to enter the presence of the Lord. In the house of the Lord, we experience a sanctifying process of casting off the world and purifying our hearts before the Lord, and consecrating our lives to him. This is a preparatory process. We are told, "Ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power." (D&C 43:16.)

What a blessing it is that each time we enter the temple, we have the opportunity to rededicate ourselves to righteous living. The Psalmist asks us, "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart." (Psalm 24:3-4.)

Have you ever gone to the temple when you were fraught with pressure and anxiety and found a respite of peace, a new perspective, answers or impressions to guide you through your problem? I have, and gratefully acknowledge it. I have often thought of the words, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matthew 11:28.)

Nonmembers who visit our temples before they are dedicated are also touched by the spirit of these holy houses. Some of them have commented:

"After seeing this beautiful place, everyone should believe there is a God."

"If someone came up and asked me what I saw and felt, I couldn't describe it in words."

"I really enjoy the serenity of your temple. It is very relaxing and I feel close to God."

A member of the press said in Alberta, "There are two things I'd like to do. Could I go back into the room you call the Garden Room and just sit there? And I'd like to sit in the World Room too."

The covenants we make in the house of the Lord are a great source of learning. I know that making covenants is essential to receiving an endowment of spiritual power and knowledge from God. The temple is a house of learning where the Spirit teaches, when we seek that Spirit.

The endowment itself is an endless opportunity for schooling. All creatures will have an eternal or endless existence, but we are granted the challenge and blessing to know God and Jesus our Savior just as we know each other. Sacred and important information as to the nature and functioning of godhood is revealed to us in the endowment ceremony, and we are imbued with spiritual power.

As I return to the temple to perform the endowment on behalf of others, I am reminded of the steadfastness and enduring nature of covenants. They are a constant in a changing world.

In the temple, we sisters receive all the blessings of the priesthood, not by ordination, but by being as fully endowed with the power of the priesthood as are the men. Both men and women wear the garments of the holy priesthood and make the same sacred covenants with God. They both perform priesthood ordinances, having authority to do so.

James E. Talmage wrote: "It is a precept of the Church that women of the Church share the authority of the Priesthood with their husbands, actual or prospective; and therefore women, whether taking the endowment for themselves or for the dead, are not ordained to specific rank in the Priesthood. Nevertheless there is no grade, rank, or phase of the temple endowment to which women are not eligible on an equality with men." (The House of the Lord [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974], p. 79.)

All faithful women may partake of temple blessings through baptisms for the dead, initiatory work, endowments, or other temple activity. Whether single or married—even if a husband is not worthy, is absent, or is not a member of the Church—each daughter of God may receive her temple blessings in the house of the Lord.

The Lord has promised that he will allow us to live with him again. How often do you contemplate that promise, especially in the temple? It is marvelous to me that if we make and keep our covenants we will be given that privilege. The scriptures give us a foreshadowing, a few whisperings, of the significance of that gift. "When he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure." (Moroni 7:48.) I want to be like my Savior, to see him as he is. I want to qualify for those blessings.

Throughout our great journey of life, we are surrounded with the cloak of his love. I often feel the warmth of that cloak as I serve in the house of the Lord. This love is epitomized for me in the scriptures: "Fear not, little children, for you are mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are of them that my Father hath given me; And none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost. . . . Wherefore, I am in your midst. . . . Watch, therefore, that ye may be ready." (D&C 50:41-46.)

I testify of the mission of our Savior, of the temple and all it symbolizes, and of the sacred blessings it brings to our lives. The temple has been and ever will be an infinitely significant part of my life. May it ever be a significant part of yours.
