Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 16

Principles of Visiting Teaching

In early 1991 I visited Relief Society women in Australia. Wati Martin, one of the Area General Board representatives, told me a wonderful story. She said that when she was younger and a newly married woman, she didn't want to go to Relief Society, but her mother explained to her how the organization worked and why it mattered. They were made visiting teaching companions, and her mother taught her how to give the message and showed her how to be sensitive to individual women in their homes. Then one day her mother said, "Wati, I'm not going to be here with you forever; and when I die, Relief Society will be your mother." Wati told me, "My mother died eighteen years ago, and she was right. Relief Society has become my mother."

Then when I returned home I found this in a letter:

I would like to share with you two sources of concern and frustration. I feel that for many women, visiting teaching is becoming a square peg in a round hole—a burden rather than a blessing. Our Relief Society president recently told me that only 50 percent of the women in our ward can or will visit teach. I feel it is a program which served its purpose in its time, but in a day of reducing and simplifying in order to concentrate on essentials, it might be seen as inefficient and even a duplication of efforts.

I want to focus here on the principles of visiting teaching. I want to explain how the pegs fit exactly into the hole. I want to explore how it is that through visiting teaching we act as mothers, sisters, helpers, companions, and friends. Visiting teaching is one of the oldest and most important parts of Relief Society. Shortly after Relief Society was founded in 1842, "a necessity committee" of sixteen members was formed to do friendly visiting. This promise was made to them: "The Spirit of the Lord will help you in it." In Nauvoo, sisters usually walked from one home to another to gather their reports on the condition of the Saints.

A woman who had been a visiting teacher for forty-eight years in southern Utah told this story about her experiences:

We were having our families then, so often had to take our babies with us. As it would take us most of a day, we were often treated to homemade root beer in the summer, and in the winter the sisters would ask us into the fire to warm up. . . . There were no pavements in those days, and we would have to push the baby buggy through the mud. We would often lose our rubbers and really have a hard time to cross the streets. In the summer it was hot and dusty, but hot or cold, dust or mud, and no matter how busy we were, we always planned to do our teaching on time, and the Lord blessed us in our work. (The Relief Society Magazine: A Legacy Remembered 1914-1970 [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982], p. 56.)

Until 1943, visiting teachers accepted contributions for charitable purposes, and one early-day visiting teacher reported:

My partner and I would receive contributions of food, soap, clothing, carpet rags, meat, butter, dried fruits, wild berries, etc. We always carried a basket and a sack. The eggs and perishable produce would be put in the basket and the rest in the sack. Sometimes we would receive so many things that we would have to leave them at the homes and go back the next day. If we came into a home where help was needed, we would often stop on our way to help care for the sick, or give a tired mother a helping hand or take home the unfinished knitting of much-needed stockings. Sometimes, we would return in the evening and sit up with the sick, and at Christmas time, we would see that each family had something special for their holiday cheer. (Ibid.)

Lucy Mack Smith, the mother of the Prophet Joseph, said at the second meeting of Relief Society, "We must cherish one another, comfort one another and watch over one another." I would add, We must nurture, protect, defend, support, cheer, and love one another. As long as we feel this concern and love, visiting teaching will be a successful and important part of who we are as Latter-day Saints.

We should never underestimate the value of a one-on-one visit. Just as women walked around Nauvoo gathering information about the conditions of individuals and families in that early era of the Church, so do sisters in Perth, Australia, and Papeete, Tahiti, walk to homes of their neighbors to visit and care for one another. I think it's exciting to be a part of a worldwide association of sisters who exercise this watchful care over each other. Sometimes when I've gone out visiting teaching I've thought about that, and wondered if maybe women in Manitoba, Canada, or in Mexico or in France or even in the Soviet Union were out doing their visiting teaching at the same time I was. It's quite a concept, to be part of something that is so much bigger than ourselves.

But even more exciting to me is the fact that I can make a difference—I can visit Jesse and Maureen and Lucille and they'll be happy to see me. That's the value of the one-on-one visit. Nothing substitutes for that opportunity of creating an honest, personal relationship that is part of the unified sisterhood we emphasize in our Relief Society mission statement.

I have good visiting teachers. I am not easy to get hold of, but they are pretty steady. They will come at 8:00 A.M. or 9:45 P.M. or on Sunday or catch me by phone, but they're consistent, and one or the other keeps in touch to know if things are all right with me. You might think, "Don't you get enough of Relief Society every day?" It's true that I spend many, many hours a day with the important business of Relief Society; but when my visiting teachers come, they're not talking to me as Sister Jack, Relief Society president, they're talking to me as Elaine—their friend, their neighbor—and that is important. I never get enough of a one-on-one association with my visiting teachers whom I love. I need my visiting teachers, and so do you.

I have heard many questions and interesting interpretations regarding the "new visiting teaching policy." In the 1988 Relief Society Handbook, guidelines were given that would allow more flexibility in the visiting teaching program. As you read them, you might ask yourself, What is the intent of the guidelines?

The work of Relief Society in assisting the bishop to seek out and care for the poor and the needy is largely carried out through visiting teaching. This selfless service within a loving sisterhood can bring both temporal and spiritual blessings. . . .

The Relief Society president assigns a pair of visiting teachers to each sister to act as a support in time of need. Each sister should receive a contact monthly, such as a personal visit, telephone call, or letter. At least once each quarter, these contacts should be in the form of a personal visit. Those with special needs require more frequent contacts than others. These would include those who are new to the Church or the area; those who are less active, single parents, divorced, widowed, or aged; and those with illness, death, or other difficulties in their families. The more active and fully participating sisters may not require the same attention as those with special needs.

In visiting teaching, both the giver and the receiver are blessed and strengthened in their Church activity by their caring concern for one another.

What is the purpose of visiting teaching? Let me pull out some phrases from our own handbook: selfless service, loving sisterhood, to bring temporal and spiritual blessings. This has not changed and it never will, because it is based on truth.

What has changed in visiting teaching is the flexibility given to use a telephone call or a letter, along with a personal visit, as ways to contact sisters. I fear that many of us have looked at the letter rather than the spirit of the law in how we accomplish our visiting teaching. The handbook never said to visit a sister only quarterly or to visit fully active sisters in lesser degrees than we visit the less-active sisters. What it says is that we should reach out in selfless service within a loving sisterhood, and that there is more than one way to do that. Some of our best gospel experiences come to us as we teach one another or as we receive visits.

Let me share with you the story of Sister Ellis. Sister Ellis is ninety-one years old and lives in Adelaide, Australia. When we went to visit her in her home, I was impressed that the woman who greeted us first was her visiting teacher, a young woman in her early twenties who was planning to be married in the fall. Also there was the ward Relief Society president, as well as the stake Relief Society president, who had brought us. All these sisters knew each other and warmly greeted each other as we entered the home. I was impressed to think that there in Adelaide the stake and ward leaders and the visiting teacher all knew Sister Ellis and cared about her welfare. They have the spirit of visiting teaching.

I am sure there is not a woman among us who couldn't write down a wonderful reason for visiting teaching. If we understand the principle so well, why is visiting teaching such a challenge? I think the reason it is a challenge for most of us is because what we think and what we feel about it are not always the same. Let me share some comments I have heard about visiting teaching from sisters around the world. See if these ring a bell with you:

"We could get 100 percent if we didn't have to keep track of all those women on our rolls that we can never find."

"It seems so stupid to visit my close friends; I feel silly giving them a spiritual message."

"We concentrate on the less active, but sometimes I feel that the sisters who come all the time get ignored—they get all the work and none of the benefit."

"I wish my visiting teachers wouldn't stay so long."

"I wish my visiting teachers wouldn't leave so soon."

"If I could just keep in touch with everyone every three months, I could spend more time."

"My companion's the problem, so I go alone—it's easier."

These common barriers to effective visiting teaching can be overcome, if we approach our callings in the right way. Sometimes all we need is a little rethinking, a little refocusing of our efforts.

If you were to be asked, Who has been an influential person in your life? you might mention all different sorts of people—some family, some teachers, some others—but what they would all have in common is that they took a personal interest in you. Why is it that we sometimes have a hard time remembering the value of personal interest when we do our visiting teaching? Visiting teaching is not a perfunctory task—it is not a matter of rushing to a home, leaving a message, and scooting off to our next appointment. It is a matter of building a personal relationship. This is a much harder thing to do. It is also a much more rewarding thing to do.

I remember several years ago when two of my neighbors went to make a second call on a sister in their district that they had missed. After that visit they said, "As long as we're out, let's stop by Helen Peterson's and see how her father is." When Helen opened the door and saw them, she said, "Oh, how did you know? My dad passed away this afternoon." My friend Doral, one of the visiting teachers, told me, "Elaine, we're going to sit at Helen's house during the funeral. For the first time in my life, I felt like a real visiting teacher." Real visiting teaching matters in the lives of individuals.

I don't believe for one minute that a woman who is active in the Church needs visiting teachers any less than a woman who is less active in the Church or even inactive in the Church. We need to be concerned about the individual. One day my counselors and I went downstairs to the Church Office Building cafeteria for lunch. When we showed our ID cards to the woman at the desk, she said, "Oh, did you come to visit teach me?" We said, "No, we really came for a turkey sandwich," and started walking toward the cafeteria line. But she said to me, "I wish you would visit me. I don't have any visiting teachers or home teachers." Now, that stopped me in my tracks, and I went back. "Have you talked to your president?" I said. "Yes," she responded, "and she's the one who says that since I am the stake Relief Society secretary, I don't need any visiting teachers. I have cried to the bishop, too, and he says, 'Oh, we know that you work for the Church and you go to church, that you're faithful; we don't think you need any home teachers,' but, Sister Jack, I do. I need them both."

Now, just as there are situations like this where a woman needs regular visits, so there are circumstances where other types of contact meet the need. In California a young woman commented, "We need to know the program—are you a bad girl if you only use a phone call?" The point is the need, which must be met—not how often a woman is visited or what manner is used to visit her. Nothing substitutes for a personal contact, and that is the major criteria by which we should measure our performance as visiting teachers—to be sure that women receive a personal contact that is according to their needs.

Many women need visiting teachers to give them support, reassurance, and comfort. Some, particularly younger women, need role models. Some women are lonely; they just need someone to say hello. Others have no access to priesthood blessings in their home. We can help them to know that a home teacher or a quorum leader is available and concerned about them.

What is the rule about how long people should stay or how long visits should be? I have had wonderful visiting teachers stay five satisfying minutes or two satisfying hours, based on the circumstance. Once my visiting teacher replaced a thermal coupler on my furnace when she found me huddled with my children in front of a fireplace waiting for the repairman.

Sometimes the relationships we build with visiting teachers and with our visiting teaching companions last over the decades. I'll never forget the day that my husband and I arrived with our family at Mount Edgecumbe, Alaska. We had small children. We were stationed in bare government housing with our furniture still five weeks away by boat. At 9:00 A.M. the first day, there was a knock on my door. Standing in front of me with a hot huckleberry pie was a beautiful woman who said, "Hi, I'm Helen Dolenc. Welcome to Mount Edgecumbe. It's so good to have another Mormon family on the island." In those days Mount Edgecumbe wasn't a branch—it wasn't even a twig. I was so grateful for this self-appointed visiting teacher and spent many subsequent days picking berries with her. Helen hasn't changed. One day on my desk appeared some home-canned salmon with this note, signed Don: "Here's some of mother's best from the best mother." Don Dolenc was Helen's only child, and I had given him his first bath. Do I think visiting teaching is rewarding? Absolutely!

How can we best visit teach? Here are a few basic guidelines:

Sister Camilla Kimball was an exemplary visiting teacher for more than fifty years. She understood the spirit of this great work when she said: "We are responsible for one another. I help you and you help me. Visiting teaching offers some of the strongest evidence that we are truly willing to serve one another. . . . All people need to appreciate what life has already given us and realize that we can still give what Christ has directed us to give—service and love." (The Writings of Camilla Eyring Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1988], pp. 10, 145.)
