Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 17

Providing in the Lord's Way

I have learned many things over the years about the essence of the gospel. Recently I looked up the dictionary definitions of the words provide and charity, two words that capture that essence. I studied these because provide is a word we use often in welfare, and charity is a word we use often in Relief Society. It's interesting to consider how similar they are.

As used in the scriptures, provide seems to have two basic meanings. One is to prepare and get ready. This seems to be the use in Hebrews 11:40, "God having provided some better thing for us." To provide also means to furnish or supply. Doctrine and Covenants 75:28 talks about "every man who is obliged to provide for his own family." Of course, those meanings are close to each other and sometimes interchangeable.

A look at how the Lord and his prophets use the word provide is much more than an exercise in verbiage. It is really an opportunity to understand what the Lord wants us to know and then to do in order to provide in his way. The essence of providing in the Lord's way is twofold; it demands both preparing and furnishing. Sometimes these come together; sometimes they are separate functions. They are both essential to the principles of welfare.

I mention these definitions because they help me define and understand Relief Society and welfare. If we are indeed serious about helping the Saints make ready and have the capacity to furnish their families with the things they need, we must be serious about the principles of charity. And after all, Charity Never Faileth is more than a motto for us in Relief Society, it's our way of life.

Here are some scriptural phrases that discuss elements of charity: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 19:19.) "Relieve the oppressed." (Isaiah 1:17.) "Give to the poor." (Mark 10:21.) "Succor those that stand in need." (Mosiah 4:16.) Each of these is stated as a commandment: love, relieve, give, succor. Each is a strong action word—just as vivid and compelling as the word provide.

For me, a large part of getting the big picture is getting an understanding of these words. Together they encapsule the essence of Relief Society and welfare.

Love

I have had many wonderful experiences with men and women throughout the Church. I have traveled through the United States, to Canada, Tahiti, Australia, South Africa, Ghana, and Cote d'Ivoire. I have also met in my office women from Poland, Russia, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Zimbabwe, Korea, Japan, Samoa, Finland, Sweden, Mexico, and more. My testimony has grown as I have observed and heard many happy, sad, and moving stories about how the Saints of God reach out to others.

Raija "Pini" Kemppainen and her husband Jussi are natives of Helsinki, Finland. They serve together in the mission presidency of the Helsinki East Mission. They often go into the republics of the Soviet Union to meet with the fledgling branches of the Church in Vyborg, St. Petersburg, and Moscow. Pini explained to the Relief Society general presidency how difficult it is for new members of the Church in the Eastern bloc countries to learn to administer the programs of the Church. Imagine never having been to church before. Imagine having to shop for the necessities of life two to three hours each day. Imagine three families living in an apartment of 600 square feet. Pini told us that the sisters in Vyborg, a small Soviet community just east of the Finnish border, struggle to care for their families, maintain their homes, work full-time, and establish the Church in their town. These modern pioneers hunger to know what it means to be a Latter-day Saint.

Pini wanted the sisters to know how to visit teach each other. She introduced the concept of visiting teaching with a story about her ten-year-old daughter. It seems the girl came home very upset one day because she could not walk the neighbor's dog. "Well, that's no reason to be upset," Pini commented. "You don't understand," the girl responded. "Two neighbor girls take the dog for a walk to earn money. I do it for the heart." And that's what visiting teaching is—what we do for the heart.

I love that story because it speaks to my heart about the reason why visiting teaching or home teaching matters. I often think what a difference it would make in the neighborhoods of this world if every visiting teacher said before she knocked on a door, "I am making this visit for the heart—my sister's and mine."

The point is that love is the most inviting, memorable, motivating experience in life. I have often thought that perhaps the major reason the Lord told us to love one another is that only through the experience of loving someone can we begin to understand the Lord's love for us. Nothing enriches the soul as much as loving someone else enough to put them first. Nothing makes us better people than the opportunity to care for someone even when it is inconvenient for us. Love—charity—is an eternal law of such magnitude that the prophets have told us if we don't possess it, little else matters. Amulek testified, "If ye do not remember to be charitable, ye are as dross, which the refiners do cast out, (it being of no worth)." (Alma 34:29.)

When I was in Tahiti, a stake Relief Society presidency took me to the home of a woman who has been paralyzed for many years. She gets around her small home by pulling herself on her elbows. She had no visible means of leaving the home, but family members were very much in evidence bringing in the things she needed to live. I was touched by the obvious love between this woman and that presidency. They embraced and kissed each other in greeting. They clasped hands and chatted excitedly in Tahitian. It was a wonderful moment to watch and to feel.

In South Africa a sister conducts a community homemaking class. She invites local women, most of whom are not of our faith, to attend classes in how to use native foods to prepare nutritious meals and how to make items at home that they can sell. Seventy women came the first time she offered this class, ninety the second.

My journal is full of stories like this of loving women and men. Nothing is more central to a true Christian life than demonstrating love for others. Nothing can compensate for lack of love. Nothing is as satisfying as loving others. Nothing is more necessary for our growth than to love and be loved. Nothing, absolutely nothing, is as good as love. If our work is not based on love, it won't matter what it is based on.

Relieve

I have always been glad that our organization is called the "Relief Society," not the "Benevolent Society." There was some considerable discussion at the founding of Relief Society about the name of the organization. Fortunately, from my point of view, relief won out. I guess I like the word so much because it seems so full of action. Relief gets right to the heart of things. The word literally means "removal, lessening, aid, help, and support." When we relieve someone, when we extend relief, we're doing a lot.

Brother and Sister Kissi in Ghana run the Deseret Clinic. They specialize in helping expectant mothers. Sister Kissi, a stake Relief Society president, is a midwife. She teaches about prenatal care and caring for each other. Brother Kissi, a regional representative, is a physician. In their little clinic they teach about relief as much as they provide it. An example of their care is that they cook for patients who must stay overnight. This is unusual in a country where the family is expected to bring in food for patients. The Kissis know that relief comes to mothers and babies in more than one way. They try to relieve both body and spirit, thereby extending the type of relief the Lord intends.

To me relief is a feeling of having all the pressure lifted off. In my visits with women around the world I think the most common refrain is that they feel great pressures. Their welfare needs relate to these pressures, which come primarily from family and economic sources. I find that most women do an admirable job of confronting and conquering their own life pressures. What they need is support. We all know the Church cannot administer so all the Saints are completely relieved of their burdens. But I am convinced that we can minister so the Saints feel relief. We can work to respond more lovingly. We can listen more and say less. We can extend a hand of fellowship, even a hand up when needed. We can let people know in many ways that they are loved, that they matter. I do not suppose it is easy to minister. I do know that to do so is the essence of the gospel.

I have never seen better examples of this Christlike ministering than among the missionary couples who often serve in circumstances far removed from the comforts of life. In Australia I met a couple in Alice Springs. The Alice, as they call it, is in the heart of the outback—smack in the center of Australia. They call it the back of beyond, with good reason. Here six elders serve along with one senior couple. I watched Sister Hansen teach new converts to the Church how to conduct a Relief Society meeting. I watched Elder Hansen help a new branch president organize his presidency. I watched both of them put an arm around every Saint who walked across the threshold of that small branch. Talk about relief. I don't know who felt more of it—the mission president knowing those elders were in good hands, or the branch president knowing he had a good senior companion to help him, or the brand-new convert sister who was a new mother far away from her own mother. The Hansens relieved all of them.

Give

Give—now there's a word for you. Think of all the Lord has given us. I cannot possibly make a complete list, but here are a few of the Lord's gifts to us. He gave his only begotten Son. (John 3:16.) The Savior gave his life for the sheep. (John 10:11.) Through his atonement, the Savior gives us everlasting consolation. (2 Thessalonians 2:16.) The Lord gave the children of Israel a land. (Genesis 12:7.) He gives to us according to our deeds. (Psalm 28:4.) He gives rest. (Matthew 11:28.) He gives and requires much. (Luke 12:48.) Try sometime to look up all the scriptures in the Topical Guide about giving. It's a wonderful experience to read about giving as the Lord has done it and as he asks us to do it.

The Lord has told us a lot about giving. But he has also told us through our leaders that we are not required to give what we don't have. I find this doctrine very comforting. I should give according to my circumstances, not yours.

In the context of welfare giving means many other things. It means that we must teach each other the correct principles of giving. I was dismayed recently when I learned that at a Church college, some young Relief Society sisters went to their bishop requesting money because they'd overspent their food budget for the month. It is my hope that a good bishop counseled with those sisters, taking advantage of that opportunity to teach them the correct doctrine about giving and provident living.

We are most blessed because we know that, in fact, giving is a part of our stewardship. The Lord taught, "I, the Lord, . . . built the earth . . . and all things therein are mine." (D&C 104:14.) "Yea, I prepared all things, and have given unto the children of men to be agents unto themselves." (D&C 104:17.) "That every man may give an account unto me of the stewardship which is appointed unto him." (D&C 104:12.)

We need to understand those critical concepts. First, all things are the Lord's and we are stewards over them. When I finally understood this doctrine of stewardship, it was a great moment in my spiritual development. It was something I learned, however. It did not distill as the dews from heaven. When we understand that what we give is in part a measure of our stewardship to the Lord, we can put our giving in a better spiritual context. There is a real freedom in saying from the heart, "All these goods are not mine. They are the Lord's and he has lent me his property." I find that children, youth, and adults are less selfish when they think this way about the goods of this world.

A woman I know has the habit of saying to her children, "I pay for this car, but I don't feel like its owner. I am the steward of it. The Lord has blessed our family with enough money to buy it, but it's our joint stewardship. That means that every time you take a corner fast and leave some of the tire rubber on the street, our stewardship is a little less valuable. Each time you borrow it, it's part of your responsibility to fill it with gas. Just remember, dear, it's our joint stewardship to take care of this car." This is a smart mother. After all, if it's only Mom's car, the teenagers don't feel much responsibility for it. But when everyone has a piece of the responsibility, the thought patterns are different.

It is a true part of human nature that we are more likely to cooperate and participate when we understand how we fit into the big picture. When we understand our responsibilities, it is as if the map descends and at last we can see where we are and where we need to go to reach our destination. In Relief Society we learn about the joys of charitable giving. Such giving emulates the Savior's example and represents obedience to the commandments the Lord has given us.

Some months ago I made a study of several scriptural recountings of times when the people lived in righteousness. In each case the people gave more freely to the poor as they achieved higher levels of righteousness in their personal lives. As the Lord told us in the Doctrine and Covenants, it is possible to provide for the Saints: "And it is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine. But it must needs be done in mine own way; and behold this is the way that I, the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low." (D&C 104:15-16.) This can only happen when we as individual Saints are willing to give.

Succor

Perhaps the best synonym for the word succor is simply help. To me, to offer help or succor means to assist in ways that correct circumstances. While I was in Africa, I learned some new lessons about providing succor from the Waites. Brother Waite is a wiry, retired school headmaster. His wife is a gray-haired dynamo. They took my husband and me to meet some wonderful people in the Ivory Coast. They introduced us to a member family who are refugees from Liberia. The husband, an attorney, was now reduced to tending a few tomato plants, which were the major source of sustenance for his family. He had literally wheeled his mother out of Liberia in a wheelbarrow. The day we met him, his mother had just died. What the Waites gave that sorrowing family was encouragement and support—succor. I've never been anywhere it was more needed or more appreciated.

I have always been grateful that the Lord used the story of the Samaritan as the means of teaching us about loving our neighbors. This story is instructive to me about the concept of succoring. Luke records: "A certain Samaritan . . . saw him [and] he had compassion on him, and went to him." This Samaritan was a man whose heart had already been softened so that it quickly filled with compassion when he saw a man in need. The Samaritan was also an observer. He saw and felt.

The story continues: "[the Samaritan] went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him." The Samaritan was a man of action, knowledge, and skill. He knew how to assess a situation and was resourceful in creating a solution to a problem.

Jesus told us further: "And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee." (Luke 10:33-35.) The Samaritan looked for long-term solutions, acted with care and responsibility, and still fulfilled his other obligations.

I'm sure you recognize the principles demonstrated in this story as the principles of welfare. Modern-day Samaritans, all of us must be men and women who see, feel Christlike love, know how to act, and possess skill and knowledge. We must know how to assess a situation and create solutions. We must follow through, attempting to act with the care and responsibility the Lord asks of us.

A friend told me recently of a family her son met in Brazil while he was on his mission. The father had been a bishop there and had done well financially. The parents felt, however, that their children would benefit from the educational system of the United States. Moving to New York, they undertook the cleaning of homes and office buildings to support their large family. Because of limited English skills, they could find no other work. They were involved in their ward and served faithfully in every assignment. A son was months away from a mission call when he became ill. Tests showed that a major operation was needed, but the family had no money and no insurance. The parents did not know what to do, but decided not to counsel with their bishop about this matter. They were embarrassed to be in this situation and felt uncomfortable taking any money from the Church.

One day shortly after the parents had made their decision not to involve the Church authorities in their problem, the visiting teachers came. One of the visiting teachers was also the ward Relief Society president. When the sister discussed her son's health, this sensitive president asked about their ability to pay for medical care. Then it all came out—the fears, the reluctance, the embarrassment. The president explained that the welfare system was put in place to succor those in need. She talked with this mother about the importance of being receivers so others could have the blessing and opportunity of giving. An appointment was made with the bishop and appropriate help given.

We take turns being givers and receivers. For most of us it is infinitely more comfortable to be the giver, but sometimes it's ours to receive so others have the growth that comes only from giving the type of succor demonstrated by the Samaritan.

Welfare is not just a program to be administered by the Relief Society president and the bishop. It is individuals giving what they have to give, meeting the specific needs of their brothers and sisters. May each of us recommit to loving, relieving, giving, succoring, and providing in the Lord's way.
