Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

Personal Vision

CHAPTER 18

Example in the Home

I had a friend who was teaching a child development class at Brigham Young University about fifteen years ago. One day she said, "Elaine, you and Joe must have something special you do in raising your boys. Will you come to my class and tell us what you've done to achieve the results you have?"

I was flattered that she would ask. When I told my oldest son, Dave, that she had asked me to come, he said, "Doesn't she want us to come too?" I said, "No, I don't think so." He continued, "I don't know why not. After all, we're what make you look good." Which brings up a sound leadership principle: no leader is any better than the ones he serves.

Love to me is a synonym for home and family. One day I asked my young son Eric, "What color is love?" He replied, "Pink, because that's the most prettiest color there is."

Husband and wife must love the Lord and love each other. This love fulfills the two greatest commandments, upon which hang all the law and the prophets. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. " (Matthew 22:37-39.) Nothing is more important in a family than having a good mate, being able to share with that person, having the same goals and a united feeling of what you are trying to accomplish. The art of living together happily is perhaps one of the greatest of all arts. Having and being the right mate are the foundation for all else in the family.

We hear a lot about how important love is with our children, but I believe love is effective only as it is coupled with action. Says the writer of Proverbs, "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it." (Proverbs 22:6.) To train implies to do something; that is a commanding statement which puts love into action. Sometimes I find that I am trained more easily than the child—I wonder if I'm the trainer or the trainee. But I know action is necessary if I love my children. I have a firm enough testimony to realize the responsibility I have and the importance of the goal of true happiness.

Happiness results when we can feel ourselves progressing, continually growing, learning, changing, and expanding our outlook—being able to see that we are not the same people we were last year. Education is important in the home because it is one way to accomplish this progression, and also because it is an eternal concept. "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." (D&C 131:6.)

All four of our boys were in college at one time, two at home and two away from home. I remember well the years Dave was applying for medical school. I knew what the odds were for his acceptance and how much it meant to him. Knowing how disappointed he would be if he did not make it, I used to think, "Don't want to go to medical school, Dave. Don't let yourself in for that disappointment again. Want to be a mortician instead!" And yet I admired his integrity and his aspirations and that he worked toward his goal despite the odds.

I realized that we couldn't protect him from every blow or disappointment. In fact, during this time I saw the role of adversity in strengthening character and increasing compassion. I believe in this concept, but it's hard to let my children experience it. To let them progress on their own, accepting failure when necessary, takes a lot of generosity and love.

Our second son, Bill, didn't want to go to medical school. He said his college class was full of pre-med students working only for A grades, and that he enjoyed the learning process too much to be caught in that hassle. "Enjoy the learning process." What joy that idea has brought to me; what joy it brings to Bill and also to the two brothers following him.

Bill has a son of his own now. In a letter he was telling of the latest accomplishment of that common, ordinary, perfect grandchild and said, "James imitates me so directly that it is almost scary." It doesn't scare me. The same boy that imitates his father's taste in dogs and books is going to imitate Bill's style of humor, his desire for excellence, his method of praying.

Often we expect children to do all the learning in a family, without realizing that constant growth is necessary for each of us. Parents set the example in every area of life, including continued learning. Joe is constantly updating and improving his knowledge in his profession. Through my church callings I have tried to keep abreast of women's topics and Relief Society curriculum. I have become proficient in a sport. We study the scriptures. My boys see this and share in our progress as we rejoice in theirs. A big boost one summer came when Eric was hitting balls to me on the tennis court and said, "Hey, Mom, you're not bad for a beginner. Try it again." Perhaps that was a little thing, but in family living, the little things are often the big things. The progress we make here is not only for now but for the eternities.

I appreciate the example set by the older boys for the younger. When Eric left on his mission, Gord was being especially helpful to his dad in the yard one day. When I commented on this, he replied, "I have to help now that Eric's gone." He had moved from the shade into the sunlight of bright example.

I also appreciate the example set by a grandfather. My dear father above all taught me the dignity of work, the rewards of self-reliance, and the joys of service. Even in the eighty-seventh year of his life he was happiest with some widow's lawn to cut or bushes to trim or snow to shovel. My children saw this—and saw how independent Grandpa was, wanting to still do everything himself even when his ambitions outpaced his physical abilities. Our whole family's attitude about work came from him. We have rarely had to pay college tuition, because our boys worked themselves through or earned scholarships.

Family members can give great encouragement to each other. In the close circle of love, words of correction and suggestions are somehow softened, cushioned with caring. I maintain that a woman has to have a healthy self-esteem to survive living in a family of four boys. Actually, they stimulate me to build self-esteem. I find that it is more important for me to achieve in the eyes of my family than for anyone else. Conversely, it is important for me to let them, more than anyone else, know that I appreciate their accomplishments.

Once I had asked Joe to do a household chore for me so I could concentrate on a troubling assignment I had been given. He responded, "Okay, I'll do that chore, but I don't want to ever hear you say again that you're not smart enough to fulfill that assignment. You are smart enough; you can too do it." Maybe that would not be encouraging to you, but his words helped me feel I really could accomplish that job.

Our family has fun together. Joe has always geared his free time to activities the whole family could enjoy, so we did a lot of things together. I've gone through cycles of learning, as Joe's teaching the boys has also taught me.

Through the years, I have found joy in watching our boys learn to put the needs of others before their own. I remember Bill helping Eric with math in eighth grade. Eric was rebellious because he wanted answers and Bill insisted on methods, and they had some stormy sessions. Bill was willing to help if Eric appreciated it, but he didn't like wasting his time if Eric wasn't going to listen. Then I remember report card time and the look of great satisfaction on Eric's face when he came in the door exclaiming, "I got an A in math!" Then, recognizing the reason behind it, he added, "Thanks to Bill."

I think of the two older boys fussing about the difficulties of driving to the University of Utah together and waiting for each other. I realized that Dave, who worked each night until midnight and then studied afterward, got up in time to take Bill to a 7:45 A.M. class all during the dark, snowy winter quarter although Dave's own first class did not start until 9:20. And I also noticed that Bill was always up and had the snow scraped off the windshield and the motor warm when Dave came out of the house.

President Spencer W. Kimball said, "Heaven is a place, but also a condition; it is home and family. It is understanding and kindness. It is interdependence and selfless activity. It is quiet, sane living; personal sacrifice, genuine hospitality, wholesome concern for others." (Ensign, December 1971, p. 39.) In Doctrine and Covenants 130:2 the Lord tells us, "That same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there [when the Savior comes], only it will be coupled with eternal glory."

Our homes should be places where family members get along well and bring out the best in one another. Our success will largely be determined by how faithfully we focus on living the gospel in the home. A parent's role is to provide leadership and example.

I'd rather be a mother than anything else. When Dave used to call from Washington and became immediately engrossed in discussing a medical concept with Joe, when the whole family jumped with excitement over the important letter that came from the First Presidency with a mission call, when I watched the adoration with which the youngest boy followed the oldest in everything he did, when I saw the tenderness with which the oldest, age ten, held a newborn baby brother in his arms, then indeed my cup ran over, and I wanted our family life to go on forever. The Lord has outlined the plan and told us what to do so that it can. I thank him for the glimpse of heaven I have now in my family, and for the promises that it can continue.
