Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 19

Rings of Growth

When Christmastime rolls around each year, I envision the bushy, fragrant pine trees we had in my parents' home in Canada. My dad had a friend who cut trees fresh from the nearby mountains and hauled them to our home on a horse-drawn sleigh. These huge trees brushed the ceiling and filled the corner of our living room with branches heavy enough to hold our wrapped presents. To me the tree represents everything good about the season: my home, the love we share, family togetherness, and Christmas itself.

It was exciting to be a bride living in Staten Island, New York, during the Christmas season of 1949. Both my husband, Joe, and I worked in Manhattan and spent our limited free time happily exploring the city together. We were having a wonderful time. Life was good.

Early in December we received a letter from Fred, an old neighborhood friend of Joe's, telling us that he would be in New York for three days on his way home from a two-year mission. We knew that he had served in Czechoslovakia for eighteen months and had completed his mission in England, but we were oblivious to the conditions in Europe at that time. We were light-hearted, carefree, and eager to share our Christmas cheer with an old friend.

Fred arrived a sobered young missionary. He told us of being forcibly expelled from Czechoslovakia, of scarce food and dwindling medical supplies in the country, of the devotion of the Latter-day Saints and how he hated to leave them. He was unsettled and troubled by the oppressive events he had witnessed in Europe.

It was two weeks before Christmas. While I was preparing a special turkey dinner the evening after Fred arrived, I suggested that he and Joe go on the bus to get a Christmas tree for the bedroom of our small two-room apartment. I was anxious to have a tree. While Joe and Fred were gone, I envisioned a beautiful, full tree, reminiscent of those at home.

When I heard Joe and Fred coming up the stairs, I rushed to see what they had brought. Joe held the New York tree—small enough to be carried in one hand. I was shocked. This Christmas tree would never do! "It will be just fine for the table," Joe said. A tree that would fit on a table? A table tree was simply not acceptable! I pointed out the only solution, "Take it back and get a bigger one." Apparently Joe sensed how important it was to me because with minimal protest he and Fred took the small tree back on the bus to exchange it for a larger one. The six-foot tree with sparse branches and short needles that ended up at the foot of the bed was not very beautiful even with decorations, but at least it was a tree that could bridge the transition from the Christmases of the past to the establishing of our own family memories and traditions.

Seven years later our home was in southeast Alaska. Joe and I and our first two sons, David, six, and Bill, four, lived in government housing at the edge of a large area of muskeg—a spongy, swampy bog covered with moss and small plants. Ponds of water, a few pine trees, small shrubs, and skunk cabbage were scattered across this fertile area.

Because they stood alone, muskeg pine trees were usually well formed and symmetrical—perfect for Christmas trees. One afternoon close to Christmas we decided to create a family tradition by chopping our own fresh Christmas tree. We took an axe and a saw and walked to the edge of the muskeg, squishing through the tundra. We examined each tree along the way. Finally, some distance into the bog, we found the perfect one. Joe hacked off the lower branches so he could reach the thick trunk with his saw. Dave, Bill, and I held branches out of the way while he worked at felling the tree. When it toppled over, we were delighted. Dragging the tree was too much for the boys, so I took them on ahead, carefully picking our footing while Joe pulled the tree by himself through the thick, goopey bog. When next I looked, Joe was in the soggiest part of the muskeg to the top of his boots. He tried to pull one foot onto solid ground but only succeeded in burying the other foot deeper into the guck. No matter which foot he tried to extract, he sank further. He couldn't find a solid base. To our horror, he was slowly sinking into the ground!

"Stay where you are, kids," I said. "I'm going to help Dad." Joe yelled, "Stay back! I'll catch my breath and get out of this." Fortunately the branches of the bushy tree had spread over the marshy area; Joe braced himself on the branches and struggled to firmer ground. He was exhausted. He pulled the tree to the edge of the muskeg with the last of his energy and left it there until he could borrow a truck to transport it the rest of the way to our house.

It had been a harrowing experience, but what a tree we had! It was exactly the kind you would choose to put in City Hall. When we got home, we could hardly pull it through the door. Although that tree hadn't filled much of the muskeg, it bumped against the ceiling and nearly touched all four walls of our living room. We chopped off branches from the back of the tree, shoved it toward the corner, then hacked off more branches until it was finally stuffed into the space where it belonged. The lopsided tree fit perfectly with the help of wires to hold it up. We have never had a more magnificent tree. Nor have I ever had a more fatigued husband! Joe said, "In the future, whatever price you have to pay for a tree, pay it. It is worth it!"

Much as I love fragrant, green trees, I followed the fashion in the early sixties and decided to flock our tree. I thought the natural look of a tree after a snowstorm would be a wonderful addition to our Christmas decor. With a do-it-yourself flocking kit that attached to my vacuum cleaner, I was sure I could create a beautiful tree for much less than a tree cost on a lot. I decided that I would do the job right where the tree would stand so none of the flocking would be disturbed. I connected the vacuum to the powdery flocking material and the bottle of water and turned on the power. It worked! Synthetic snow made the tree look like a winter wonderland. As I finished and stepped back to admire my Currier and Ives tree, I noticed that the wall, the sofa, the piano, and the chairs were also part of my winter wonderland. We had a spectacular tree, but snow removal that year continued into June. The following year I remembered Joe's advice in Alaska and paid the price for a tree someone else had flocked.

Last year I didn't send Joe for a tree; I didn't flock one myself; I didn't even buy a Christmas tree. My children have moved to homes of their own, and I used other decorations to bring the festive feelings of Christmas into our home. It was a different kind of Christmas for me. Even without a tree, the feelings that Christmas trees symbolize seemed more real to me than ever before. I basked in the warmth created by years of family togetherness around our trees. A thousand memories fill my heart at Christmastime—memories that have grown and matured into a deeper understanding that the peace and goodwill brought to earth with the birth of the Savior are the basis for all the good things Christmas means. I reflected upon the New York "return-the-tree" season of 1949 and thought how blessed we were to have had the luxury of worrying about the size of our tree when so many people had no means at all. I remembered my two little boys, now fathers, and laughed about Joe's skirmish with a muskeg bog in Alaska. I thought about the many fashions of the holidays: how flocked trees, like wide collars, come and go, but the spirit of Christmas does not change.
