Elaine L. Jack, Eye to Eye, Heart to Heart ( 1992)

CHAPTER 20

Heritage

One year, while I was painting the walls in my downstairs hall after having convinced my husband to help me in our first venture of wallpapering the ceiling, I was thinking with satisfaction of all the rooms and furniture I had painted for our homes. I wondered if my mother knew what ambition and skills she had passed on to me—if she knew that forty years later I would be doing the same things I had seen her do. Then I realized that I have read the same books aloud to my children that my mother read to me. I cook the same desserts Mother did. I use the same expressions.

Although heritage is a personal thing, perhaps you can relate my thoughts to your experiences, and we can share our common legacy as inheritors of traditions and values from the past. I am fascinated by the practical traditions—methods for home doctoring, for gardening and cooking, for decorating and sewing—that mothers pass on to their children. I am also struck by the value systems and the spiritual heritage that enrich our lives. These come both from the ancestors whose names we know and from the scriptural foremothers and fathers we reverence. It is important for us to assess these traditions, because we are in the process of passing on to the next generation our own ways of thinking, feeling, and doing. Will these children remember us with thanks for our dedication to a good cause, to eternal values?

What traits and talents did I inherit? My mother was not what you'd call an artsy-craftsy person, but she didn't sit idle. She was resourceful, and spent much of her time in what we would call recycling. She called it "making over" or "redoing." Her sewing machine was always out. As I think back on my made-over dresses, I remember especially how I loved a red taffeta formal that was made for me from my sister's. And my sister Jean cherishes the memory of a bathrobe made from Grandma's old grey flannel robe, newly trimmed in bright red velvet. Mother did the painting at our house, renewed the old iron-posted bedstead for our newly remodeled bedroom, and could always make a meal out of bits and pieces in the icebox.

Many family traits and ways of doing things come from our heritage, though we're often not conscious of their origins. In me it's the streak of economy, the thrill of getting a bargain, the unique work ethic we developed growing up in southern Alberta. We had to preserve and prepare for the long, cold winter. My sister Jean said, "I've given away my canning bottles three times! But this is my heritage. I can't let things go to waste. I have to can." From my heritage too comes an appreciation for the out-of-doors: the wheat fields of Alberta, Old Chief Mountain, patches of yellow buttercups, and purple shooting stars.

Even though some of our heritage passes to us unconsciously, even more we receive because our parents and grandparents consciously wanted to preserve all that was good in their lives, improve upon it, and pass it on to us. Isn't that exactly what we want to do for our children? We want to give them the most valuable things we have. In some ways we can gather up our heritage and offer it to our children.

When the pioneers came to southern Alberta, life was a constant struggle. It was all they could do to provide the basic needs for their families. Yet these pioneers were not satisfied merely to have functional things; they, especially the women, longed for beautiful things too. With imagination and ingenuity and very little else, they created a corner of culture and beauty. They did this in many ways, primarily through their handiwork.

The early settlers made every stitch of clothing and household linens by hand. Practically every article had embellishments of tatting, embroidery, crocheting, or homemade lace. Because there weren't many patterns, women drew on their imaginations and made up their own. Sometimes they borrowed a finished item from a neighbor, "to take a pattern off it." Even when the same pattern was used by many people, the results were individual and distinctive.

Although patchwork is a very old craft, it has become a bridge across generations—an example of culture being passed on. Women used to trade swatches of material with their neighbors in order to get colors and fabrics they needed to finish their patchwork designs. They could proudly point to the piece that was Ellie's Sunday dress or Aunt Lucy's taffeta skirt that she brought from England. Sometimes a thoughtful mother would save bits from her daughter's dresses as she grew up, then piece them all together into a memory quilt for the girl's trousseau. I have friends today who have done the same thing.

It seems that women of every age and time with talented hands have expressed their inherent desire to create and to add something of their own to everyday items. For example, for generations women have been making a statement about the world in which they live through quilt making. Modern quilts reflect technological advances with synthetic blends and bonded batts. Rather than pieces gleaned from the scrap bag, quilts today are usually made from purchased fabric, often with patterns that eliminate the need for marking. With less intricate designs, we tie or machine stitch for "instant" quilts. In this way, we're saying, "I'm busy car-pooling children, taking university classes, learning tennis. Times are good; materials are plentiful." Someday our granddaughters will read this history from our handiwork as they decode the quilts we pass on to them.

Life on a farm forty years ago was demanding on a woman. Even there, my Aunt Antris created her corner of beauty when she planted rows and rows of bounteous vegetables. Beyond the vegetables, she added asters and bells of Ireland, with sweet peas on the fence. People in Cardston nursed geraniums into bloom in their south windows during the cold winter months, red blossoms bringing some brightness into their lives. In our home, cactus blooming at Christmastime was the wonder of the winter.

These townspeople welcomed culture. Some may remember the chautauqua, which was a circuit of traveling lectures and concerts and recitals, performing between about 1903 and 1930 in a large tent in our town. The chautauquas brought a taste of culture to the frontier. In addition, we children had music lessons. We learned about literature and drama. Though we were not New York City or even Toronto, we looked beyond the necessities of life to those things that lifted us and added refinement.

An important part of my heritage is homemaking. To a Latter-day Saint woman, the word homemaking has great significance. Since every task performed in her home, whether she lives alone or with a family, is done in the framework of eternity, this demands the best she has to offer. Homemaking includes the creation of beauty, the encouragement of culture, the nurturing of warm family relationships. It also includes the constant concern of every provident homemaker, ancient or modern, for feeding, clothing, and caring for that family.

The provident homemaker is described for all time in the thirty-first chapter of Proverbs: "Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies. . . . She is like the merchants' ships; she bringeth her food from afar. She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens." (Proverbs 31:10, 14-15.)

My Grandmother Low was this kind of a provident homemaker. I try to be too. Our concerns have been the same, but our methods of providing "meat for our household" have differed. One of my uncles wrote this about Grandmother Low's homemaking ability:

As father was a bookkeeper and was Stake and Tithing Clerk he knew very little about livestock and farming, but mother was of good farm stock and did much of the managing as well as the work.

I would certainly pay tribute to mother for her ability to take care of a large family as she did all the housework and feeding of an always hungry bunch of kids. Mother made all the clothes, knitted the socks and mittens, made our underwear from grey flannel, as well as milked cows, churned the butter and sold it, raised chickens, ducks and turkeys, was a counselor in the Relief Society and would gather wheat for them from all the neighboring farms.

Grandmother was also a midwife. As hard as all that work she did sounds, is any less required of me? I don't have to do the same physical things Grandma Low did, but I have to be just as industrious, just as compassionate, just as frugal, just as prepared for the winter as she was. This is my heritage.

"She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard. She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms. She perceiveth that her merchandise is good: her candle goeth not out by night. She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff. She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy." (Proverbs 31:16-20.)

These are the teachings of the gospel to me today: "I ask you earnestly, have you provided for your family a year's supply of food, clothing, and, where possible, fuel? The revelation to produce and store food may be as essential to our temporal welfare today as boarding the ark was to the people in the days of Noah." (Ezra Taft Benson, Conference Report, October 1987, p. 61.)

In her eighties, the prophet's wife, Sister Camilla Kimball, surprised her friends by leaving a study club a little early one spring afternoon. When asked why, she said, "I've got to go home and plant my carrots." One friend asked, "Camilla, do you mean to tell me you plant a garden?" "Of course," she replied, "the prophet has asked us to. Can I do anything less?"

One summer my eighty-four-year-old dad bottled 110 quarts of fruit. Can I do anything less?

I can vividly remember walking up the wooden path to Grandma Anderson's house, opening the door to the smell of finnan haddie or gooseberry pie. On walking into the living room, I usually saw her sitting in her oak armchair at a dropleaf table covered with genealogy sheets. Spread out before her would be correspondence with stamps on it from Great Britain, boxes of papers, an open ink bottle, and a five-cent pencil sharpener. She spent hours researching, corresponding, and copying by hand the names of her ancestors. At her death, her records were passed to her daughter, my mother, who charged me to continue the work. A few years ago, when I got out her records to sort them, I kept thinking, "Surely there must be more. This couldn't have been all Grandma did!" It was all, but her "all" was done without computers or even typewriters, without air mail or special libraries. Her "all" was total dedication to the scripture: "And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers." (Joseph Smith-History 1:39.)

Grandma turned to her ancestors in love and concern, and in so doing she set an example that became a valuable heritage passed on to me. If I took my family to the family history library today, we could probably research Grandma's lifetime of genealogy work in three or four hours. But her work, of course, is done, and we have new challenges in research that will take our total dedication.

"Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all." (Proverbs 31:28-29.)

In what other ways does our heritage remind us to be dedicated and self-reliant? Health matters are a concern in every generation. We are expected to handle the sickness of family members with care and competence. Can you imagine the feeling of helplessness and terror a woman on the frontier felt when one of her family was struck with whooping cough, smallpox, or diphtheria? She was often isolated, no professional care was available, and she had to use anything she thought might help to save the lives of her loved ones. Sometimes her remedies worked; sometimes they didn't.

My grandmother's remedies now make me smile. Have you heard of using hot onion juice to cure earache? Remember mustard plasters and ginger tea? I certainly remember asafetida placed in a bag and tied around a person's neck. Even though it was dreadfully smelly, some people wore the bag all year, every year, no matter what the season or their state of health, because it was sure to ward off illness. My dad told me about swabbing blue vitriol on the throat as a preventive measure against diphtheria. "I believe it worked, too," I remember Dad saying. "We never got diphtheria."

In times of illness, the most important things frontier women relied on were faith and prayer and healings through the blessings of the priesthood. Many diaries and journals testify of the effectiveness of prayer in the home. My own grandmother recorded in her journal:

Johnnie was taken so sick at five years old with a very severe case of scarlet fever that everyone thought he was dying, and if he lived, it would be a miracle. The doctor gave him up. Everyone who saw him and knew his case had no hope of his recovery; however, his father and I had faith, and fasted and prayed for days to the Lord to spare his life. He had many complications and was even paralyzed. He could not speak for three weeks and had to learn to crawl and walk all over again. We were so glad when we heard him try to say his first words, "Aunt Betsy" as he was very fond of her, and she was near to help us nurse him night and day. He did recover and fulfilled his mission to the world.

Modern medicine has eliminated many of the diseases that were so dreaded in the early days, but the exercise of faith in healing has not changed. Diaries and journals still record the effectiveness of prayer.

My heritage has prepared me for the opportunities that have come in my life. I am sure that you feel the same about your heritage. Our Father in heaven is using us to advance his work on the earth, in preparing his children to receive Jesus Christ and to live by the principles of the gospel.

Once a daughter tried to express her gratitude to her aged mother for having cared so much about her that at great sacrifice she had provided the daughter rich opportunities for her development. How could she ever pay back? The mother smiled and said with astonishment in her voice, "Why, don't you know, Anne, how you repay? You care as much and more for the next generation."

Something of ourselves lives on from generation to generation. "The seeds . . . implanted by the family of one's birth, are ready to sprout as soon as one sets up a family of one's own." (Michael Novak, Harper's, April 1976, p. 40.)

What we are is passed on from one generation to another. We influence all those we have contact with, not just immediate family, and they influence us.

"Let every [woman] esteem [her sister] as [herself] and practice virtue and holiness before me." (D&C 38:24.) When we regard each other as equals and openly accept each other, we will relate heart to heart because the Lord will magnify our love and our vision and we will see as he sees.
