Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Preface

"And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness, and then shall the end come."

3 Never before in the history of the world, has there been such an array of testimony borne to the divinity of the work of God and His Son Jesus Christ, so that the inhabitants of the earth may have access to it, as has been compiled in the records of the Church of Jesus Christ, of Latter-day Saints since its organization through the Prophet Joseph Smith, under the direction of the authority of Heaven, on the sixth day of April, 1830.

3 The testimonies contained in this book are but a few of the hundreds of thousands of similar ones that have been borne in this latter dispensation, and "God hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual." (1 Cor. 2. )

3 The publications of the Church are so filled with beautiful testimony that it is impossible to compile in one volume the smallest fraction of those that have been given, but a sincere desire to place before the world a living witness to the divinity of the "Marvelous work and a wonder" that the Lord Jesus Christ has established in these Latter days, prompted the publication in "Liahona, the Elders' Journal" of the testimonies of the General Authorities and Mission Presidents.

3 Accordingly there appeared in the first number of Volume Twelve the testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith and a testimony was published each week thereafter, extending into Volume Thirteen.

3 During this time a careful search was made for other material and great effort and care exercised to choose that which the compilers felt would meet the wishes of each person whose testimony is presented in this book.

4 After the material was all gathered it was submitted to the First Presidency of the Church, who appointed President Heber J. Grant, Rudger Clawson, and Anthony W. Ivins as a committee to examine. This was done and returned with valuable suggestions for arrangement and additions, all of which have been carefully followed, and thus it is sent forth to the world a living witness to the divinity of the "Work of God-Verily, The power of God unto Salvation unto all who will believe and obey."

4 The order observed in arranging these testimonies is based upon the seniority of their ordination as General Authorities and appointment as Mission Presidents, under their respective heads, with the exception of those of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith and the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. It seems proper and fitting that the testimonies of the two martyrs-the Prophet and Patriarch, who were one in life and together in death, should go side by side to the world as living testimonies to the divinity of the Cause for which they lived and who together sealed their testimonies with their blood. These are followed by the testimonies of the Three Witnesses and Eight Witnesses respectively to the Book of Mormon, then the individual testimonies of the Three Witnesses. Following these appear those of the General Authorities, and the Mission Presidents in their order as stated above.

4 The Christian world readily accepts the few testimonies recorded in the New Testament of the divinity of the mission of the Savior, and of the Church which He established. Why should not the testimonies of God's Latter-day Prophets, Apostles and Servants be accepted as readily as those of his Former-day Servants? These latter testimonies confirm the former, all of which were given by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. The Lord said, "And in the mouth of two or more witnesses shall every word be established." Here is presented the most wonderful array of direct testimony to the Divinity of the Mission of the Redeemer ever published, and these same witnesses testify by the same spirit, that His Gospel has been restored to the earth in these latter days, never more to be thrown down nor given to another people; that the Holy Priesthood has been conferred again upon men, giving them divine authority to administer in the things of God; that Joseph Smith is a true Prophet, and that those who have succeeded him in the Presidency of the Church, namely: Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, Joseph F. Smith and Heber J. Grant, are his legal successors and are Prophets of God; that His restored Gospel is being preached to every nation, kindred, tongue and people, as a witness preparatory to the glorious coming of the Redeemer to reign upon the earth as Lord and King.

5The men whose testimonies are here given are men of God, men of honor, whose integrity is not questioned, by those who know them. They testify to that which they know to be true, realizing the weight of responsibility that rests upon them as servants of God bearing the Holy Priesthood, with authority to testify to these things, to teach the Gospel, and administer in the ordinances thereof.

5Grateful acknowledgment is herein expressed to Elder Hugh Ireland, editor of Liahona the Elders' Journal, for many valuable suggestions given and help rendered in the final arrangement of this volume.

5We in common with tens of thousands of other members of the Church bear witness by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, that the testimonies contained herein are true, and reiterate to all unto whom these Words shall come the promise of the Prophet Moroni contained in his tenth chapter, fourth and fifth verses, as follows:

5"And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, He will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost; and by the power of the Holy Ghost you may know the truth of all things."

5If these testimonies are the means, in the hands of God, of increasing the faith of the Saints and awakening within them a greater desire to press onward in His wonderful work, and of assisting the honest-in-heart in obtaining a knowledge and testimony of the truth, the fondest hopes of the compilers will be fully realized.

Joseph E. Cardon Samuel O. Bennion Independence, Mo., 1930.
