Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder John G. Allred

President of the Northcentral States Mission from its Organization July 12, 1925, to June, 1929.

I prize highly my standing among this people, I would rather have my standing in this Church than all the gold of Ophir. I would rather be where I am now, laboring in the ministry of our Lord, than in any other place that I know of. To labor with these young men and young women, to meet them in their weakness, when they arrive in the field, and then to watch them grow and increase in their power, is an inspiration that you cannot get anywhere else in the world. They undergo a wonderful transformation and a steady, constant growth.

292 Not so long ago at the close of one of our conferences, a young lady missionary, only nineteen years of age, who had just arrived in the field, came back into the building as I left it. I found her weeping and asked her what was the matter. She said: "Brother Allred, I do not believe that I can do this work. I just feel that I cannot do it." After talking with her a few moments, I laid my hands upon her head and blessed her and promised her that if she would put her attention to the work and trust in God, that God's power would come into her soul until her heart would be overflowing with a testimony of the work of God. Three weeks later I happened to be in that same district again, and I met this same girl standing on a street corner, bearing witness to the people that she knew the Gospel as restored is true. In talking with her, she said: "Brother Allred, I have had more glory in the last three weeks than I have had before in all my life put together." What is the change which gives this joy? Where is the strength of this Church? Is it with these brethren on the stand? No. I will tell you; the strength of this Church lies in the testimony that God implants in the hearts of its members, and once that testimony is implanted in the heart of a boy or girl he or she will go through fire for the religion they are preaching in the world.

293We are grateful for those very splendid young men and young women who come to our mission field, who will face any kind of weather to preach the Gospel. I tell you people, there is a power in this Church which the world must yet recognize. I am wondering what the answer of the world would be if we were to ask them today: Whence comes this power? How can we get these young men and young women to go out into the world and devote their attention to this work, and how is it that they make such growth?

293I want to say to you today that the Gospel of Jesus Christ will meet every human need, and it will meet it fully and completely, for this is God's work, it is not the work of man. I bear witness to this fact today, with all the earnestness of my soul, and I testify that he will carry it through successfully to the end.

293May God bless this work at home and abroad, that men and women holding responsibility in it, may be endowed with the spirit of their office and calling, that we may work day and night for the furtherance of the purposes of God, and that His purposes might be accomplished and His will prevail on earth as it does in heaven, I humbly pray, in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.
