Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder William R. Sloan

President of Northwestern States Mission from January, 1927, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

Webster says that a testimony is a solemn declaration or an affirmation made to establish or prove some fact.

295The Lord said and gave this promise to all who will read the Book of Mormon with a prayerful heart and shall ask with a sincere heart, having real faith in Christ, that He will manifest the truth of it unto them by the power of the Holy Ghost, and by the power of the Holy Ghost you may know the truth of all things. (Moro. 10:3, 4, 5.)

295Three Witnesses gave their testimonies that they saw the angel and handled the plates. Eight other Witnesses say that they saw the plates also. These testimonies stand today!

295The Lord revealed to his servants in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section seventeen, verse six, prior to the publication of the Book of Mormon to the world, a testimony that stands and the world will yet have to accept it, and He commanded these servants that they should testify that they had seen the plates and that Joseph Smith had translated them-even the part that the Lord had commanded. "And as your Lord and your God liveth, it is true."

295The book itself can be tested on these four fundamental claims: As a book of science, history, doctrine and prophecy.

295 In Section eighty-nine of the Doctrine and Covenants, promises have been made to the members of this Church and blessings predicated upon obedience to the promises-one of which is that we should "find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures," and after many years of service in the Church, my humble testimony is that God has revealed and given unto me wisdom and some of these treasures of knowledge a testimony that the Redeemer of the world lives, a testimony of the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the testimony of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon which the Lord gave through him to the world. I am happy to give this testimony to all the world.
