Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Henry H. Rolapp

President of the Eastern States Mission from May, 1927, to November, 1928.

297I rejoice in the opportunity of preaching the Gospel of Christ. I was converted in the old country, fifty years ago next December. As a young man I felt very enthusiastic about the Gospel of Christ. I can't remember the time, since then, when I have not had a testimony of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. I have been called into many different positions, civil, political, and otherwise, but I have always been blessed by the Lord with a knowledge that the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it was restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, is true and is that which ought to be preached to the world.

297As I think of the Church that Christ himself established, at the age that we have attained, and remember that the apostles were not even permitted to preach the Gospel as we have the right to preach it, I am glad of the change in conditions. When a person in those days opened his mouth about the Gospel that the Master had proclaimed, he took his life into his hands. As I have sat here and listened to all these men, these leaders of the Church, telling us of the principles of the Gospel, and giving us encouragement in going on with the work, I have recognized how much greater is our opportunity for securing salvation, for securing knowledge of the principles of the Gospel, than was given unto those who lived in the days of the Master. Rome was the big city when that privilege finally came, three hundred or more years after the birth of Christ. It was Rome, a city that was amongst the Gentiles; it was Rome that was regarded as the big Christian center. Today the Church of Christ, the big center of the Church of Christ, is here in Salt Lake City, among those who have builded this community.

297 I shall do my best to convert the people to the fact that here in Utah and surrounding states are the Saints of God, those whom he has selected, as a small number, to bring out the truth in the world. I pray God that he will bless us all in doing that which we can do, at home or abroad, preaching the Gospel of Christ, so that we may bring men into this communion, all of which I ask, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
