Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Elias S. Woodruff

President of Western States Mission from April 1, 1928, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

I am grateful to be able to bear my testimony that I know this is the work of the Lord. Beyond any question of a doubt I know that God is near and answers our righteous prayers. I can testify that over a period of a year, I have never once sought his aid in vain. Even when a feeling of unworthiness at times has made me feel as though I could not ask His help, He has never failed to sustain me while in His service. I know, too, that any person from any nation may come to know Him if such a one will seek Him with full purpose of heart. I have known many who have obtained a testimony by compliance with His will and I have never known of a single person who has failed to receive a knowledge of His existence after having obeyed His commandments faithfully.

300I also know that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is His Church and that His blessings are given to every one of its members who accept and obey its teachings. The only real consolation I have ever known has come through obedience to His commandments. Without His fellowship and that of my fellow-worshippers, the world would contain little of interest, pleasure or satisfaction for me.

300I am grateful to my parents and my grandparents who, through much tribulation, were faithful and have left me a heritage I am striving to preserve. I have heard them testify that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God and His divinely inspired servant, and that his successors were also his true servants.

301Believing their testimony, I have come to know for myself that their testimonies were true. I rejoice that I have the privilege of bearing my testimony to many and earnestly pray that my testimony with those of my brethren may impress many to seek and find for themselves that knowledge which brings peace and joy everlasting.
