Donald W. Parry, Temples of the Ancient World: Ritual and Symbolism ( 1994)

Part 5

The Temple according to Judaism

15

Demarcation between Sacred Space and Profane Space: The Temple of Herod Model

Donald W. Parry

To illustrate the pure condition of the temple of Jerusalem, the city of Jerusalem, and the land of Israel, ancient Jewish midrashim tended to exaggerate with the intent of showing the antithetical relationship between sacred and profane space. For instance, Sifre on Deuteronomy Pisqa 37 states that "the refuse of the land of Israel, is superior to the best place in Egypt." [^1] Other accounts produced by the same author(s) relate that four kingdoms of the world argued for possession of the least significant mountains of Israel because even the most inferior areas of the land of Israel were superior to the remaining parts of the world. [^2] Why is the land of Israel superior to neighboring Egypt, and why are the least significant areas of Israel superior to the remaining parts of the world? The answer to this question lies in the fact that the temple of the Lord existed in the land of Israel, causing all parts of Israel to possess a degree of holiness.

The fact that a temple existed in the land of Israel forced the Jewish rabbinic authorities to develop an interesting and unique theology concerning sacred space. According to several rabbinic documents, the land of Israel was divided into ten concentric zones of holiness. The premier rabbinic record that identifies the various gradations of holiness is M Kelim 1:6-9. It states:

There are ten degrees of holiness:

The land of Israel is holier than all the [other] lands. . . .

The cities that are surrounded with walls are holier than it. . . .

Within the wall of Jerusalem is holier than they [the foregoing]. . . .

The Temple Mount is holier than it. . . .

The rampart is holier than it. . . .

The Court of the Women is holier than it. . . .

The Court of Israel is holier than it. . . .

The Court of the Priests is holier than it. . . .

[The space] between the porch and the altar is holier than it. . . .

The sanctuary is holier than it. . . .

The Holy of Holies is holier than them all. [^3]

While each of the zones possessed a certain degree of holiness, the outer zone (the land of Israel) possessed a lesser degree of holiness than the innermost zone (the Holy of Holies), which possessed the greatest degree of holiness.

In what manner did the rabbis demarcate between the various zones of holiness? How, for example, did the rabbis delimit between the holiness of the Court of the Priests and the Court of Israel, which possessed a lesser degree of holiness? The purpose of this paper is to examine the demarcations found within the Temple of Herod system, especially with regard to the careful separation of sacred from profane space. The investigation will first review the antithetical relationship that exists between sacred and profane space. This review will be followed by a detailed discussion of the rabbinic method of demarcating between sacred and profane space. Furthermore, the sacral/nonsacral constitution of the subterranean areas below the temple and aerial space above the temple will be considered. We will limit our discussion to the period of the Temple of Herod (18 B.C.-A.D. 70).

The Nonconterminous Nature of Sacredand Profane Space

Definition of Sacred Space: In order to better understand the essence of sacred space, [^4] one must juxtapose the concepts of the sacred and profane and provide a comparison of the two. Although the two concepts are contradictory and "mutually exclusive," [^5] one cannot be defined completely without the other, for one gains definition from the other.

Otto's definition of holiness summarily describes the nature of the sacred, for holiness is something "wholly other" than the profane world. [^6] In terms of categorization, sacred space belongs to a category far removed from the profane. The sacred contains elements of mystery, the supernatural, and inviolability. It is an item of the intellect and is said to exist perceptually. [^7] Only those who perceive that sacred space exists will acknowledge its existence. Brevard Childs's work on the holy explains the manner in which sacred space is viewed perceptually or emotionally. He calls one's relationship with sacred space an emotional "experience" that "fills that particular space with its unique character." [^8] Those who experience sacral space and its corresponding sacral architecture generate a unique religious response, a response far different from one's reaction to empirical space. That is not to say that empirical space and secular architecture do not create their own emotional content, [^9] but religious geography with its religious architecture has at its very foundation a set of beliefs that points to the origins or primary fundamentals of a particular religious system. Hans J. Klimkeit's language is not unlike that of Childs. He refers to sacral space as having a "value of its own" due to "an emotional accent" held by those who perceive it to be sacred space. [^10]

Sacred space is intimately connected with temple space—they are often one and the same. The very meaning of the term temple in the Hebrew language demonstrates this idea. In the Hebrew Bible [^11] one of the principal roots from which the English words sanctuary and temple originate is *QDS, which has the basic meaning of "separation" or "withdrawal" of sacred entities from profane things. [^12] Specifically, the Qal verbal form of *QDS denotes something that is "holy" or "withheld from profane use." The Niphal form of the same root refers to showing or proving "oneself holy." The Piel verbal form speaks of placing a thing or person "into the state of holiness" or declaring something holy. In the Hiphil verbal form, the root letters *QDS have reference to the dedication or sanctification of a person or thing to sacredness. [^13] In all instances, the meaning of the Hebrew root *QDS pertains to separation from the profane.

Definition of Profane Space: Sacred and profane are not conterminous but represent "two antithetical entities." [^14] Sacred space is temple space, and profane space is chaos. However, as mentioned above, we can appreciate sacred space fully only when we understand its relationship to the profane. The Latin word profanum (English "profane") literally means "before" or "outside" the temple, formed from pro (meaning "outside") and fanum (meaning "temple"). [^15] The equivalent Hebrew word is h.Ã´l, which, according to Marcus Jastrow, has the meaning of "outside of the sanctuary, foreign, profane, common." [^16] If the temple is the consecrated place created "by marking it out, by cutting it off from the profane space around it," [^17] then the profane space represents unconsecrated space, the peripheral area that remains after the sacred has been removed.

In his work Images and Symbols, Mircea Eliade speaks of profane space as being "objective," "abstract," and "nonessential." [^18] Human beings gather upon profane space and celebrate human actions. It is temporal, nonreligious geography, which is centered around the mundane events of humanity. Profane space deals with physical geography, or "empirical geography," and its field is "empirical space." [^19] Caillois's studies in Man and the Sacred have aptly shown that the two concepts—sacred and profane—can never be united, but must be separated, lest confusion come. [^20]

The Jews that belonged to the Second Temple period were well aware that sacred space was set amidst profane space. In what manner could the rabbinic authorities develop well-defined borders that would serve to delimit the two antithetical entities—sacred and profane space? How could the Jews create a dividing line between the orderliness of sacral space and the anomalous condition of profane space? The authorities were well aware of the rigid lines needed to separate the sacred from the profane. We will now deal with those rigid lines.

The Careful Delimitation between Sacred and Profane Space according to the Rabbis

This section deals with sacred space and sacral architecture as ordered, well-defined, and nonhomogeneous topos. We will look at the preciseness with which the Jews of the Second Temple era carefully delimited the temple's various zones and created borders between the sacred and the profane. Walls and gateways created borders and divided sacred from profane space. Both the subterranean areas of the temple and the aerial space above the sanctuary were momentous considerations for the Jewish sages. The demarcation of zones of holiness outside of the immediate temple area, such as the city of Jerusalem and the land of Israel, were also the subjects of rabbinic deliberations.

The architectural boundaries of the sacred precinct needed to be well defined, visible, and obstructive. Borders had to be established that identified grades of space, and regulations had to exist that enforced the segregation. Architecturally, the borders of the temple (speaking of the Israelite temple paradigms) were most easily represented by the wall. The same wall that retained the sacred aura inside also barred the profane to the outside. At the same time a breach in the wall needed to exist that would allow the profane to be transcended, or would offer an opening into the sacred. Such breaches in the walls were represented by the temple doors, gates, and veils. The Jews during the Second Temple period were well aware of the various challenges involved in delimiting a precise area of space that would be called holy and segregating that area from secular space. To carry the challenge a step further, the Jews needed to demarcate every zone of sanctity in relation to other zones of the temple precinct.

With regard to the many gates that existed in the temple precinct, the sages determined with great care and deliberation precisely what fraction of the gates belonged to the interior, as opposed to the exterior, of a given zone. According to M Pesahim 7:12, the interior parts of the door stop (or jamb) were considered to belong to the interior of the enclosure, while the outside parts of the door stop belonged to the exterior: "From the stop of the door inwards counts as inside, and from the stop of the door outwards counts as outside."

The earliest known commentary on M Pesahim 7:12 adds additional information. Specifically speaking of the gates belonging to the court of the Priests, the Gemara states that the door jamb should be considered part of the interior of that court. Nothing is said about the other gates that belong to the other courtyards. With regard to the gates of the city of Jerusalem, however, the door jamb belongs to the outside of the wall. [^21] We learn from this that the sages considered that the exact point of separation between two juxtaposed temple zones existed at the door jamb. In most instances the door jamb was considered to be part of the interior, but in one interpretation the door jamb belonged to the exterior. It is possible, and the texts are unclear in this regard, that the determining factor of inner or outer door jamb was whether the gate swung inward or outward.

Another related discussion centered upon the actual moveable gate itself. Did it contain the quality of holiness that belonged to the inner territory, or did it possess the sanctity of the outer zone? The answer to the question had relevance to at least one gate within the temple precinct, as well as to the gates of the city of Jerusalem. It is written in the Talmud that the gates of Jerusalem were not sanctified because the lepers sheltered themselves near the gates from the atmospheric elements, e.g., from the winter rains and the summer sun. In other words, the presence of ritually impure lepers caused the gates to lose any sanctity that may have once been attached to them. Similarly, the Nicanor Gate, which existed between the court of the Women and the court of Israel, did not possess the sanctity of the court of Israel. "Why was the gate of Nicanor not sanctified? Because lepers stand there and insert the thumbs of their hands [into the Court]." [^22] The extension of the leper's thumbs into the court of Israel has reference to the leper who has completed the days of purification. According to rabbinic law, the leper presented himself at the Nicanor Gate, extended his thumb and big toe into the sanctuary, where the priest then applied sacrificial blood. [^23]

For practical purposes the architects built cells or chambers into the great thick outer wall of the temple precinct. At times, the cells were designed so that persons could pass back and forth through the building between the rampart and the court. This type of construction raised several questions concerning the exact demarcation between sacred and profane space. What about chambers built into a wall that had a door opening outward into the rampart—is the area sacred within the chamber? To this question the sages responded with a negative answer. However, if the chamber's roof is level with the pavement of the court, then the roof is considered to be holy. As is the case in many instances, an exception to the ruling existed. The exception to this concept is cited by the sages—if the doors open into the courtyard, the rooms of the chamber are deemed to possess sanctity, but the roofs are not sacred. The cellars of the temple provide an exception to this, however, for they are not sanctified at any time. [^24]

What about a chamber that had a door on each end of the building, one opening onto holy ground and the other onto unholy ground? Where is the dividing line that separates sacred from profane space? Talmudic sources make reference to two chambers that fit this description—the Chamber of Hewn Stone and the Chamber of the Fireplace. The Chamber of Hewn Stone, built into the great temple wall, was located on the border between the court of the Priests and the rampart. The sages determined that the building itself was situated half on holy ground and half on nonholy ground. It had two doors, one opened to holy ground (the court of the Priests) and the other to unholy ground (the rampart). [^25] The Chamber of Hewn Stone served as the gathering place for the Sanhedrin. Maimonides writes that the Sanhedrin would sit in the half of the Chamber of Hewn Stone that stood upon nonholy ground. [^26]

The Chamber of the Fireplace was situated within the same wall as the Chamber of Hewn Stone but lay westward several cubits. Although larger than the Chamber of Hewn Stone, the Chamber of the Fireplace possessed similar architectural features. It was divided into four rooms; two were located on holy ground and two on profane ground. Flagstones were set into the ground to mark the division between the two. [^27] "There were four cells in the Chamber of the Hearth, like small rooms opening into a hall, two within holy space and two outside of holy space, and the ends of marked pavement separated between the holy and the profane." [^28]

While no flagstones are mentioned with reference to the Chamber of Hewn Stone, it is possible that they were utilized in demarcating space in this chamber, given their usefulness in demarcating space. Flagstones were also used to separate the Court of the Priests from the Court of Israel, [^29] and in the chamber above the tripartite temple building, flagstones separated the Holy of Holies from the Holy Place. [^30]

Another architectural component, which is mentioned in connection with Solomon's Temple, was found in the Temple of Herod. A two-part cedar partition was used in Solomon's Temple to divide the Holy Place from the Holy of Holies (see 1 Kings 6:16). During the period of the Second Temple, two curtains were employed between the two zones rather than the wooden partition. Between the two curtains was a space that measured one cubit. The veils were designed so that the outer curtain was fastened to the northern wall and the inner curtain was fastened to the southern wall. As the high priest would enter the Holy of Holies on the Day of Atonement, he would enter from the south, travel northward between the two veils until he reached the entrance of the inner veil at the north end, and then enter the sanctum. Evidently, the purpose of the two veils was to protect the sanctity of the Holy of Holies from the view, either accidental or purposeful, of proximal ministering priests. Given the sages' preoccupation with determining exact spatial borders throughout the temple precinct, the question naturally arose whether the cubit of space between the two veils held the sanctity of the sanctum or the Holy Place. While the text of TB Yoma 51b-52b presents the discussion of the rabbis with regard to this issue, the text does not reveal a clear-cut decision.

Preliminarily, one may guess that the walls of the temple were simple demarcating lines that acted as visual and physical barriers between gradational zones. In a sense they were just that, with the side of the wall representing the sanctity of the zone that it faced. But the rabbis, desiring to be more precise in their demarcations, addressed the matter of the thickness of the walls. In a mishnaic statement in M Pesahim 7:12, it was declared that the thickness of the walls counted as the inside of that respective zone. Maimonides, commenting on that statement, adds that the thickness of the walls was considered part of the interior with regard to both uncleanness and the consumption of offerings. [^31] Windows also, which were set in various walls, were to be considered as part of and possessing the sanctity of the interior. [^32] Practical situations of cultic life required rabbinic response. Jewish law dictated that the paschal lamb was to be eaten within the walls of Jerusalem, and if removed, then the food was declared unclean for consumption. It was possible that, while preparing the passover offering, one of its limbs would accidently project outside of the wall of Jerusalem. If this situation were to occur, then special prescriptions provided for the removal of that defective limb from the remainder of the passover lamb. This was accomplished by first scraping the flesh of the limb off the bone up to the first joint. After this exercise the limb might be cut off at the joint. All the while the person performing this activity had to take care not to break the bone of the limb (see Exodus 12:46). [^33]

Another Talmudic illustration demonstrates that the walls of the court of Priests represented a border between two temple zones. Rabbi Ammi, speaking in Rabbi Eleazar's name, presented the illustration. What is the ritual status of an animal whose legs are unintentionally extended outside of the court? Is the animal still fit for the altar? Rabbi Ammi's response to this situation was, "If he [the priest] cut off its legs and then slaughtered it, it is fit; if he slaughtered and then cut off [the legs] it is unfit." [^34] Yet another Talmudic example lists a concern for spatial demarcation. Rabbi Abba b. Mammel noted that the gateway of the wall of the Court of the Priests carefully divided the purity of certain priesthood officiants. He stated that if certain temple workers carry the flesh of the Passover sacrifice to another company and the front bearers go "outside the walls of the temple court while the rear ones had not yet gone out, those in front defile their garments while those behind do not defile their garments." [^35]

A similar case study deals with the level of purity of a member of the priesthood who causes a portion of his body to leave the court of Priests while the remainder remains within the court. The rabbis ruled that if the priest's hands only were projected out of the court of the Priests, the person would yet be considered cultically pure. Similarly, if the person extended both his hands and his feet outside of the court, but his torso remained within the court, the person would yet retain his sanctity. The response toward the entire body or person was different. The authorities concluded that if a temple officiant left the court's premises with the intention of tarrying outside of the court, he would then be required to immerse himself in the cleansing pool. If it was his intention, however, to briefly leave the premises and shortly return, he would then be required to wash his hands and feet only. The text raises the issue of one who leaves the court due to "nature's call." It states that "he who eases himself needs immersion, and he who answers nature's call requires sanctification of hands and feet." [^36]

The Temple Mount was known to have a number of tunnels that aided members of the priesthood in their cultic duties. According to Maimonides, entrances of tunnels opening into the courts are holy, while those opening up outside of the courts are profane. [^37] Tunnels opening outward into the Temple Mount (Har ha-Bayit) that originate outside of the courtyards are not as holy as the Temple Mount, but if the tunnel begins in the court and opens outside of the court into the Temple Mount, it is equal in holiness to the Temple Mount. [^38]

Aerial and Subterranean Space

To this point we have seen the manner in which the Jewish sages, using architectural components, determined precisely where profane space ended and sacred space began. Two other dimensions of sacred space should be treated here—aerial and subterranean space.

Aerial Space: The rabbinic sources build a case for the sanctity of the airspace above the temple precinct. [^39] A simple statement attested in TB Zevahim 26a provides a summary on the matter—"the airspace of within is as within." That is to say, the sanctity of the airspace within a defined area is to be considered equal to the sanctity of that area. A modern commentator has paraphrased this statement by writing that "the airspace of a place is as the place itself." [^40] Hence, the airspace that exists within the walls of a given zone of the temple carries the same sanctity as the area's surface and its appurtenances. By way of extension, the airspace of a court is governed by the same regulations as the zone itself. [^41]

Having established these facts, the sages were able to treat various circumstances that had relevancy to sanctuary airspace. For instance, when a priest projected his hands into the court of Priests, but his body remained outside of the court, it was as if full entry had been made by that person. [^42] This ruling produced grave results for the unclean person who projected his hand into the court. According to Maimonides, if a ritually impure person stretched forth his hand into the sanctuary, he would be flogged. [^43]

Outside of the tripartite temple building itself, the most sacred area of the temple precinct was north of the sacrificial altar. Lesser sacrifices may be slaughtered in any part of the court, but the sacrifices of a higher sanctity must be offered on the north side. [^44] If, however, a priest stood in the southern portion of the court, extended his hands into the northern area, and in this manner slaughtered the sacrifice, then "his slaughtering is valid." Apparently the sanctity of the area did not magically draw its powers from the pavement, but the very airspace of the north territory was seen to be equal to the pavement itself. The Talmud continues by explaining that if the greater portion of a priest's upper body, including his head, is extended into the northern portion of the court, then it is as if his entire person had entered that zone. [^45]

Under the same regulations that stated "the airspace of within is as within," the sages ruled that the airspace above the altar was equal in sanctity to the altar itself. [^46] The point is significant, for the altar was a prominent focal point of the entire precinct, second only to the Holy of Holies. Similarly, the airspace above the altar's ramp, ledge, and foundation possessed the same degree of sanctity as the airspace above the altar. [^47] For evidence of this, the rabbis refer to Leviticus 1. According to verse 15, when the sacrificial bird is offered, its head must be pinched in a prescribed manner while upon the altar. The body of the bird rests upon the altar, while its head is found in the airspace above the altar. Can the head of the bird lose its sanctity because it does not touch the altar? According to the sages, the answer is no. The sages are in agreement that the holiness of the airspace above the altar is equal to the holiness of the altar itself.

The question was raised concerning the vessels of the temple—when a utensil or vessel is suspended in the air between the altar and a sacrificial offering, does it not act as a barrier between the altar and sacrifice, thereby blocking the sanctity of the airspace? The rabbis ruled that the vessel does not create a barrier, for it too is holy. [^48] In fact, the concept dealing with the pavement's airspace and the altar's airspace is identical to the airspace of the utensil. The airspace of the utensil is equal to the sanctity of the utensil itself. It is necessary for the operations of the temple cult that this be the case. It has been ruled by the sages that both the vessel and the blood of the sacrificial animal are equally holy. When the priest pours the blood of the jugular veins straight into the vessel, the blood remains sanctified as it travels through the air. From the cultically clean animal, through cultically clean airspace, to the cultically pure vessel, the blood remains unblemished. Hence, the holiness of the airspace above a vessel is equal to the holiness of the vessel itself. [^49]

According to the scheme found in M Kelim 1:6-9 and elsewhere, Jerusalem was also considered a zone of holiness. Therefore, similar to the courtyard zones of the temple precinct, the airspace of the city of Jerusalem, too, was equal in sanctity to the city itself. Encyclopedia Talmudica cites the example of a person standing in a tree, that "as a person stands upon the branches of a tree, he is regarded as standing in the airspace above the ground." [^50] The Mishnah equates Jerusalem's airspace with its pavement: "If a man says to his children, 'Behold, I slaughter the Passover-offering on behalf of whichever of you goes up first to Jerusalem,' as soon as the first has inserted his head and the greater part of his body [in Jerusalem] he has acquired his portion (M Pesahim 8:3)." [^51]

Moving outward beyond all the zones of holiness as listed in M Kelim 1:6-9, we discover that the aerial space belonging to heathen lands is equal to the soil of the area. Maimonides' tutelage concerning the airspace of heathen lands is instructive. He compares the soil of heathen lands to an area where graves are found. [^52] Similarly the airspace of heathen lands is unclean. If a Jew walks upon heathen land, or even thrusts his head or the greater portion of his body into heathen airspace, that person will become unclean. [^53] In this regard there existed a metonymical relationship—part of the body represented the entire person. Sacred vessels, also, if extended into heathen airspace would become unclean. [^54]

Although both heathen soil and airspace is unclean, the uncleannness of the heathen soil is greater than the uncleanness of the airspace, says Maimonides. [^55] The reason for this is direct contact of heathen soil conveys uncleanness, but not so much uncleanness is conveyed by overshadowing. [^56] Hence, one who becomes unclean by virtue of heathen soil is required to be cleansed the third and seventh days, while one who becomes unclean by virtue of the airspace above heathen soil has need of immersion only. Furthermore, if one travels through heathen land, he will incur seven-day uncleanness, but if he travels by sea through heathen countries, it is as if he had become unclean because of heathen airspace, and not its soil. Syria stands as an exception to this ruling: its soil is unclean like any other heathen country, but its airspace is clean like the land of Israel. [^57] A second exception concerns a person who walks along an area over which the ocean may swell during a storm, for the person remains clean in such a place. [^58] T. Ahilot 18:5 adds the following concepts: If a person enters heathen lands in a box, the person is clean. If, however, a person enters heathen land in a carriage or boat, he is unclean. Finally, if more than one-half of a chair is extended into a heathen land, then it is unclean.

Subterranean Space: We have addressed the issue of the sanctity of aerial space; now we must look at the subterranean areas of the temple. It was understood by the sages that the surface of the courts and buildings located within the temple precinct was sacred. It was taught by the School of Ishmael that "the pavement sanctifies." For this reason, nothing must exist upon the ground which would "interpose" between the priest and the pavement. Questionable, however, was the area below the paved surface—the depths. Two contradictory views existed. The first considered the soil and area below the surface to be sacred. According to this view the ground was first sanctified by David "to the nethermost soil." A note in the Epstein version of the Talmud states that the expression "nethermost soil" should read literally "the soil of the deep." [^59]

A second and more popular view of the temple's subterrane held the area to be profane. According to M Tamid 1:1, a priest who suffered an accident, such as a seminal issue, would descend below the surface of the temple through a passageway until he reached the ritual baths. The unclean priest would immerse himself, dry himself by the fire, and take his place by other priests who awaited the opening of the gates. Jewish law prevented the priests from returning to the sacred ground of the temple, for those who immersed themselves in the ritual baths were required to wait for sunset. [^60] Rather, at the opening of the gates of the temple, the priests would depart. The Gemara cites M Tamid 1:1 as evidence that the temple's subterrane was profane. In a statement attributed to Rabbi Johanan, the Talmud states "[M Tamid 1:1] supports the view . . . that the subterranean passage possessed no sanctity." [^61]

Although it is clear that the subterranean areas of the temple became a location for unclean priests, the temple depths were also unclean by virtue of a second reason. A natural but profane act [^62] was conducted under the surface area of the temple, for it was there that a privy was located. [^63] A door was found on the privy, and a locked door signaled to a potential occupant that the privy was occupied; an unlocked door allowed a person entrance.

The rabbis held other concerns about the subterrane.M Parah relates the preventive measures that the authorities took to ensure that a corpse would not desecrate any area of the Temple Mount. One prescription dealt with the rabbinic ruling with regard to the "tent" (or shadowing). According to the law, the tent of a corpse was able to defile in three separate but similar ways: (1) If the corpse is found above or overshadows a person or utensil, that person or utensil becomes unclean. (2) If the corpse is found under the same covering as a person or utensil, that person or utensil becomes unclean. (3) If the corpse is found beneath a person or utensil, that person becomes unclean. [^64] In the context of the depths below the ground surface of the temple, the third case has the greatest relevance. The Jews needed assurance that no graves existed below the surface of the temple, so they hollowed out the depths. [^65] A further measure added additional confidence to the temple community when a causeway was constructed extending from the Temple Mount to the Mount of Olives "for fear of any grave in the depths below." [^66] This causeway may have shared a purpose similar to the bridge connecting the upper city with the Temple Mount. The bridge was constructed to allow the high priest and other temple workers to reach the temple without passing through the lower marketplace. [^67]

The Demarcation of Space outside of the Temple Precinct

A broader picture regarding the demarcation of space should be examined here. Rabbinic literature illustrates the sages' attempts to carefully delimit space outside of the temple area, including the city of Jerusalem, the land of Israel, and the lands of the Gentiles.

The city of Jerusalem metonymically was an extension of the temple and its holiness. The three camps or gradations that existed at the time of the Israelites' sojourn in the wilderness were, during the period of the Second Temple, superimposed upon Jerusalem and the temple. "The Temple and Jerusalem were the direct continuation of the camp and Tabernacle of the wilderness. The rabbis . . . divided Jerusalem into three sections: the priestly camp (temple), the Levitic camp (the Temple Mount), and the Israelite camp (the city)." [^68] The Tabernacle was replaced with the temple, the camp of Levites became equated with the Temple Mount, and Jerusalem replaced what was known as the camp of Israel. [^69] Numbers Rabbah 7:8 grades persons within the three camps. The city of Jerusalem, like the temple, possessed precise boundaries. Within the city a high degree of sanctity was found; without the city existed a lesser degree. Space outside of the city was called the "border," [^70] having the connotation of peripherality or marginality.

The walls of Jerusalem were vital in separating the sacred from the profane. They became physical verticalities, retaining inside themselves the mystical power of holiness. The walls represented border configurations par excellence, symbolizing linear divisions between zones. "Space, however, consists not only of localities, but is determined as well by directions, and finally by its borders, or boundaries." [^71] J. G. Davies believes that sacred space has a distinct identity and must have "pronounced borders." [^72] Standing in antithesis to sacred space is profane space, which has no borders and is largely unidentifiable.

Jerusalem's walls served as precise borders that defined and demarcated space. Many examples from the Second Temple period can be cited. A practical problem existed within the borders of Israel concerning the ownership of trees. Throughout the land of Israel, with the exception of the cities of refuge and the city of Jerusalem, when disputations arose affecting the ownership of trees, the location of the roots became the factor of determination. The tract of land that possessed the tree's roots (or, at least, the majority of the roots), also possessed the tree. In this matter, though, Jerusalem and the cities of refuge were exceptions. The tree's roots were not a factor in determining ownership, but the tree's branches were. If the roots of the tree were located outside of the walls, but its branches extended over the wall into the city, then the branches (i.e., its fruits) belonged to the city. [^73]

The term wall is frequently used by the Talmudic authors who demonstrated particular interest in the sacred tithes and offerings. Jerusalem's wall played a role in the complex laws governing the second tithe. [^74] The second tithes were to be eaten within the walls of Jerusalem; if they were eaten outside of the walls, the offender would incur stripes and flogging. [^75] Similarly, whoever encouraged others to eat consecrated animals outside of the walls was subject to excommunication. [^76] According to the Mishnah, if a person unintentionally removed sacred flesh outside of Jerusalem's walls, he was given two options: If he had already passed beyond Mount Scopus (the hill northeast of Jerusalem, which is the last elevated area from which Jerusalem is visible), then he was instructed to burn the flesh on the spot. If, however, the person could yet see the city, he was to return to the temple and burn the flesh there. [^77]

Conclusion

We first viewed the manner in which physical geography and hiero-geography are not conterminous but represent antithetical situations. Sacred space and sacral architecture are carefully delimited and possess precise borders that serve to separate the holy from the profane. Several examples from rabbinic literature demonstrated the manner in which the Jews utilized the walls and gateways to divide and demarcate various planes of holiness, both within and without the temple precinct. With regard to spatial delimitation, both the subterranean areas of the temple and the aerial space above the sanctuary received due consideration by the Jewish sages—the subterrane was considered to be profane; aerial space was seen to be holy.

What was the significance of meticulous demarcations between sacred and profane space? Sacred space, of course, was holy because of its connection to God—his divine appearance to a particular site or his selection of the site. R. D. Martienssen explains that the very first step towards "arranged and controlled space" [^78] is the selection of the site. Site designation promptly suggests a delimitation between a sacred "inside" centered area and a chaotic homogeneous "outside" area, or a perceptible division between holy and profane space. Hence, sacred space is divided from the profane in order to protect the interests of the temple commu nity, whose desire it is to approach God within the boundaries of the temple.

Notes

TB Yoma 12a presents a slightly different picture. "What lay in the lot of Judah? The Temple Mount, the cells, the courts. And what lay in the lot of Benjamin? The Hall, the Temple, and the Holy of Holies. And a strip of land went forth from Judah's lot and went into Benjamin's territory, and on this the temple was built." Sifre on Deuteronomy Pisqa 352 explains that the sanctuary was built in the "portion of Benjamin, and a triangular section extended from that portion to that of Judah" (quoted in Hammer, Sifre, 366). This text continues by quoting Genesis 49:10, "The scepter shall not depart from Judah," and explains, "That refers to the Hall of Hewn Stones which was situated in the portion of Judah, as it is said"; then Psalms 78:67-68 is quoted (Hammer, Sifre, 366). Here we are not interested in attempting to solve the apparent contradictions that exist in the literature. The sources are pointed out because they demonstrate the careful interest held by the rabbis in producing tribal borders, especially with regard to the temple.

---
Notas:
[^1] A mortal is taken up to the highest heaven. God is sitting on a throne, often called a merkavah (Eng. "chariot"). See Josephus, The Jewish Wars, VI, 230-VII, 175; David M. Rhoads, Israel in Revolution: 6-74 C.E. A Political History Based on the Writings of Josephus (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1976).
[^2] The ascent is an extraordinary privilege. God possesses anthropomorphic qualities and features. Sozomen, Church History, V, 52, discusses plans to rebuild the temple under Julian the Apostate, c. A.D. 361-64. Michael Avi-Yonah, The Jews of Palestine: A Political History from the Bar Kokhba War to the Arab Conquest (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1976), 266-67, discusses the attempt by the Jews to rebuild the temple and begin sacrifices from A.D. 614-17 during the Sasanid Persian occupation of Jerusalem.
[^3] The way is fraught with danger and can be successfully undertaken only through divine permission and power. God's throne is in the Holy of Holies in the celestial temple (Heb. hekhal). [^15] On the nature of Israelite sacrifice, see Gary Anderson, "Sacrifice and Sacrificial Offerings," in Anchor Bible Dictionary, ed. David Noel Freedman (New York: Doubleday, 1992), 5:870-86.
[^4] There is great distance between the earthly and heavenly realms, with increasing beauty and splendor (or danger for the uninvited) as one moves up, and an increasing sense of alienation from the world below. The temple is filled with fire, light, gold, crystal, and gems, symbolizing the brilliant glory of God. For a general background on the Pharisees, see Anthony J. Saldarini, "Pharisees," ibid., 5:289-303, with extensive bibliography.
[^5] The ascent itself is a transforming experience in which the candidate is progressively glorified. God is surrounded by angels who minister to him. (These angels fulfill the role of priests in the heavenly temple, paralleling the Levite priests in the earthly temple.) [^16] For background on the building of the eschatological temple, see Ezekiel 40-48 and the Temple Scroll from Qumran (11QT) in The Dead Sea Scrolls in English, trans. Geza Vermes, 3rd ed. (New York: Penguin, 1987), 128-58, with full edition by Yigael Yadin, The Temple Scroll, 3 vols. (Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society, 1983). The description of New Jerusalem in Revelation 21:9-27 contains many similarities to the temple of Ezekiel (48:31-35) and the Qumran Temple Scroll. However, the New Jerusalem is explicitly said to have "no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it" (Revelation 21:22). It may be that the entire city of New Jerusalem was conceived of as a temple.
[^6] The climax of the journey is an encounter with the highest god. The angels are singing hymns, paralleling the earthly temple hymns, rituals, and liturgies. [^17] This is a major theme of the letter to the Hebrews, especially chapters 8-10; see also George Buchanan, To the Hebrews (New York: Doubleday, 1972), 132-53.
[^7] One is given secret revelations, or shown mysteries. See Hugh Nibley, "The Christian Envy of the Temple," in Mormonism and Early Christianity, in CWHN, 4:391-434; see also Isaiah Tishby, The Wisdom of the Zohar: An Anthology of Texts, 3 vols., tr. David Goldstein (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), 3:867. Tishby cites Nibley's article (p. 900, n. 4) as definitive on this subject. It is worth emphasizing that although the early Christians abandoned the Mosaic temple sacrifices, which they saw as being superseded by the cosmic atonement of Christ, some Christian mystics were nonetheless active participants in Christian versions of the celestial ascension rituals and literature.
[^8] The ascent is followed by a return to the world below to continue life as a mortal. I would like to thank Janet Carpenter for her research assistance on this paper.
[^9] What is seen and heard can be selectively passed on by the recipient of the celestial ascension. See Ioan Petru Colianu, "Ascension," in Encyclopedia of Religion, ed. Mircea Eliade (New York: Macmillan, 1987), 1:435-41.
[^10] The one who has ascended faces the opposition of lower spiritual powers upon his return. [^13] Raymond O. Faulkner, "The King and the Star-Religion in the Pyramid Texts," Journal of Near Eastern Studies 25, no. 3 (1966): 153-61, discusses the ascent of the Pharaoh in the Pyramid Texts. In Mesopotamian myth, Etana ascends into heaven on the back of an eagle (see Stephanie Dalley, Myths from Mesopotamia [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991], 189-202). The idea of the heavenly ascent can be found in numerous religions, as outlined by Mircea Eliade, Shamanism (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964).
[^11] See Erwin R. Goodenough, By Light, Light: The Mystic Gospel of Hellenistic Judaism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1935), on the mystical vision of God in Philo's thought.
[^12] See James Tabor, Things Unutterable: Paul's Ascent to Paradise in its Greco-Roman, Judaic, and Early Christian Contexts (Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 1986).
[^13] See Tabor, Things Unutterable, 87.
[^14] See AMM, 31. My list is based directly on Gruenwald's but expanded with material from other sources as indicated.
[^15] Hekhal is frequently translated as "palace," but in context, it seems clearly to be either the earthly or celestial temple (see Martha Himmelfarb, "Apocalyptic Ascent and the Heavenly Temple," Society for Biblical Literature 1987 Seminar Papers, ed. Kent H. Tichards (Atlanta: Scholars, 1987), 210-17; Morton Smith, "Observations on Hekhalot Rabbati," in Biblical and Other Studies, ed. Alexander Altmann [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1963], 144.
[^16] See Himmelfarb, "Apocalyptic Ascent and the Heavenly Temple," 212-14, on equating angels with priests.
[^17] See ibid., on the angelic hymns as celestial temple liturgies.
[^18] See Jay A. Parry and Donald W. Parry, "The Temple in Heaven: Its Description and Significance," in this volume; Himmelfarb, "Apocalyptic Ascent and the Heavenly Temple"; Victor Aptowitzer, The Celestial Temple as Viewed in the Aggadah (Jerusalem: The International Center for University Teaching of Jewish Civilization, 1980); William Riley, "Temple Imagery and the Book of Revelation: Ancient Near Eastern Temple Ideology and Cultic Resonances in the Apocalypse," Proceedings of the Irish Biblical Association 6 (1982): 81-102. The post-Second Temple Hekhalot visionaries based their understanding of the heavenly ascent to the celestial temple on four important revelations of God in the Hebrew Bible: 1 Kings 22:19; Isaiah 6; Ezekiel 1; 3:22-24; 8; and Daniel 7:9-10 (cf. Exodus 19:16-18; 20:15-18; 24:16-18; Deuteronomy 5:19-24; see J. Lindblom, "Theophanies in Holy Places in Hebrew Religion," Hebrew Union College Annual 32 [1961]: 91-106; also Buchanan, To the Hebrews, 132-37; cf. Revelation 7:15; 14:17; 15:5; 16:7). The earliest references to a celestial prototype for the Hebrew temple can be found in the descriptions of the building of the tabernacle, where Moses is told to build it based on the pattern of the celestial temple or tabernacle he was shown in vision on the mountain (see Exodus 25:9, 40; 26:30; 27:8).
[^19] See Himmelfarb, "Apocalyptic Ascent and the Heavenly Temple," 212. Himmelfarb mentions specifically 2 Enoch, The Similitudes of Enoch (1 Enoch), the Apocalypse of Abraham, the Testament of Levi (5:1), the Ascension of Isaiah, 3 Baruch, and the Apocalypse of Zephaniah. There is sometimes ambiguity between the structure of heaven as a whole symbolizing a temple, and a celestial temple being somewhere within one of the levels of heaven. In the Testament of Levi 5:1 the temple in the third heaven contains God's throne; TB Haggigah 12b has the temple in the fourth heaven; Re'uyot Yehezkel in the fifth heaven. For general studies of Judeo-Christian ascent literature, see Martha Himmelfarb, Ascent to Heaven in Jewish and Christian Apocalypses (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993); Mary Dean-Otting, Heavenly Journeys: A Study of the Motif in Hellenistic Jewish Literature (New York: P. Lang, 1984); and Martha Himmelfarb, Tours of Hell: An Apocalyptic Form in Jewish and Christian Literature (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983).
[^20] See Martha Himmelfarb, "From Prophecy to Apocalypse: The Book of the Watchers and Tours of Heaven," in Jewish Spirituality: From the Bible to the Middle Ages, ed. A. Green (New York: Crossroads, 1986), 149-53.
[^21] See 1 Enoch; 3 Enoch; Apocalypse of Abraham; Ascension of Moses; Isaiah 6; Ezekiel 1; 10; 40-48.
[^22] AMM, 47.
[^23] M. Ottosson, "Hekhal," in Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 1978), 3:382-88.
[^24] Author's translation. See Otto Michel, "Mone," in Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, 10 vols., ed. Gerhard Kittel (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1967), 4:579-81. The KJV translation for the word monai is "mansions," deriving from the Latin Vulgate mansio, meaning not splendid palatial home in the modern sense, but a "stopping place" on a journey.
[^25] Author's translation. See Michel, "Oikos," in ibid., 5:119-58. For the Old Testament usage, see Michel, "Oikos," 120-21; also "Bayt," Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament.
[^26] See Origen, On First Principles (Peri Archon), II, 11, 6; Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies (Stromateis), IV, 6, 36, 3; VI, 14, 114, 1; VI, 107, 2; Irenaeus, Against Heresies (Adversus Haereses), V, 36. See also Hugh W. Nibley, "Baptism for the Dead in Ancient Times," in Mormonism and Christianity, 4:112-13, 116-17.
[^27] AMM, 74.
[^28] Jesus' revelation of the "Great Mystery" in the Secret Gospel of Mark could fit into this category (see William Hamblin, "Aspects of an Early Christian Initiation Ritual," in BSAF, 1:202-21). For a full discussion of the Secret Gospel of Mark, see Morton Smith, Clement of Alexandria and a Secret Gospel of Mark (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1973).
[^29] It is interesting to note that Paul's vision as recounted in 2 Corinthians 12:2-4 is widely regarded as the only first-person account of a celestial ascent from this period (see Tabor, Things Unutterable, 1). For a general study of esoteric ideas in Paul's writings, see Alan F. Segal, Paul the Convert: The Apostolate and Apostasy of Saul the Pharisee (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990).
[^30] See Tabor, Things Unutterable, 57-111.
[^31] For lists, descriptions, and sources of the major Hekhalot documents that will be quoted throughout this paper, see Gershom Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism (New York: Schocken Books, 1961); AMM, 127-234; and most recently Peter Schaefer, Synopse zur Hekhalot Literatur (Tubingen: Mohr, 1983). The thorny problems of determining the exact date and provenance can probably never be fully resolved and are irrelevant for the purposes of this paper.
[^32] See Schaefer, Synopse zur Hekhalot Literatur, passim.
[^33] It should be emphasized that there are many elements in Jewish ascension mysticism that we today would find very strange, including various magical incantations and practices and a strong emphasis on gematria. Gematria is a complex system of mystical interpretation of numbers, letters, and words. The most well-known example is found in Revelation 13:18, where the number of the "beast" is given as 666, which is frequently thought to represent a gematria on a name (see Gershom Scholem, "Gematria," in Encyclopedia of Judaism [Jerusalem: Keter, 1972], 7:369-74). Although I want to emphasize that these Jewish mystics were not "closet" Latter-day Saints, there are nonetheless some remarkable features of their ascension rituals and literature.
[^34] See TB Haggigah 14b; TY Haggigah 77a; TB Kiddushin 71a; 1QS 6:13-22; 1QS 5:24; Hekhalot Zutreti (AMM 142-43); Hekhalot Rabbati (AMM, 172); Merkavah Rabbah (AMM, 174); Sefer Hekhalot (AMM, 194). Emphasis is also sometimes placed on physiognomy (special physical characteristics denoting special spiritual power) and astrology (see AMM, 79-80, n. 21).
[^35] Hekhalot Rabbati 20:1, translated by Gershom Scholem, in Jewish Gnosticism, Merkabah Mysticism, and Talmudic Tradition (New York: Jewish Theological Seminary, 1965), 12, n. 5.
[^36] Translated by Smith, "Observations on Hekhalot Rabbati," 144.
[^37] See 1 Enoch 41:10-11; Testament of Levi 3:6; Revelation 1:5-6; 4:8-11; 8:2-5; 15:1-8.
[^38] Scholem, Jewish Gnosticism, 12, discussing Hekhalot Rabbati 18. In the Book of Mormon we learn that "there cannot any unclean thing enter into the Kingdom of Heaven" (1 Nephi 15:34), a concept that would have been fully endorsed by the Merkavah visionaries.
[^39] See M Haggigah 2:1; TB Haggigah 2:1, 11b, 14b; TY Haggigah 77a; Hekhalot Zutreti (AMM, 142-44); Merkavah Rabbah (AMM, 178).
[^40] See AMM, 77-79, for a full discussion of the sources.
[^41] AMM, viii; see M Haggigah 2.1; cf. 1 Enoch 93:11-12; Hekhalot Zutreti (AMM, 13). The New Testament describes several similar examples of secret teachings: Matthew 13:11; 16:21; 17:9; John 16:12; 1 Corinthians 3:1-2; 2 Corinthians 12:1-4. For numerous examples of secret teachings in early Christianity, see Hugh Nibley, "Evangelium Quadraginta Dierum: The Forty-day Mission of Christ—the Forgotten Heritage," in Mormonism and Christianity, in CWHN, 4:10-44, and Hamblin, "Aspects of an Early Christian Initiation Ritual."
[^42] See Marvin W. Meyer, ed., The Ancient Mysteries: A Sourcebook (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1987); Walter Burkert, Ancient Mystery Cults (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1987).
[^43] AMM, 85.
[^44] Hekhalot Rabbati 13, translated by Smith, "Observations," 144.
[^45] For a general discussion of these various mechanisms of the ascent into heaven, with numerous references to primary and secondary sources, see AMM, 119-23.
[^46] See 1 Enoch 14:8; 39:3; 52:1; 70:2; 2 Kings 2:11. Moses ascended to heaven in a cloud according to Pesikta Rabbati, in A. Jellinek, Bet ha-Midrash (Jerusalem: Wahrmann, 1967), 1:59. Notice Christ's "ascent" into the presence of God is associated with a cloud during the transfiguration on the Mount (see Matthew 17:5; Mark 9:7; Luke 9:34-35). God also appears to Israel in a cloud (Exodus 16:10, 19:9).
[^47] See Apocalypse of Abraham 12:10; the Etana legend, cited in n. 9.
[^48] John M. Lundquist, "Studies on the Temple in the Ancient Near East," Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, 1983, discusses several of these motifs.
[^49] See Apocalypse of Abraham 12; cf. Genesis 15; note the possible relationship of setting between Genesis 15:5 and JS Abraham 3:2 (in order to distinguish between the LDS book of Abraham and pseudepigraphical writings attributed to Abraham and Moses, I will designate the LDS scripture as JS [for Joseph Smith] Abraham or Moses).
[^50] Temples are often associated with mountains (see 1 Enoch 24-25 translated in OTP; J. Maier, Vom Kultus zur Gnosis [Salzburg: Otto Muller Verlag, 1964]; AMM, 38).
[^51] See extensive bibliography in AMM, 38, n. 44. Dante, in his Purgatorio, also ascends a cosmic mountain to discover a sacred tree (see Canto 22.130-41) and paradise (see Cantos 28-33).
[^52] See 1 Enoch 24:4-6 (OTP 1:26). Note the extensive parallels between Enoch's vision of the Tree of Life and Nephi's vision in the Book of Mormon: The tree is most beautiful (1 Enoch 24:5 = 1 Nephi 8:10-11; 11:8); its fruit brings eternal life for the righteous (1 Enoch 25:5 = 1 Nephi 8:10-12); an angelic figure guides and explains the vision (2 Enoch 24:6 = 1 Nephi 11:2-3); and there is a valley near the tree representing hell (1 Enoch 26:3-6, 27:1-2 = 1 Nephi 8:13, 26; 12:16-17). On the Tree of Life in Paradise, see 2 Enoch 8:3; 3 Enoch 5. Gruenwald adds that "the Tree of Life could be the place on which God rests, and God's theophany on the Tree of Life is, thus, a counterpart to his theophanies in the Temple and on His Throne of Glory" (AMM, 50-51). There is also a possible relationship between Lehi's vision of the throne of God (see 1 Nephi 1:8, 14) and the tree of life (see 1 Nephi 8-14).
[^53] See Masekhet Hekhalot (AMM, 210); Michael A. Morgan, tr., Sefer ha-Razim: The Book of Mysteries (Chico, California: Scholars, 1983).
[^54] There appears to be only one heaven in the book of Revelation, or perhaps John's vision includes only the highest heaven. Three: 2 Corinthians 12:2; Testament of Levi 3. Five: Apocalypse of Zephaniah cited by Clement of Alexandria; Greek Baruch. Eight: Re'uyot Yehezkel (AMM, 134, n. 2, 136, 139). Ten: 2 Enoch 20:3 (OTP, 1:134). In 2 Enoch 22:6, the ninth heaven is called "Kukhavim" or "stars" (cf. JS Abraham 3:13). This may support the interpretation that the astronomy in the Book of Abraham reflects an ancient geocentric world view similar to that found in the ascension literature (see William J. Hamblin, John Gee, and Daniel C. Peterson, "And I Saw the Stars: the Book of Abraham and Ancient Geocentric Astronomy," unpublished manuscript; cf. Revelation 4:1; Testament of Reuben 1:6; 5:7; 6:9; Testament of Judah 21:4; Testament of Levi 14:3; 18:3-4).
[^55] See 2 Enoch; Apocalypse of Abraham 19; Ascension of Isaiah.
[^56] See 2 Enoch 8:1; Apocalypse of Moses 38:4; cf. discussion by Tabor, Things Unutterable, 113-19, and AMM, 90-92. This may be related to Paul's account of his celestial ascent in 2 Corinthians 12:2-4.
[^57] Note that in JS Abraham 3:3, 9, God resides on his throne in the highest part of heaven. For a discussion see Hamblin, Gee, and Peterson, "And I Saw the Stars." It is interesting to speculate that from this perspective, Christ's promise to the thieves with whom he was crucified, "today you will be with me in paradise" (Luke 23:43), is not a necessarily a promise of eternal exaltation as some Christians understand it, but simply a promise that they will enter into one of the levels ("mansions") or hekhalot of heaven, or one of the lower degrees of glory in LDS understanding.
[^58] Cf. similar concepts in JS Abraham 3:3-6, 16-19.
[^59] See Ascension of Isaiah 7-8; Hekhalot Rabbati 17.
[^60] See Origen, On First Principles, 1.6.2; see also further references in note 25.
[^61] 1 Enoch 71:1; the original reads "sons of the holy angels," which R. H. Charles equates with the bene elohim of the Old Testament (The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament in English [Oxford: Clarendon, 1913], 2:233, 235). Cf. Hekhalot Rabbati (AMM, 159-60); Ma'aseh Merkavah (AMM, 183); Masekhet Hekhalot (AMM, 210); Morgan, Sefer ha-Razim.
[^62] Himmelfarb, "Apocalyptic Ascent and the Heavenly Temple," 210-12; cf. Apocalypse of Abraham 8:3; Ascension of Isaiah 9:40 (AMM, 40, n. 52); I. Elbogen, Der judische Gottesdienst in seiner geschichtlichen Entwicklung (Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1962), 61 ff., 521-22. This idea is also found at Qumran, according to J. Strugnell, "The Angelic Liturgy at Qumran 4Q400," Vetus Testamentum Supplement 7 (1960): 318-45 (4Q400-407 = Vermes, Dead Sea Scrolls in English, 221-30; 2 Enoch 8:8). The Christian Apocalypse of Paul tells us that Hebrew—the liturgical language of the earthly temple—is also the language of the angels. When not singing, the angels are said to speak only in a reverent whisper (see Hekhalot Rabbati 3:1, 7:5).
[^63] See Himmelfarb, "Apocalyptic Ascent and the Heavenly Temple," 211.
[^64] See 1 Enoch 71:11-12 (= OTP, 1:50), Apocalypse of Abraham 17:6-21 (= OTP, 1:697); Revelation 4:10; 5:9; 7:12; 11:17; 19:4.
[^65] See Testament of Levi 5:1.
[^66] 1 Enoch 14:9 (= OTP, 1:20); Hekhalot Zutreti (AMM, 33 n. 13); TB Haggigah 14b; cf. Ezekiel 1:22; 1 Enoch 71:5.
[^67] See Ascension of Isaiah 6:6 (= OTP, 2:164); cf. Isaiah 6:6; Revelation 4:1. This idea is perhaps related to idea of the "opening of heaven" in Ezekiel 1:1 and Syrian Baruch 22:1. 3 Baruch (Greek) has doors separating each heaven. For related texts see, Revelation 4:1; 1 Enoch 14:9; Testament of Levi 5:1; 3 Maccabees 6:18. The ascension motifs in the Mithras Liturgy describe a series of doors leading into heaven (see Papyri Graecae Magicae, 4.475-829, translated in Hans Dieter Betz, The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986], 48-54).
[^68] See 2 Enoch 21:2; Apocalypse of Abraham 10:1-2; a similar reaction is found in JS Moses 1:20.
[^69] See 2 Enoch 21:3; Hekhalot Rabbati 17; cf. Nephi's angelic guide, 1 Nephi 11.
[^70] See TB Haggigah 15b; J. P. Schultz, "Angelic Opposition to the Ascension of Moses and the Revelation of the Law," Jewish Quarterly Review 61, no. 1 (1970): 282-307.
[^71] The obsession with angelic names is most pronounced in Sepher ha-Razim, see Morgan, Sepher ha-Razim; Hekhalot Rabbati 15; see also Betz, The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, passim.
[^72] Scholem, Jewish Gnosticism, 32; see Hekalot Rabbati 17-18. The books of Jeu are filled with celestial seals (see Carl Schmidt, The Books of Jeu, The Coptic Gnostic Library 13, trans. Violet Macdermot [Leiden: Brill, 1978]).
[^73] Toseftah Haggigah 2:3; TY Haggigah 77b; Midrash Rabba to Shir ha-Shiram 7d-8a. See discussion of the tale in AMM, 85-87, and Christopher Rowland, The Open Heaven (New York: Crossroad, 1982), 306-48.
[^74] Toseftah Haggigah 2:3, translated in Rowland, The Open Heaven, 310-12.
[^75] 2 Enoch 22:9 (recension J) (= OTP, 1:138); cf. Chaldean Oracles; Acts 6:15; Origen, On First Principles, II, 3, 7; 2 Corinthians 5:3. In Revelation 6:11; 7:9-14, the saints in heaven wear splendid white robes.
[^76] See 2 Enoch 22; Pistis Sophia; cf. AMM, 33-34.
[^77] See 1 Enoch 71:1; Revelation 4:4; 6:11; Revelation 15; Revelation 16; 1 Maccabees 10:89; 11:58; Ascension of Isaiah 9:6; 46:5.
[^78] Clement of Alexandria and a Secret Gospel of Mark, 243-44; note that the transfiguration of Jesus can be seen in this light, where Christ's clothes are transformed (see Matthew 17:2; Mark 9:3; Luke 9:29; see also Hugh Nibley, "Sacred Vestments," in Temple and Cosmos, in CWHN, 12:91-138).
