Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President Lorenzo Snow

Fifth President of the Church, Member of the Council of Twelve from February 12, 1849, to September 13, 1898. President of the Church from September 13, 1898, to October 10, 1901.

I testify before this assembly, as I have testified before the people throughout the different states of the union, and throughout England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Italy, Switzerland and France, that God Almighty, through my obedience to the Gospel of Jesus, has revealed to me tangibly that this is the work of God, that this is His Gospel, and that this is His Kingdom which Daniel prophesied should be set up in the last days. I prophesy that any man who will be humble before the Lord-any man who will, with child-like simplicity, be baptized for the remission of his sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost, which shall lead him into all truth, and show him things to come; he shall receive a knowledge from God that His Kingdom has been established in these latter days, and that it shall never be thrown down, or be left to another people.

55 In saying this, I say no more than every man could say, and has said, who had a dispensation of the Gospel. I would not have traveled over the face of the earth as I have for the last thirty-five years unless God had revealed this unto me. I have already said nothing but absolute duty ever prompted me to travel and preach this Gospel; but I received a dispensation from the Most High, and I could say, and do say now, as the Apostle Paul said, "I received not this Gospel from man, but I received it by revelation from God." I say that any man who will humble himself before God, and be immersed in water (after repentance ) for the remission of his sins, shall receive, through the laying on of hands, the Holy Ghost. Can I give him this? No. I, as a messenger of the Lord, to whom authority has been delegated, administer immersion for the remission of sins. I simply immerse him in water, having authority to do so. I simply lay my hands upon him for the reception of the Holy Ghost; then God, from His holy presence, acknowledges my authority-acknowledges that I am His messenger, and confers the Holy Ghost upon the individual. This is the Gospel; this is what constitutes a man a savor of life unto life, as Jesus told His disciples they were.

56Talk about this kingdom being destroyed! Talk about, reason upon, lay plans here and there, by the combined wisdom of governments, to destroy the kingdom of God! Why, you might as Well try to pluck the stars from the firmament, or the moon and the sun from their orbits! It can never be accomplished, for it is the work of the great I AM. I advise every man who has a disposition to put forth his hand against this work to hold on and consider. Take the advice of Gamaliel, the lawyer. Said he: "Refrain from these men, and let them alone, for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to naught: But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God."
