Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President Sidney Rigdon

First Counselor to President Joseph Smith from March, 1833, to June 27, 1844. Excommunicated from the Church September 8, 1844.

In the year 1830 I met the whole Church of Christ in a little log house about twenty feet square, near Waterloo, New York, and we began to talk about the Kingdom of God. We knew fourteen years ago that the Church would become as large as it is today. We began to talk like men in authority and power. If we did not see this people, we saw by vision the Church of God a thousand times larger. Many things were taught, believed and preached then which have since come to pass. The world being entirely ignorant of the testimony of the prophets, and without knowledge of what God was about to do, treated all we said with pretended contempt and ridicule.

63We talked about the people coming as doves to the windows; that all nations should flock unto it; that they should come bending to the standard of Jesus, saying, "Our fathers have taught falsehood and things in which there is no profit," and of whole nations being born in one day. God had great things to say for the salvation of the world. If we had told the people what our eyes behold this day, we should not have been delivered.

63I do not know that anything has taken place in the history of this Church which we did not then believe. It was written upon our hearts and never could be taken away. It was indelibly engraved; no power beneath yonder heavens could obliterate it. This was the period when God laid the foundation of the Church, and He laid it firmly, truly, and upon Eternal Truth.

64If any man says it is not the work of God, I know he lies. Some of you who know you have a house, how long would it take to make you reason yourself into a belief that you have no house where you now reside with your families? Neither have we any power whereby we can ever persuade ourselves that this is not the Church of God. We do not care who sinks or swims, or opposes, but we know here is the Church of God, and I have authority before God for saying so. I have the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy. I have slept with it, I have walked with it. The idea has never been out of my heart for a moment, and I will reap the glory of it when I leave this world. I know God. I have gazed upon the glory of God, the throne, visions and glories of God, and the visions of eternity in days gone by.
