Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President Heber C. Kimball

Member of the Council of Twelve from February 14, 1835, to December 5, 1847. First Counselor to President Brigham Young from December 5, 1847, to June 22, 1868.

I can say truly that I have heard the Gospel presented before us this morning as it is recorded in the New Testament.

65You know that it is generally understood, and perhaps by many of the strangers who are present today, that we do not believe the Bible. That is a great mistake: we do believe it. I can say, as one of the Apostles of old said, and it is my advice and instruction to you-prove all things and try all things, and hold fast to that which is good. As he exhorted you to prove these things, to investigate them, and reflect upon them, and prove the truth of that which is called "Mormonism," let me tell you the day will come, if you don't do it, you will be sorry. Why? Because there is a future day that will determine these things.

65 This is the Gospel which has been taught to us today, in a plain and simple manner and in that simplicity that it was taught by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and by many others who were ordained by them. The people profess to believe the Bible; the whole Christian world profess to believe that book-to believe that it is the Bible, but do they believe what is in that Bible? If they do, they don't practice it. How many of you, my brethren and fellow travelers to eternity, how many times have you said in your day, and in your generation, and in your family circles, "If I could see one man practice that religion that was taught by Jesus and his Apostles, I would be a Saint." I said it many times before I ever heard of "Mormonism," and sought for these things, and wished for them, and prayed for them according to the knowledge I then had. But what did I know about God, or about the Gospel, by what I heard from the pulpits of the day?

66God has one mode of saving men and women, and you cannot be saved upon any other principle than that which Jesus Christ taught, and I know it. I can say to this congregation, and to every other, which thing I have said in the United States and in Great Britain-except you receive the words of Jesus Christ, and those that are ordained and sent forth by Him, you are just as sure of damnation as you are sure of dying, and I know it. These things are plain, and the Gospel that has been spoken of has been revealed in these last times. That light that was once extinguished by wickedness has been lit up again. The ancient Gospel is again revealed, and the Priesthood of the Son of God, and the Latter-day Saints have this power, and you cannot help yourselves. That is why we are here today, that is the reason why I am here today.

66Joseph Smith and his brother were killed in Carthage jail. Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and I know it. I am not testifying to this because I have believed it so long, but I knew it twenty years ago, just as well as I do now, and have testified of it to the nations of the earth. And what will be the consequences of this testimony? They that believe and are baptized shall be saved, and they shall receive the Holy Ghost under the hands of those who have due authority to confer that blessing; and if they go forward and are baptized with full purpose of heart, believing with all their soul, obeying the Gospel, being buried with Christ in baptism, they shall obtain the Holy Ghost.

66 I rejoice that I live in this day and age of the world; I rejoice that I have passed through what I have for the Gospel's sake; but will it compare with what men passed through in the days of Jesus, who was hung upon a cross for His religion? He expired upon Calvary for His religion; they killed Him as a false prophet, and even those of His own household did not believe in Him; they also slew His Apostles, and those who believed in them. Don't you suppose it was as degrading to them to believe in Jesus Christ as for us to believe that Joseph Smith was a Prophet? He was a Prophet, and Jesus was the Son of God; and Hyrum Smith was a Patriarch, and I bear witness of it unto all men.

67I have told you the truth, and you shall know that "Mormonism" is true, and what I and my brethren have told you this day is the Gospel of salvation.
