Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President George A. Smith

Member of the Council of Twelve from April 26, 1839, to October 6, 1868. Church Historian and General Church Recorder from April, 1854, to April, 1871. First Counselor to President Brigham Young from October 6, 1868, to September 1, 1875.

Twenty-four years ago, when the doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were first being proclaimed to the inhabitants of the earth, we were told that we were to participate in the same blessings, and would be subject to the same persecutions as was the common lot of all Former-day Saints; that the same gifts that were enjoyed in the days of our Savior and His Apostles were and should be in the last days; and if these things did not follow, it was for want of obedience to the will of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It was this spirit of revelation that pointed out the only way; and because the different churches did not have in their midst the same offices, gifts and blessings, and the same privileges, the reason assigned was plainly and simply that they had not been faithful in their obedience to the principles which had been revealed, and had thereby lost the spirit of revelation; had slid from the original platform, and had fallen back to principles of folly, teaching for doctrine the precepts of men.

73 The Lord sent His servant Joseph Smith to proclaim to the world the original principles of the Gospel; and the very moment they heard him calling upon them to come back to the original principles, and partake of the blessings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as they were originally preached by those whom Jesus Himself sent to preach, all those different sects and denominations began to call for authority. On being told that it was revealed from Heaven, and that the foundation was revelation from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, authority given by Him, and that He had commanded the re-establishment of His Church, or of laying the foundation of His Church upon its primitive or original foundation, they all exclaimed, "There is to be no more revelation, there is to be no more prophesying, no more visions, no more ministering of Angels." Hard as it is to believe, and strange as it may appear, these religionists who had read and professed to believe the New Testament, and knew that John did declare, more than sixty years after Christ, that he saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven having the everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth, to every nation, kindred, tongue and people-these same men would rise up and declare such a thing never was to take place; and although John plainly declares that what he saw was to come to pass hereafter, yet they believe it not, and said all such manifestation had an end when the apostles, or fathers fell asleep. Thus they commenced the persecution, and untiring crusade against the Latter-day Saints, and by every means in their power endeavored to stop the progress of the work.

74The signs of the times thicken in the heavens, and the earth shows forth her wonders, and as this is frequently denominated the fast age, I will say that it is fast ripening for the burning, for ere long the Savior will make His appearance among His people, when they are sufficiently united, when they become sufficiently agreed that they can all work with one feeling, one mind, one soul, and with one spirit; the heavens then can be revealed, the curtains unrolled, and the Savior appear in the midst of His Saints.

74The time is near at hand when the consummation of the wicked will take place; the day of the Lord is near; the harvest is not far ahead. The wicked are slaying the wicked, and times are growing worse and worse; all the world feel it; and we should watch for the coming of the Son of Man.

74I have been a member of this Church from my childhood; I commenced to advocate the Book of Mormon when only 13 years of age. News flew around the neighborhood that the "Golden Bible" had come, and a large company of neighbors came in to see the book; they commenced to examine and find fault with it and I to answer their objections; although I had not made my mind up on the subject, yet I tried to remove their objections; the result was, the whole company went away confounded, leaving me surprised that they could not raise any stronger objections against it; and from that day to this I have not let any proper occasion pass that presented to me an opportunity of defending the mission of Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon.

75I bear my testimony that this is the work of God, and these men are His servants, and God has placed in His church a prophet, priest and president. Joseph Smith was a true prophet, and that which he has conferred upon this people is the true priesthood, and if you listen to the instructions and be led by the keys of this Kingdom, you are in the path to an eternal exaltation.
