Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President Daniel H. Wells

Second Counselor to President Brigham Young, from January 4, 1857, to August 29, 1877.

The light of truth has been revealed by the Savior, and through the mercy of the Lord He has sent forth His servants to proclaim this Gospel to all nations, to bless them. The time has come when God has set Himself to take the rule and the power of the earth into His own hands. He has sent forth Joseph, and Hyrum, and Brigham, and Heber, and Jedediah, and Willard, and Daniel, and the Twelve Apostles and the other authorities of the Holy Priesthood Which is established upon the earth. The communication has been opened up between the heavens and the earth. He has sent forth a message to all nations, saying, "Fear God and give glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment has come." It has been proclaimed to the world by faithful men for many years-it has been sounded in the byways and highways, in city and hamlet, and in the nooks and corners of the earth; and in a coming day the people will be judged by it, because it has been sent forth by the direct counsel of Heaven.

80 It is our duty to sustain the principles of truth, virtue and integrity, and every principle that has been revealed from the Almighty to His children on the earth. If it is the duty of one man to do this, it is the duty of every man to do the same; and every man will be found wanting unless he obeys this Heavenly message. How shall we do it when we are compassed about by all the power of earth and hell to overcome, overthrow and destroy us? By cleaving to the Lord of hosts, who is mighty to save, and by cleaving to those holy principles of life and power which He has revealed. The more the floods of iniquity surge up against us, the closer let us cling to those principles, for they will bear us off victoriously to exaltation and glory in this world and in the worlds to come. The same principles have exalted our Father and our God to his present state of glory and power, and they will exalt you and me and all who will abide them in the scale of human existence and eternal progression. They are the same principles which have been revealed in the latter days for the salvation of mankind, and for their exaltation to the presence of God the Father in heaven. They have always existed, and will continue to exist. They will abide after the refuge of lies has been swept away. It is not as it has been in days and years gone by. The kingdom is now established; it is upon the earth never again to be prevailed against or to be overcome by sin and iniquity.

81All men have their volition, and are responsible to God alone for it. As the kingdom of God grows and becomes mighty upon the earth, laws will be given suited to the condition of the children of men, in their respective governments and nationalities, according to their principles. The supreme law of the world will be the law of God, and all people will choose to obey or disobey as they list. All will be governed according to their circumstances and the principles which will be revealed from time to time for their best good. This is not the work of a day, but of eternity-it is without beginning of days or end of years.

81I feel grateful that I live in this day and age of the world. The Twelve Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ are here, and the organization of the Church and kingdom of God is here, with the Holy Priesthood which is after the order of the Son of God; and this is the chain which opens up a communication between the heavens and the earth, and in it there is safety; and through it truth will prevail over the face of the whole earth, and by its power the kingdom of God will be established upon the earth no more to be prevailed against.

81I bear testimony that the Lord did reveal himself to Joseph Smith, and called him to commence this work. In calling him the Lord made no mistake. He knew that Joseph would rather die

83than quail under persecution or deny the faith. Joseph did this, he proved that sooner than swerve from his integrity to God he would die. Who can gainsay this? No man, in time or eternity. Joseph's martyrdom is a monument that will endure forever, that he preferred death to forsaking the principles of the holy Gospel and the institutions of heaven. They killed him for that, and nothing else. His death is a testimony against this wicked and adulterous generation. We as a community are his witnesses, and a monument that all people may look upon, and, if they have a mind to, they can comprehend that God has commenced His latter-day work.

83These are the last days, and God will surely bring His purposes to pass. His work is established, and all are invited to help build it up. We have received the principles of eternal life and we offer them to all. Freely we have received, freely we give, and ask nothing for it. We bear the glad tidings of salvation across the plains, rivers and oceans, and proclaim them on all suitable occasions at home and in distant climes. No day or hour passes without this testimony is being borne by the servants of the Lord, and this has been so now for more than forty years, and during this time the work of the Lord has been continually increasing and gaining strength, taking root downward and bearing fruit upward. It is greater today than it was yesterday, and it will continue so, no matter what may be brought to bear against it.

83The Lord will reveal to any faithful individual all that is necessary to convince him that this work is true. None need depend for that testimony upon others; all can have it for themselves, and that Will be like a well of water within them, springing up to everlasting life, revealing to them the things of God, and all that is needful to make them wise unto salvation. They need not depend upon my testimony, or upon that of President Young or President Smith, nor upon any but God. He will direct the course of all who try to serve Him with full purpose of heart. He will show them whether we are placed here properly, or whether any mistake has been made concerning the calling of Joseph Smith. The testimony of the Lord will tell whether we teach things of ourselves or of the Lord; that testimony will tell its possessors whether the servants of God who stand here tell the truth about this work or not. They need be dependent upon none but themselves and the Lord for this knowledge, for the Lord is willing to give liberally to all, and He upbraids not. All the world may learn to know the Lord our Father, who is in heaven, and Jesus Christ, Whom He has sent, if they will but take the course the Lord has marked out.
