Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President John R. Winder

Second Counselor to Presiding Bishop William B. Preston, from April, 1886, to October 24, 1901. First Counselor to President Joseph F. Smith from October 17, 1901, to March 27, 1910.

I scarcely know how to express my gratitude to God, our Eternal Father, for this privilege that I have of once more meeting with you, my brethren and sisters, in general conference. As I looked over this congregation this morning, I thought of the time when I first heard the Gospel in a far off land, from an elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I was convinced of the truth when I first heard it, and I knew that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I am thankful to say, this morning, that faith has grown and increased with me as the years have passed along. My mind goes back to the day when the boy Joseph Smith, 14 years of age, went into the woods to pray to the Father, and when the Father and the Son appeared to him and gave him some instructions as to how he should proceed. The thought comes to me that no sooner did he make known what had taken place than persecution commenced. From that hour his life was sought. In every way the effort was made to destroy him and his influence. Seventy-five years ago today he was enabled to organize the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with very few members. Persecution did not cease then. On the contrary, it continued from year to year. Then when I think of the trying circumstances in which he was placed, the wonderful work that he accomplished during the few years he was permitted to live upon the earth, the translation of the Book of Mormon and the presenting of it to the people and to the world; also the production of the Doctrine and Covenants, and the announcement of many glorious principles introduced for the salvation of the living and the redemption of the dead, I marvel at the great work that he accomplished in the short space of 14 years. Then I thought of the time when the people were compelled to leave Nauvoo and come to this country, the hardships they had to endure, the travels across the plains, the many difficulties they had to encounter, and after they had arrived here the energies they put forth to establish industries for the good and benefit of the people.

89The Lord has preserved and protected His people, notwithstanding the fact that, at many times, they have been menaced by opposition, all things have been overruled for the good and benefit of the work of the Lord, and for the advancement of His work upon the earth. I do not know of any time when my heart has felt to rejoice more than at the present, in the extent of the work of the Lord and the progress that it is making upon the face of the earth.

89Every day of my life I see new evidences of the truth of the everlasting Gospel, and of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. There is one thing that I would like to mention, and that is in relation to the salvation of the dead. You will all remember the great anxiety of the Prophet Joseph Smith in regard to this subject. On more than one occasion he said that he was very much concerned about this matter, and desired to bring it before the people.

89 This is a duty that is laid upon the Saints; the Lord requires that they shall minister in behalf of the dead, and it is astonishing sometimes to see the interest that is taken in regard to this matter. There has been a wonderful increase in the interest manifested in this work. The Temple, the House of the Lord, has been crowded. The Latter-day Saints come here from all parts of the country, from Old Mexico, New Mexico, Arizona, and all the settlements in the south, as well as from Canada, from Idaho, and all the settlements in the north. They flock here by the thousands. This is one of the evidences, to me, that the people are fulfilling the promises that have been made by the prophets of old, that the hearts of the fathers would turn to the children, and the hearts of the children would turn to the fathers. There is a greater interest in this direction than I have ever seen before.

90I never saw a brighter day than this for the Latter-day Saints. Everything that I see around me and everything that I hear causes me to rejoice. We have eighteen hundred missionaries in the world preaching the Gospel of life and salvation-"Peace on earth, good will to men." That is the message they go abroad to deliver, and it is left optional with every person to accept or reject it. If they accept it, it is life and salvation; if they reject it, it may be their condemnation.

90I testify to you that I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. I am thankful that this testimony has never left me since I first heard the Gospel, more than sixty years ago.
