Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President Anthon H. Lund

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 7, 1889, to October 17, 1901. Church Historian and General Church Recorder from July 26, 1900, to October 17, 1901. Second Counselor to President Joseph F. Smith from October 17, 1901, to April 7, 1910. First Counselor to President Joseph F. Smith from April 7, 1910, to March 2, 1921.

My testimony is that this is the work of God, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the Lord, raised up to usher in this last dispensation. He was called to be an instrument in the hands of the Lord to bring again unto man the Gospel which had been taken from the earth. He performed his mission well; he was faithful and true; and he was willing even to give his life for the truth. Joseph Smith knew for himself that this was the work of God; and he often told others that they could know it also through the Spirit of God. He was willing to go, as he said himself, "like a lamb to the slaughter." He understood what was coming; but he submitted willingly. He did not shrink, he did not leave his people and try to save his own life, but he sealed his testimony with his blood. And so did his brother Hyrum, the Patriarch. Their integrity, love and devotion come to us as their testament. To us is also given the great boon of having an assurance of the truth, a knowledge for ourselves that this is the work of God.

91 I bear my testimony unto this congregation that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the Lord, that he proved himself worthy of the name he was called to bear; and that he not only taught the principles of the Gospel, but, as a prophet, was able to tell the Saints what should come to pass, to warn them against certain courses, to tell them what the future had in store for them, and also to prophesy what should befall this nation. Read the 87th section of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and his history, and you will see that as a prophet he foresaw the future both of the nation and of the Saints. The Lord did not leave him nor the Saints in the dark concerning these things. And we have seen his prophecies fulfilled.

92This work has been established by our Heavenly Father, and no opposition can stop it. When there were only six or ten members in the Church, it might have been thought that the adversary could have stopped it, but not even then. It has grown. The influence of the Gospel, as brought forth by the Prophet Joseph Smith, is making its way and is being felt throughout all nations; the truths revealed through him will yet be accepted by the world.

92I rejoice in the fact that the work of God is growing in the earth, and that He has been with His servants in their labors to promulgate the glad tidings of salvation unto men. Our missionaries have gone to nearly all lands, and are proclaiming the will of our Heavenly Father and telling men that the time is quickly approaching when Christ will come the second time. When He came the first time He descended below all things that He might redeem mankind, but He will come in glory to the earth, with His holy angels, to meet His Saints. That time is approaching. Much will have to be done, no doubt, before Christ will come to reign upon the earth. How long it will be we do not know, but we know this: the work in which we are engaged is the preparatory work for His coming. We call upon the whole world to repent, to turn unto God, to have faith in Him, to keep His commandments, and do the things which He has ordained for salvation; then lead such lives that they can say in truth that they have taken upon them the name of Christ.

92 The Gospel of Christ as revealed unto us is the same as formerly. When John was shown that an angel should come with the Gospel, he was not told that it should be a new Gospel; but it was the "everlasting" Gospel-always new, and yet everlasting; the same Gospel, with no change in it. The Latter-day Saints are a God-fearing people, a duty-fulfilling people, a people who have joined together in covenants to serve the Lord and to work out the salvation of their souls, in fear and trembling before God. They are not a people sunken in vice and iniquity.
