Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President John Henry Smith

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 27, 1880, to April 7, 1910. Second Counselor to President Joseph F. Smith from April 7, 1910, to October 13, 1911.

Standing before you, my brethren and sisters, as one of the witnesses of the mission of the Redeemer of the world, and of the restored truths of the Gospel given in the day and age in which we live, I bear this record in your presence today. I have grown from childhood to manhood in connection with these leading men of the Church of Christ. I knew Brigham Young as intimately as a boy could know his father. I knew John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow in like manner. I have been as intimate with President Joseph F. Smith as kinsman could be. Standing here as a witness before God today, I solemnly declare that I have never received one item of instruction from these men and from the Council of Apostles that did not breathe words of life, words of encouragement, words of loyalty and devotion to every element of true manhood.

94The Gospel is true. The angel of God spoken of by the prophet of old has flown through the midst of heaven, "having the everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell upon the earth, to every nation, kindred, tongue and people." Upon the head of this man (pointing to President Joseph F. Smith ) and his associates today lies the responsibility of seeing to it that every child of our Father within reach shall hear that witness and accept or reject it. My witness before you is that God has spoken, that His truth is established, and that His Church is in the world. God, the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, have spoken to man in this dispensation. The key has been turned and the work is in motion.

95The Gospel we have embraced is the truth. It came from the Master. It has been sent to renovate the world, to re-establish among mankind the living faith which had so largely departed from the breasts of the human family, and to bring them to a comprehension of the responsibilities they owe to the Divine Master. Nothing can stay its progress. You and I may fall by the wayside; we may lack the fortitude and faith to endure and fulfil our part; but the work itself has gone on from the day the announcement was made of the administration of heavenly beings, and it will continue in its onward march until every nation, kindred, tongue, and people throughout the universe shall hear the glad tidings of great joy, and have the privilege of accepting or rejecting the same in the exercise of the agency our Father has given to them.

95I bear you my testimony to the truth of the Gospel, and the mission of Joseph Smith; to the mission of his associates that stood around him and were true to him; to the mission of Brigham Young, who was faithful, earnest, devoted and of a heroic mould, and who, had he not been of such type, would have failed in the great mission that was given him; honoring and esteeming in his life's ministry that heroic man whose blood mingled with the Prophet's in Carthage jail, John Taylor; true to that humble and earnest advocate of the principles of the Gospel, one of the most successful that ever preached it in the world, Wilford Woodruff; and to that upright man of the Lord, Lorenzo Snow, who presided in righteousness over this people. And I will not in any degree slacken in my allegiance and respect for the man (President Joseph F. Smith) who stands at our head today. No truer man ever breathed the breath of life. No man has ever been more willing to stand up for the principles of justice and mercy. No man has been more loyal in preaching the principles of his faith. No man is more ready today to discharge that high responsibility and fulfil every obligation. I bear witness to this work. I know that it is from the Lord, that it has come to stay, that it will continue to spread and increase in the world, and that it will become the joy of the whole earth.
