Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President Charles W. Penrose

Member of the Council of Twelve from July 7, 1904, to December 7, 1911, Second Counselor to President Joseph F. Smith from December 7, 1911, to November 19, 1918. Second Counselor to President Heber J. Grant from November 23, 1918, to March 10, 1921. First Counselor to President Heber J. Grant from March 10, 1921, to May 16, 1925.

Be it known to all people that the Lord, in His infinite mercy, has once more opened the heavens and revealed Himself to man. The last dispensation has been commenced. The voice of Christ has again been heard. Angels have come down from heaven to earth. Prophets, Apostles and other inspired men declare the word and will of the Lord. A sacred record of the ancient people of a vast continent has been brought out of the ground, and, united with the Jewish Bible, bears witness that God is the same yesterday, today and forever, and that by faith mankind in all ages may learn of Him and have communion with Him. The Gospel of Jesus Christ is being preached in all the world as a witness to all nations, baptism is administered by divine authority for the remission of sins, the Holy Ghost is conferred as of old, by the laying on of hands of men clothed with the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood, the unity of the faith is enjoyed, the sick are healed, prophecies are uttered, the gifts of tongues and of interpretation are attainable, and by visions and dreams and the witness of the Comforter, God is testifying to those who receive His word, that He has commenced the great Latter-day work spoken of by His holy prophets.

96 The man chosen of God to commence the work of the last dispensation was Joseph Smith, who was slain at Carthage, Illinois, for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus. No prophet who ever lived on earth, except the Son of God Himself, accomplished a greater work, brought forth more truth or received greater revelations from on high than he. Having finished the grand mission required of him by the Lord, he sealed his testimony with his blood, and stands with the martyrs who will be crowned in the presence of God and of the Lamb as Kings and Priests unto them forever. The truth of this testimony has been sealed upon the hearts of many thousands of people, who rejoice in the certain knowledge that they are accepted of God. And this knowledge may be obtained by every soul who shall believe in Christ, repent of sin, be baptized for the remission of sins, and receive the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Therefore, 0 reader! Come unto the light, obey the Gospel and be saved! This is the only way of eternal life and everlasting happiness in the Father's presence.

97I bear my testimony that I know this work is God's work. I know that He lives, that He is our Father, the Father of our spirits; I bear testimony that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ and is the Christ, the Son of the living God, in body and in spirit; that He is our Redeemer, and that by obedience to His laws and commandments we shall go on through all eternity increasing in light, and knowledge, and bliss, and power, and dominion. I bear testimony that we are led today by the living oracles. The man who stands at the head succeeds to all the keys and powers and authorities revealed from God, through men who lived on the earth in the past, who restored their keys to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Every key and power restored by that means is held in the Church and vested in the man who now stands at the head. I bear testimony to his integrity, and his honor, and his truth, and his devotion to that which is good. The work of God shall prevail; evil shall be overcome; darkness shall be dispersed; and the rule and government and dominion of the Almighty shall be established from the rivers to the ends of the earth.

97 This glorious work for the salvation of the human family is now in progress under the revelation and authority of the Most High, and no matter how much it may be opposed by ignorance or malice, by Satan or foolish men, it will go on to complete a glorious victory. Evil will be overcome, darkness dispersed, Satan and his hosts be bound, the earth and its inhabitants be redeemed, Paradise will be restored, Eden will bloom again, Christ will reign as King, the Tabernacle of God will be with men, and all things above, beneath, around, will sing praises to the Most High, to whom be glory and dominion forever.
