Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President Anthony W. Ivins

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 6, 1907, to March 10, 1921. Second Counselor to President Heber J. Grant from March 10, 1921, to May 28, 1925; First Counselor May 28, 1925, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

"This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

99"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God." (John 3:3. )

99At a very early period in my life I began to read books. At eight years of age I was quite familiar with English history, which was my first interesting study. A little later I began the study of the scriptures. Among the passages which greatly impressed me were those quoted above. Eternal life, I reasoned, was the greatest of all gifts. To attain it, according to the word of the Lord, one must know God, and His Son, Jesus Christ. To even see the Kingdom of God, much less enter into it, one must be born again. I asked myself what this new birth consisted of.

99I learned, as I read farther, that to know the truth of the doctrines taught by the Redeemer, it is necessary to do the will of the Father. Converted to the truth of this doctrine, a strong conviction came to me that if I were ever to obtain an abiding testimony of the truth of the doctrines of the Gospel it was necessary to live a clean life. I must be trustworthy, temperate, virtuous, in a word must do the will of the Father, as the Son had commanded. Then came a careful reading of the Book of Mormon. No book that I had ever read, or have read since, impressed me as did this book. I read it in connection with works treating upon the archaeology of the American continent, and was thoroughly convinced of its divine authenticity and truth. When I read the last chapter of the book I was profoundly impressed with the promise made by Moroni, in which he says that any one who would read the things which he has written, and ask the Father, in faith believing, shall know the truth by the power of the Holy Ghost.

100It was my custom, while making these investigations, to go to a remote place which I had selected, and there pray to the Lord for wisdom that I might understand the things which I read. On one of these occasions, after reading the Book of Mormon, the testimony which I desired came to me. A great joy filled my soul, I was very happy. I felt that my transgressions were forgiven, and I loved and forgave every one. That my Redeemer lived and had restored His Gospel through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, the great prophet of this dispensation, seemed as certain to me as my own existence. The scripture was easy to understand, I knew that the words of the prophets would be fulfilled, the covenant people of the Lord gathered and redeemed and that the kingdom and coming of the Lord was near.

100The experiences and observations of fifty years have confirmed that testimony and if possible made it stronger than ever before. I have never been in doubt for a moment, but have waited patiently and happily for the consummation of the work of the Lord and His glorious coming to reign among men, which I know is very near at hand.

100I bear testimony that Joseph Smith was and is today the prophet of this dispensation, the chosen instrument of the Lord, through whom the Gospel has been restored to earth, that its inhabitants may be warned and brought to repentance if they are to avoid the judgments of the Almighty which hang over them.
