Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

President Charles W. Nibley

Presiding Bishop of the Church from December 11, 1907, to May 28, 1925. Second Counselor to President Heber J. Grant from May 28, 1925, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

I know that the men who are called to preside over the Church of Christ are men of God. I bear witness of that, for I know them. It has been my high privilege to know, better than most men, better than almost any, of the life and labors of President Joseph F. Smith, and I know what manner of man he is. I testify to you that he is a man of God, choice and most precious, as I believe, above every man whom I know or have ever known; honest, sincere, devoted, patient, forgiving, loving and most precious. This is the kind of man that God has called to lead His Church, in this the beginning of the twentieth century.

101I bear testimony to you, also, concerning the integrity of the Twelve Apostles, who are special witnesses of Jesus Christ; they try to make other people believe that Jesus has indeed risen, that He is the Redeemer of the world; and they try to instill that faith into the hearts of the children of men. I bear witness that these Seventies are of the same high class of men, men of faith, men of God, who have that same testimony in their hearts, ready to stand before all the world and testify that God, our Eternal Father, has revealed that Jesus is the Christ, that He has risen, that He lives and that He will come and reign upon the earth.

101 "Mormonism" holds a singular and unique position in the world, claiming as it does to be the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is a creed rounded in righteousness, established in a perfect law of liberty, and it challenges the world to produce anything like the organization which the Lord has revealed, and through which He makes manifest His righteousness and His purposes in the earth. Without this Priesthood, we are told, the power of godliness is not made manifest to men in the flesh.

102The organization of this most wonderful piece of spiritual machinery, called the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is a miracle in itself. We teach faith in God and in His Son Jesus Christ; faith in the Prophet Joseph Smith, faith in the Book of Mormon; faith in the miraculous birth, life and resurrection of the risen Redeemer.

102So "Mormonism" is here with a mission and the Lord has provided men and women who are stalwart and true to carry on this work. His servants are determined men of God. Men of faith who believe that God has spoken; who are assured in their very souls that this is His special work; that He has established it, and they believe and accept it without reservation or equivocation. I bear witness of it. Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God, whom to know is life eternal. I bear witness of His mission, of His life and of His resurrection. If we Latter-day Saints do not stand for this faith, shall the Son of Man, when He cometh, find faith on the earth? I tell you, mighty little, indeed, unless the Latter-day Saints and their sons and daughters after them carry out the mission whereunto we are called.

102This is not a church established by some man, by man's wisdom-it is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Herein is the truth, and the light, and the way-a perfect law of liberty and of righteousness. This is God's Church; this is The Church-the only Church that He acknowledges in the earth as having His Priesthood-the only one in all the world. We challenge the attention of the world on that proposition. It is guided by Him. I know as I live that this is the Church of God, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is His prophet, sent of God to establish the Church whose law is a perfect law of liberty to all mankind.
