Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Parley P. Pratt

Member of the First Council of Twelve from February 21, 1835, to May 13, 1857.

Twenty-six years ago, the coming summer, mine eyes glanced over the Book of Mormon, and I afterwards heard the voice of the servant of the Lord and enjoyed the smiles and the blessings of the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum, and received under their hands and those of Oliver Cowdery the Priesthood, or a portion of it, and the keys and powers of the same, they having received it by the ministering of angels, to be carried to all the people of the earth; and at that time all the people in this Church, upon the face of the earth, could have been assembled in the vestry of the Tabernacle without being much crowded.

116 Nor have I been disappointed in my hopes since I embraced the Gospel. After twenty-six years of progress-progressive fulfilment of the things spoken by the Redeemer to the Nephites, and the things written by his commandment and brought forth unto us, I not only believe but I realize and know by the Spirit of the Lord as well as a man knows anything that he sees or hears, and better too, for a man might be deceived in seeing or in hearing, but I know these things by the light that reflects on the understanding, and in which there is no mistake, nor deception; by that I know that the work is true and that Joseph Smith, the translator, and the restorer of the Priesthood upon the earth, was a Prophet and an Apostle of Jesus Christ-a restorer, raised up according to that which is written, to bring back and commit unto the person appointed, those covenants, those keys, those ordinances, that Gospel and plan of salvation which were had in old times, but which had been suspended and lost from the enjoyment of the people; I say that he was such, I had a knowledge and an understanding.

117He was only about twenty-four or twenty-five years old when I first met him, and I became intimately acquainted with him and his brothers, and with his father's house, and I remained so, as far as I was not separated by foreign mission, until his death; and I do know and bear testimony that he lived and that he died an Apostle and Prophet of Jesus Christ? And from the day of his death, or long before that until the present, I have been intimately acquainted and associated with the Apostles of this Church and Kingdom under all circumstances, whether in sickness or in health, whether in the midst of life or in death, whether in prosperity or adversity, whether abounding or suffering want; whether by sea or land; whether in the midst of peace or mobs and oppression. And do I not know that President Young and his Counselors and the other Apostles associated with him in the Church, hold the keys of salvation? That they hold that authority which administers life and salvation to the obedient and the humble, and which to reject is condemnation, wherever it exists, to every soul of man upon the earth? Yes, I do know it, and I do this day bear testimony of it, and of that glorious Gospel in its fulness which was restored to the earth twenty-six years ago, that filled my heart with joy and charity and love for my fellow-men, and with a desire to do good, and to impart the truth as it is revealed.

117I bear testimony that Joseph Smith and the witnesses of the Book of Mormon were, and, as far as they held out faithful, are men of God, holding the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which is calculated to lead the people out from the iniquity and abominations of this lower world; and that their successors, the Apostles, your President and his Counselors, received the keys under the hands of the Prophet Joseph and holding the keys of a dispensation which will never come to an end, for although all other institutions on the earth will come to an end, this will stand forever.
