Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder William B. Smith

Brother of Joseph Smith, the Prophet Member of the First Council of Twelve from February 15, 1835, to October 6, 1845, at which date he was rejected as an Apostle, at the General Conference held at Nauvoo, and excommunicated from the Church October 12, 1845.

120I have read Elder (Parley P.) Pratt's circular to the churches, and do most cordially approve of its sentiments. Since the death of the Prophet and Patriarch, the Church has had to undergo almost an entire revolution of things, and those away from Nauvoo have had to guess their way, or get along the best they could, and if errors have been committed, they have been of the head and not of the heart. We pray God to guide us by that Spirit that leads into all truth, and if there should be any discontented spirits, the brethren will attribute them to the right source.

120Rigdonism has been through this country, but it is now dead-forsooth it never lived. It has perished in its birth, and died without usage, and those who have been led by its influence are now without a name or church. God pity them; they know no better.

120The Church of Christ is well united. God help us now, and the Gospel ship will ride safely through the storm. The winds and waves have now subsided, and she anchors in the haven of rest. Be faithful, brethren, and you will reap your reward. You know my feelings; it is that Zion may prosper and be built up, and the cause of truth spread throughout the whole world, and the pure in heart be blessed. God have mercy on my enemies, and those who persecute and despitefully use us.

120God loves the honest in heart, and those who will stand at their posts, and prove true unto death, but the traitor and hypocrite God will judge. Integrity is half the battle; let the saints put their trust in God, and be true to their friends and trust, and the battle is won, the victory ours.

121Only fifteen years have passed away since the organization of the Church of God in the last days: but those years have been as ages (in suffering) to the hapless family, who were its founders. Forced to flee from their homes, they settled in Ohio; driven from thence, they founded a city in Missouri; and, banished from that land of freedom, they have, at last, built up a beautiful city, upon the banks of the majestic Mississippi, under the banners of Illinois; but, again have they been deceived, in this boasted land of liberty; and they have now paid the last penalty of their adherence to the commands of God. Through all these scenes the great object of their lives has continued to roll onward; cities have been built up; countries have been settled; the wilderness has been converted into a fruitful field; and the desert has been made to blossom as the rose.

121After having myself passed through all these scenes of affliction, and seen my father and brothers laid beneath the cold sod in consequence of the unhallowed persecutions of an inhuman mob; after having been beaten, driven, and persecuted for a long series of years; after having been compelled so many times, by mobs, to sacrifice all this world's goods, though fifteen years of my life have been spent in the service of my fellow-men, and in the building up of the kingdom of God; though reduced to poverty and distress; and though I have suffered the loss of all I hold dear, yet, I do not complain; my trust is in the God of Israel, who will make all things work together for the good of His Saints. Support and uphold the proper authorities of the Church when I say authorities, I mean the whole, and not a part; the Twelve, and not one, two, six, eight, ten, or eleven, but the whole Twelve.

121The cause of Zion, for which my brethren died, lies near my heart: its prosperity is my glory and my theme; and would to God I could see Zion arise, put on her beautiful garments, and become the glory of the earth.-Times and Seasons, Vol. 6, pages 814 and 904, Jan. 25, and May 15, 1845.
