Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Orson Pratt

Member of the First Council of Twelve from April 26, 1835, to October 3, 1881. Church Historian and General Church Recorder from May 9, 1874, to October 3, 1881.

A message of simple truth, when sent from God-when published by divine authority, through divinely inspired men-penetrates the mind like a sharp two-edged sword, and cuts asunder the deeply-rooted prejudices, the iron-bound sinews of ancient error and tradition, made sacred by age and rendered popular by human wisdom. It severs with undeviating exactness between truth and falsehood-between the doctrines of Christ and the doctrines of men; it levels with the most perfect ease every argument that human learning may array against it. Opinions, creeds invented by uninspired men, and doctrines originated in schools of divinity, all vanish like the morning dew-all sink into insignificance when compared with a message direct from heaven. Such a message shines upon the understanding like the splendors of the noon-day sun; it whispers in the ears of mortals, saying, "This is the way, walk ye in it." Certainty and assurance are its constant companions; it is entirely unlike all plans or systems ever invented by human authority, it has no alliance, connection, or fellowship with any of them; it speaks with divine authority, and all nations, without exception, are required to obey. He that receives the message and endures to the end will be saved; but he that rejects it will be damned. It matters not what his former righteousness may have been-none can be excused.

123Oh, what a wide and marked difference between the religion of Joseph Smith and that of the Protestant and Catholic religions-between his authority and that of the sectarian divines!

123Joseph Smith's doctrine is reasonable, scriptural, perfect and infallible in all its precepts, commands, ordinances, promises, blessings, and gifts. In his organization of the church, no officer mentioned in the New Testament organization is omitted. Inspired apostles and prophets are considered as necessary as pastors, teachers, or any other officer.

123Joseph Smith's account of the restoration of the Gospel by an angel-of his taking out of the ground the sacred records of the tribe of Joseph-of their subsequent translation by the gift of God-and of the great western continent's being given to a remnant of Joseph, where they have grown into a multitude of nations, are all events clearly predicted by the ancient Jewish apostles and prophets, together with the minute circumstances connected therewith. The times and seasons in which these events should transpire, and the purpose which they should accomplish are also plainly foretold. Joseph Smith presents the world with the fulfilment at the predicted time-in the predicted manner-and for the predicted purpose as anciently specified.

123Joseph Smith incorporates in his mission the gathering of the Saints out of Babylon, and every other predicted event that was to characterize the great preparatory dispensation for the second advent of our Lord.

123The revelation of the Book of Mormon, pointed out the location of many ancient cities, the ruins of which were subsequently discovered by Catherwood and Stephens-the direct and palpable fulfilment of many of the prophecies of Joseph Smith, which no human sagacity could have foreseen, all natural appearances and circumstances being entirely against their expected fulfilment-the raising up of numerous other witnesses who also testify to the ministering of angels and the manifestations of the power of God confirmatory of this message-the performance of many splendid miracles by Joseph Smith and his followers, and the bold unequivocal promise of the miraculous gifts to all who should believe and embrace this message, are

125all evidences such as no impostor ever has given, or ever can give; they are evidences such as will prove the salvation of every creature that receives the message, and the damnation of every one that rejects it.

125And I now bear testimony to all, both small and great, that the Lord of Hosts has sent us with a message of glad tidings-the everlasting Gospel, to cry repentance to the nations, and prepare the way of His second coming.
