Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Ezra Taft Benson

Member of the Council of Twelve from July 16, 1846, to September 3, 1869.

I bear my testimony to the truth of the Gospel of the Son of God. I testify that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the Most High, that he was a minister of life to the nations, that he revealed the will of the Father concerning His sons and daughters, that many of the revelations which he gave concerning this nation have already been fulfilled, and that others are being fulfilled before our eyes. I know he revealed the future destinies of the nations of the earth, and there is no doubt in regard to those that are still unfulfilled. I have seen the wonder-working hand of the Almighty ever since I have been in the Church, and I have realized, when preaching the Gospel, that the power of God has accompanied my words. The Lord has sustained His work wherever the Elders have gone forth preaching the Gospel, and He will continue to do so; He will feed and clothe them, and His work will roll forth under their administration. The Holy Spirit will go with these young elders and back up their words. When they stand up and bear testimony to the truth, "The wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid."

129It is verily so in this age and generation, for we see the Elders of Israel going forth without purse or scrip, preaching by the power of God, the peaceable things of the kingdom to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death; they confound the gainsayers and put to silence the fault-finder.

129 My testimony is: that "Mormonism" is the kingdom of God; that it is the work of God established in the tops of the mountains; that it is the kingdom that Daniel saw, and it is going to spread till it fills the whole earth; that it will continue forever, for God sustains it; that it emanated from the Father of Light, and I know that it will roll forth, and prosper until the kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of God and of his Christ. I know that God is able to make the wrath of man praise Him just the same now as He did in the days of the prophets of old. We are a blessed people; we are blessed by being taught of the Lord; we are instructed in those things that pertain to peace, and my testimony before High Heaven, before this people and before the nations of the earth is: that we are for peace, and we intend to have it.

130We are in possession of those heavenly principles that have been so plainly laid before us; they are things that immediately concern us as Saints of the Most High. It is indeed good to be here-to dwell and rejoice in the midst of this people, for this is the work of the Lord.

130"Mormonism" is the Gospel of liberty, for it opens the door of freedom, and throws off the fetters of bondage. I bear my testimony to the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and to the correctness of the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; also to the revelations given through the prophets of God both ancient and modern.
