Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Charles Coulson Rich

Member of the Council of Twelve from February 12, 1849, to November 17, 1883.

We have received the everlasting Gospel from the heavens; it found us in the various nations of the earth, and it has gathered us to this place for the purpose of establishing the principles of righteousness and of building up the Kingdom of God on the earth. The Gospel we have obeyed embraces all truth on earth and in heaven; it has been revealed to bring about the same condition here on earth that exists in heaven, and it will result in this if its principles are faithfully observed.

131The Kingdom of God has been established upon the earth, a knowledge of the ordinances of the kingdom has also been committed to man, and the keys have been given, and the longer I live and the more I see and experience the more I know that we are the favored people of the Lord. The principles of our religion have emanated from our Father and God, with whom there is no variableness nor the least shadow of turning; these principles have been revealed for the express purpose that we might embrace and practice them, and thereby bring about our own salvation and secure that happiness which is promised to the faithful sons and daughters of God.

131 Happiness for which all are striving in this life is obtainable only upon the principles of truth which have been and shall be revealed from heaven. I bear testimony that this people have never had to wait for the knowledge of God. It is His good pleasure to enlighten our minds and enlarge our understanding in reference to the things of His kingdom, that we may have just conceptions of His ways, and understand correctly the principles that pertain to the development of all that wisdom and knowledge necessary for our present and future advancement in the principles of eternal life.

132The knowledge of God shall cover the earth as the waters cover the great deep, and we live in a time when that knowledge is being taught by the Prophets of God, and when it is the privilege of all mankind to be exalted upon principles of obedience to the laws of heaven.

132I rejoice in the plan of salvation; to have the privilege of laboring to establish these principles upon the earth, and in the prospect of seeing the kingdom of God rising in splendor and greatness. We have abundant reason to be thankful, for we have been led by the hand of the Almighty from the first organization of the Church.

132All that wisdom and knowledge which we obtain we will carry with us to the spirit world. We have the power to prove these principles and can bear testimony to their truth, for we experience their benefits and blessings in our everyday life. When I first embraced the Gospel, I had a testimony of its truth and I have had evidence increasing with me all the day long.

132From the time the Church and kingdom was established upon the earth to the present day, we have never been at a loss to know what to do; but we have at all times and under all circumstances had the path of duty made plain to us, and our individual line of duty marked out; and whenever we have taken the counsel given, we have been prospered and made happy. We are blessed with the power to know the right way, for we have in our midst men who can point out the course to be pursued in order to secure life and light, and to obtain blessings promised by practicing the truth.

132 I bear testimony that I have never been disappointed when I have been engaged in the work of the Lord, and in carrying out the counsels of His servants. I bear testimony that this is the work of God, that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, that Brigham Young is a Prophet of God, and that the Gospel which they have preached is the Gospel of the Son of God, and if we live its precepts we shall be delivered from evil. In the Gospel there is deliverance from sin if we will but apply its principles to our lives.

133The Latter-day Saints know and bear testimony by the gift and power of God that they are right in His sight; they know they have received the everlasting Gospel; they know they are laboring in accordance with His mind and will, and that they are building up His kingdom here on earth. This knowledge is a source of joy unspeakable to the Saints, and possessing it, they can leave native lands, homes and possessions, parents, friends and every thing they value and hold dear, in order to accomplish the labor which the Lord requires at their hands.

133I know for myself that God has established His kingdom on the earth in these days, although the world does not believe it; neither did the world believe Noah when he preached unto them for the space of many years, and they were destroyed in their sins. The world did not believe Jesus the Son of God, when He told them the future of Jerusalem. The world never has received the testimonies of the servants of God, neither do they believe now what is being preached to them by His servants. But for all that the Lord has always fulfilled His word, and by it the righteous have been saved, and the disobedient destroyed.

133I know He will bring to pass all that has been spoken by the mouth of His servants whether the world believes it or not. As the people of God, we have the consolation of knowing that while wickedness and abomination, and all who delight therein, shall perish according to the decree of the Almighty, His Saints, with their children, will live to increase and spread abroad and ultimately fill the whole earth.
