Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Erastus Snow

Member of the Council of Twelve from February 12, 1849, to May 27, 1888.

God has said that Zion shall be as a city set upon a hill, whose light can not be hid. We are called to be the children of Zion. The Lord has declared that Zion consists of the pure in heart. He has said, further, that the nations of the earth have corrupted their way before Him, and, referring to Babylon, His command to the Saints is-"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." The Bible is full of prophecies delivered by the Prophets and Patriarchs, and by the Savior and His Apostles, concerning the day and age in which we live. The end draweth nigh and the time approacheth speedily when the Lord will make a full end of all nations who fight against Zion, who reject His law and harden their hearts against Him, His precepts and His government.

134 It is our high privilege to bear this testimony, which is but a renewal of that which was borne by Prophets and Saints in days past and gone. They spoke of the time in which we live by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, which was like one looking through a glass darkly; yet it is our privilege to behold with our eyes and to hear with our ears those things which Prophets and Patriarchs long desired to see, but died without the sight. The duty especially enjoined upon us to-day is to awake to righteousness, and consider the calling wherewith God has called us. We should consider that God has separated us by the preaching of His word and by the testimony of Jesus; and has called us to be a distinct people, distinct in this particular, that we separate ourselves from sin and wickedness, and, as far as possible, from the company of sinners and from all those customs and habits that tend to darken, degrade and abase the human mind, and cultivate those which will sanctify the affections, purify the heart and ennoble the whole being of man, and fit us, as far as in us lies, to regenerate ourselves and our race. In short, God desires, and has put forth His hand, to exalt His people from their low degree, and to lift them up and make them a peculiar people, a holy nation, a kingdom of Priests unto the Most High God and the Lamb.

135In all this, is there anything that can hurt, destroy or injure, in any wise, any portion of our fellow-men who do not feel disposed to join us in this glorious work, or engage with us in this noble enterprise? Not at all. The salvation of God is revealed for the good of all men who will receive it. The Gospel is offered without money and without price to all flesh, and the testimony that we bear to the world is that Jesus died for all, and that through the shedding of His blood, salvation may come unto all men who will believe and yield obedience unto the requirements of this Gospel. The government which is inaugurated and established among men by the preaching of the Gospel, and the administration of its holy ordinances, is a government of peace, love, and goodwill to men, prompting those who receive it to do good unto all, but especially unto the household of faith.

135 There is nothing in the constitution of the Gospel, or the organization of the Church of Christ and the kingdom of God among men, and the precepts that are taught of God and His servants, that would in the least degree inflict injury or withhold blessings from any member of the family of man, inasmuch as they place themselves in a condition to receive them, and are willing to accept them. But God has ordained certain everlasting principles of truth by which His people may be exalted, and without which they cannot be exalted into His presence and to the enjoyment of His glory. All things are governed by law, and all good and wholesome laws, which are ordained and enacted by men, designed for the peace, prosperity and well-being of their fellow-creatures, should be respected, maintained and honored by all people, and this is one of the duties enjoined upon all Saints in all the commandments and revelations of God to His people.

136The weapons of the people of God are not carnal, but they are mighty through faith. We war not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual wickedness in high places, and against corruption wherever it is found, reproving sin, folly, deception, dishonesty and wickedness of every kind. "Mormonism" does not coerce, but all the time persuades, teaches, enlightens, instructs, and invites by the beauty, excellence, and virtue of those holy principles which God has revealed to us, gradually drawing the people together, cementing their feelings, and bringing them by common consent to act upon the principles of truth and righteousness.

136I am a witness of the truth which God has revealed unto man pertaining to the fulness of the Gospel: that Jesus is the Son of God, the Savior of those who will receive Him, and that He has laid the foundation for a more glorious and extended salvation than the majority of us are capable of conceiving and properly comprehending; and His work is onward in the earth, and it will continue onward and upward, until the nations of the earth shall be warned, and all people who will hear and receive the Gospel, be numbered with His children, be gathered into His fold, become the children of Zion, and prepared for His coming, at the appointed time, which He has foretold, and which time is in the bosom of the Father; the Son will surely come in the clouds of heaven and the holy Angels with Him, to assume the reins of government on the earth, and to reign King of kings and Lord of lords. Then all those who will not bow to His sceptre, yield obedience to His rule, and accept of His government and of His dominion will be cut off. Then comes the time spoken of when every knee that remains shall bow, and every tongue confess, to the glory of God the Father, that Jesus is the Christ.

136 It is to lay the foundation of this work, and to prepare a people for this era, that the Lord called His servant Joseph, and revealed unto him the fulness of the Gospel in this, the 19th century. How can a man know for himself that Joseph Smith was truly called to be a prophet, seer, and revelator to this generation? That God did reveal to him the fulness of the Gospel? That the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the Gospel-the same that was taught and revealed by the Savior and His disciples, as recorded in the New Testament? How can a man know that Angels administered to him? That God opened the visions of heaven to the Prophet Joseph Smith? I answer, they may know it precisely as the Apostle Peter knew that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the living God. It is in this manner that I know he was a Prophet and a servant of God raised up to commence this work in the earth, and to lay the foundation of the Church and kingdom of God on the earth. When Jesus asked Peter and the rest of the Apostles, "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." Not upon Peter, nor his person, for he was flesh, and must pass away like the flower of the field. Then who and what was this rock Christ referred to? It was the rock of revelation, revelation from the living God. "On this rock," said the Savior, "I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." And I repeat that I know the truth of the Gospel, as Peter knew that Jesus was the Christ, by revelation unto me from the Father who is in heaven, and I bear this testimony unto you.

137 There are many, very many, whose testimony has been proclaimed in the ears of this generation, and is recorded in heaven. Their words are like the precious things that John saw in the vials that were before the throne of God, and their testimony will remain, and blessed are all those who receive it. Blessed be the Lord God who revealed these things unto Peter and unto His servant Joseph, and who has revealed it unto many more who have sought Him with an earnest desire to know His ways! Blessed are those who fear Him and keep His commandments!

138May God seal the testimony of the Twelve upon the hearts of those who desire it, that they may come unto and walk in the light, be saved through the truth, and inherit exaltation with the sanctified, is my prayer, for Christ's sake. Amen.
