Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Franklin D. Richards

Member of the Council of Twelve from February 12, 1849, to December 9, 1899, and President of the Quorum from September, 1898, to December 9, 1899. Church Historian and General Church Recorder from April 7, 1889, to December 9, 1899.

I rejoice greatly in this Gospel, because it opens up unto us transcendent joys, blessings and glories in the future, which we have knowledge of, which our Savior taught, and which are taught to us here in our times, and which He has condescended to reveal again in these last days. Think of what this Savior has done for us here, and has gone to the Father to intercede for us, to forgive us of our sins, to heal us of our backslidings; and has condescended, after the lapse of eighteen hundred years to come with His Father, the glorious Father. The Creator of all came and introduced that Savior, His Son, to the boy Joseph Smith, when fourteen years of age, and taught him to commence a great and mighty work, of which we are today some few of the fruits. The Father said, "This is my beloved Son, hear him." And the Son taught Joseph, and sent His angels to administer to him, to teach, to bless, to bring forth the Book of Mormon, and to build up the Church again, bringing it forth out of the wilderness through great suffering; and we ought not to forget that the truth is a costly article, and always has been.

139 Think of it! This same Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery Apostles by Peter, James and John, His servants. Joseph and Oliver having received this Apostleship, conferred it upon twelve brethren of the Church, and those brethren have conferred it upon us who are in the stand today; thus some of us received this holy Apostleship but the fourth in succession from Jesus Christ. And the fact is that the Priesthood has come down to us as the Lord promised when He said He would be with his apostles always "even unto the end of the world." And He says to us concerning Peter, James and John: "Whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry, and of the same things which I revealed unto them: unto whom I have committed the keys of My kingdom, and a dispensation of the Gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth." These are the men that have received this Priesthood-these that sit around me this morning. It was received from those resurrected men that have come to labor with us. This is the Priesthood by which we officiate, and it is not something that has come down through the ages and been lost. This is the Priesthood that was taken away into the wilderness anciently, and has been restored in these latter days in its purity, in its simplicity and its power. And those who give themselves to it fully and faithfully in all humility, receiving the instructions and counsels of those holding that Priesthood, should be worthy of all acceptation, and we ought to realize it and avail ourselves of the benefit of it, and be found in no case speaking against each other or the Lord's anointed.

140I rejoice greatly in the work of the Lord, and I pray that His blessings may abound unto the people, that He may incline our hearts to keep His laws, to walk in His ways, for the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. The testimonies of the Lord are sure, and they even make wise the simple.

140I testify to you that this Gospel is the Gospel, the only one that is worthy the attention of mortals.
