Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Brigham Young, Jr.

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 9, 1868, to April 11, 1903. President of the Quorum from December, 1899, to April 11, 1903.

"Mormonism" is the work of God. The elders abroad must rise up in greater power and disseminate this Gospel among the nations of the earth; for then the progress of this work will be accelerated, the judgments of the Almighty will come faster, and His blessings will be poured out without stint upon those that are seeking to establish his work.

142Ere long the wicked will know that these are the last days. They do not seem to realize that the words which have been uttered by the servants of God during the last seventy-one and a half years have been delivered by the inspiration of the Almighty God.

142I remember the time well when the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Patriarch Hyrum Smith-two of the noblest men that ever stood upon the earth-rode to their death. They went to seal their testimonies with their blood, which cannot be refuted by all the world. They gave their lives to sustain this work, and it was necessary, according to the revelations that we have received.

142 Though driven by our enemies, God has sustained us, and we have grown and enlarged, and built up the country and become a great people, as the prophets have predicted that a great people would be established in these mountains. When the record is written and published which this people have made, under the guidance of inspired men, it will equal if not surpass any record that the people of God have ever made on this globe. It is a testimony in and of itself that should convince all men who are acquainted with it, that this people is guided by the hand of Jehovah.

143I know that we have the Gospel of the Son of God, and who can prevail against us? Not the world, nor the adversary of our souls, if we live in harmony with the revelations of God that He has given unto us, for He has revealed sufficient to guide us back into His presence.

143The Lord raised up the Prophet Joseph Smith and through him restored His Gospel. That Gospel has been and is being declared to the world. I bear you my testimony that the providences of God have been with this people, and the scenes that will come before us will be such that we will need all the power and all the union that we can get to stand and accomplish His work, but God will bear us off victorious.

143I thank God for the knowledge and testimony of His Spirit, which He has given unto me. He has never forsaken me in days of trial. I rejoice in the organization of this Church as it exists today. The living testimony within me is the priceless gem that God has given to His sons and daughters who seek Him with undivided hearts. I know the Latter-day Saints have it, for I see and feel it. The inspiring influence of that Spirit is in the midst of this people, and we are bound to succeed, because there is no power that can resist the influence of that Spirit and the revelations of God. The Church of Christ will rise; the kingdom of God will burst forth, His purposes will be accomplished, and the exaltation of the faithful will be assured, and no one can hinder it. I testify of these things unto you.
