Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Francis Marion Lyman

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 27, 1880, and President of the Quorum from October 6, 1903, to November 18, 1916.

I was born of goodly Latter-day Saints in the beginning of the year 1840. They embraced the Gospel in 1832, eight years before I was born. They gathered with the Church in Kirtland, Ohio, in early days where they were married. By the persecutions of the Saints in Missouri they were sorely tried, but established in the faith. Under those trying experiences I was born in Illinois. The intense strength of faith engendered in their hearts by persecution and hardships was all transmitted to me. In our frontier life from 1840 to 1860 I grew to manhood under a pressure of faith that settled indelibly into my very soul till every fibre of my being was charged with it, so that there was no room for doubt. The Spirit of God bearing testimony to my soul of the Father and the Son and of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith as the Restorer of the Gospel dispensation of the fulness of times, engrossed my whole self invariably. Hence no doubts have ever harassed me in regard to the divinity of the Latter-day work.

144As I have mingled with the world in my manhood and compared the truth of God with the falsehood, precepts and doctrines of men, the rays of living light and testimony have intensified. Positive knowledge has developed and proven in my whole being that this Latter-day work is of God, being the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.

144 The gifts and graces of the Gospel have attended upon my ministry. The sick have been healed, the blind restored to their sight; the dying have been returned to life and health; the gift of tongues and the interpretation of tongues, and the discerning of spirits have been abundantly enjoyed. I have seen the preserving power of God manifest in the trials and hardships of the Saints. The Church has grown in power and is made up of the people of all nations. We have gathered together to the land of Zion. We have built temples of God to His name. We work in them for the living and dead. Our ordinances are done for time and eternity and by the power of the Holy Priesthood. All different from the ways of the modern Christian and pagan world. Only the righteous and pure in heart can survive in the Church of Christ.

145We find that all men who will may see and partake of the marvelous light of the Gospel. The spirit and testimony of this Latter-day work is for all mankind. I have shared in every phase of this work and have known personally all of the chief leaders, from the Prophet Joseph to the present day, as men of God, where they have kept the faith and endured to the end. There have been rare exceptions of men who could not endure for want of integrity and faith.
