Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder George Teasdale

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 16, 1882, to June 9, 1907.

I want to bear testimony to you that I came out of the world; that I heard this Gospel in the world; that I accepted of its principles, and the promises made to me by those who introduced it to me have been fulfilled. I know that the spirit of prophecy exists. I know that the power of God is manifested, when faith is exercised, in the laying on of hands unto those who are sick and afflicted, in the anointing with oil and the prayer of faith. I know that the signs follow the believer, as the Lord Jesus Christ promised eighteen hundred years ago. The Lord has again revealed His will. He taught His servant Joseph Smith His doctrine and the necessity of these ordinances of His house, and has taught the necessity of adding works to our faith.

146 The Lord has taught us these principles today in the revelations that He has given. He has given us the ordinance of baptism, the ordinance of the laying on of hands; and when we look into the Scriptures we find that it was just the same eighteen hundred years ago. The Scriptures bear testimony, or we can quote from the Scriptures, to show the people that it is no new doctrine. We have a living testimony, too, in the which we know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that there is efficacy in His precious blood, and that if we walk in the light as He is in the light we have fellowship with our brethren, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin. We have faith in these principles, and we honor God. We manifest it in our works. We are not teaching false doctrine. We are not deceiving the people. We are teaching them the truth, and we call upon all men everywhere to repent and come unto God with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, and worship Him in the name of Jesus Christ.

147I bear testimony that the authority of God is restored to the earth. The Priesthood of Melchizedek, after the order of the Son of God, and the Priesthood after the order of Aaron have been restored; and the Gospel is being preached in all the world for a witness, by divine authority. The word of the Lord is unto all people, Repent and be baptized, and obey the Gospel; worship the living and true God, and you shall have a living and true witness that He lives, and that Jesus is the Christ. That was the message which came unto me years ago. I accepted it. I sought the Lord, and He answered me; and from the day I obeyed this Gospel down to the present time I have had a living witness concerning the truth of this work.

147The principles that we have subscribed to are eternal. We cannot do without them. The world cannot do without them; and whenever they turn their attention to the necessity of redemption, they will have to yield to the same conditions that we have, because they are the only way by which redemption can be obtained.

147These eternal principles have been restored to earth, together with the Priesthood, the authority to proclaim these principles upon the earth and to call men to repentance. Two men-Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery-commenced this wonderful work. They were ordained to the Holy Priesthood by the authority of God, to preach His Gospel, and it is being preached.

147I know that these principles are true. I know that the Lord has restored to the earth the powers and keys to endless lives, the new and everlasting covenant, and that He has given all mankind, who desire it, the opportunity of a membership in the Church of Christ, to take upon them the name of Christ, to love Him and keep His commandments, and thus manifest Him in their lives.
