Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Marriner W. Merrill

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 7, 1889, to February 6, 1906.

I have an evidence of the truth of this work. I have a testimony from the Lord. I know that this work is true. I know that Joseph the Prophet was chosen as an instrument in the hands of the Lord to establish the Gospel in the earth in this dispensation. I had evidence of this a great many years ago. It has been over forty-four years since I became associated with the Saints in these mountains, and I have been like the rest of you, I have had my trials, my dark times, and periods of affliction and sorrow. I believe that all Saints have their trials, if they are trying to do right and serve the Lord. But in these times of trial, the testimony that I had from the Lord of the truth of the divinity of this work has been a great consolation to me. I have not lost it yet. I believe it is possible for people to lose the testimony and evidence they have had in regard to this work, and to get into the dark, and become dissatisfied, and complain. The Lord has established His work; He is about to establish His kingdom; He has revealed the everlasting Gospel; and He has revealed the principles by which you and I may go back into His presence; but when we turn a deaf car to these things, through some motive or other that may arise in our minds, we will have to alone for it sooner or later.

148I tell you that God has revealed Himself in our day and time. He has raised up our Presidency and the Apostles for the guidance of the Church, for the establishing of His work and the building up of Zion on the earth; and we cannot do without

150them. We would be scattered to the four winds if we did not have the living oracles of God in our midst for our guidance. I feel happy in this work. I hope I will continue to the end. I have not only had one testimony from the Lord of its truth, but many have been added from time to time. I have seen the marvelous workings of God visible in my behalf, and I feel this morning to praise the Father because of His goodness and mercy, and because of His sparing my life to bear record of His name and to bear testimony to my brethren and sisters and friends of the truth and divinity of this great work.

150I know that this is the work of God. I bear record to you that it is. The Gospel has been revealed in our day and time, and we have been privileged to have our eyes opened a little to comprehend the great truths God has revealed. These brethren at the head are the right men in the right place. The Presidency of the Church are filled with inspiration; they are clothed with the power of God, to the extent that their administration is successful, and will continue to be successful.

150I have evidence in my heart that this is the work of the Lord, having had many testimonies to this effect; and it is a grand thing that the Lord is so merciful as to manifest to individuals with regard to the plan of life and salvation.
