Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Abraham H. Cannon

Member of the Council of the Twelve from October 7, 1889, to July 19, 1896.

I believe that the sick are healed by the power of God. I believe and know that the dead have been raised to life. I know that the gifts of tongues and interpretation of tongues are experienced by the people. I know that the gift of prophecy is heard frequently among the people, and sometimes from those from whose mouths prophecy is least expected. I know that in the conferences of the people there is the power of God manifested to a remarkable degree. The reason that some fail to experience the power which God has poured out upon the people is because they prefer to look upon the dark side of the picture, and do not see the glorious Gospel which God has bestowed upon us.

151 We believe that God has established in His Church a certain order which must be observed by His children if they would inherit the glories concerning which the scriptures speak, and for which nearly ever human being is hoping. We believe, too, that there is but one Gospel which is capable of bringing the children of men the highest glory. We believe in one faith, one Lord, one baptism; though we believe that there are lords many and gods many, as the ancient Apostle said, and that faith operates in various directions for the benefit of the children of men. It operates upon them in such a manner as to give unto one the gift of wisdom, unto another the gift of healing, unto another the gift of tongues and to others various gifts according to their capacities and the will of God in bestowing them. We believe that there is but one baptism that is recognized by God; and yet we say there is also a baptism by fire as well as water, which baptism is as essential to the salvation of the human family as the baptism of water. Yet all these beliefs of ours are comprehended in this one statement of Paul, "One Lord, one faith, one baptism."

152The Gospel which we have received is one which teaches us that all mankind are the children of God; that they are destined, to be saved, excepting a very limited number who positively reject salvation, turn against the light after they have received it, sin away the day of grace, and place themselves without the pale of the redeeming blood of Christ. But in saying that all men shall be saved, it is not saying that all men shall receive an equal glory and exaltation in the presence of God. No; we believe that in the dwelling place of our Father there are many mansions-many degrees of glory, suited to the capacity of men and women, and which will be awarded to them according to works which they have done in the flesh and the intents of their hearts. To attain the highest glory it is necessary that men and women should possess a living faith, not a faith which James describes, without works and consequently dead. I feel that it is a pernicious doctrine in some respects which is taught by the Christian world today, that belief on the Lord Jesus Christ, regardless of works or of obedience to the commands of God, is sufficient.

152 The Gospel which we have received teaches us different principles and different ways of doing things than are generally known to the people of the world. God has commenced a marvelous work and a wonder, and He has said that He will carry it forward in His own way. He does not depend upon the counsels of men for His wisdom. He does not leave His work in the hands of men for its accomplishment. But He directs in all things which pertain to the upbuilding of His Church. He has said through one of His prophets, 'For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.' We have seen this exemplified in all the course of the Latter-day Saints, from the organization of the Church until the present day. It was not according to the ideas and ways of men that God established His Church and revealed the Gospel which we have received. He did it in His own way; and in the carrying forward of that work He has acted according to the plan which He designed, and has not submitted His purposes for the criticism of men. I believe that in the future, no less than in the past, God will do this.

153The lowly character of the birth of Christ has been regarded by some as a mistake, as it would, in their estimation have been better for Him to have come into the world under affluent circumstances, so that he might have been received by the rich and the noble. It was deemed a mistake for Him to be nailed upon the cross, and even His disciples imagined when it occurred that their calling was gone. Yet that glorious act of sacrifice constituted the atonement of a God for the redemption of humanity.

153It is the judgment of men not illuminated by the Holy Ghost which commits mistakes. Men's thoughts are not as God's. The men who lead this Church in this dispensation do not make mistakes, although, viewed by individuals devoid of the Holy Spirit, some of their acts may assume that appearance. I testify that President Woodruff, who stands at the head of the Church, is directed by the revelations of God. So with those associated with him. They may make mistakes in their personal concerns, but the affairs of the Church of Christ are moved forward by the power of inspiration of the Almighty. The Church will not diminish in power, but will increase in every gift and grace and in the power of salvation from this time forward.

153 If you live faithful unto the covenants which you have made, you will know by the testimony of the Spirit Within you that when Christ comes you will know Him. There will be no need for any man to say to you that Christ has come again to earth; but by the knowledge which God shall impart unto you, by the sight of your own eyes and the hearing of your own ears, you shall be able to testify that the Savior has again come to earth, clothed with power and immortality, and bringing with Him the holy men and angels who exist with Him in the eternal worlds; and if you are faithful, you shall be caught up to receive from Him the blessings which your acts upon earth have merited.

154I know that with the faith which belongs to this Gospel the sick can be healed today. I know that when human skill is powerless, is unsuccessful, God is near to hear and answer the petitions of His children. I know that the gift of healing is within the souls of men and women here in the flesh, and they could exercise it if the people who appeal for their help and ministration as servants and handmaidens of God were only in a condition to receive these blessings.

154Skill coupled with faith will prolong life. I believe that with the exercise of faith and the wisdom that God has given us we will be able to establish a condition of things among this people that is not found in the world. There will be less death. People will live to the age of a tree, and will pass away peacefully and without pain. The average age of man will be prolonged far beyond its present limit, and there will be a long-lived race. A race of people will be established in these mountains whose physical and intellectual strength will be the admiration of the world.
