Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Abraham O. Woodruff

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 7, 1897, to June 20, 1904.

I feel very thankful to the Lord for a testimony of the divinity of this work, for a knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of the world, and that Joseph Smith was divinely commissioned of our Heavenly Father to establish this work, which has attracted the attention and the interest, either for or against it, of so many people.

155We desire to serve God and keep His commandments, and then to leave the result with Him. By doing this we will be justified in the eyes of God as well as in the eyes of all good men. We never expect the wicked or the ungodly to be pleased with the plan of life and salvation which the Lord has revealed, but we do hope that the honest in heart will be able to see the kingdom of God as it has been established.

155We expect there will be opposition, but at the same time we confidently expect that God, in the future as in the past, will deliver us if we will only do our duty. We never intend to so shape our faith and belief that it will please the adversary, or the world. The present chaotic condition of Christendom, with its jarring, differing sects, presents a practical illustration of what the Gospel would be if it were cut and pruned to suit the wishes of the enemy of all righteousness. This Gospel tree which was planted in the meridian of time by Jesus Himself and which was nurtured by Him and His followers, was shorn of many of its limbs and branches to suit the wishes of the ungodly, until its symmetry was lost. The Priesthood was taken to God, while those who were devout in maintaining the pure principles which God had revealed were put to death in various ways, because they would not recant, and deny the testimony which God the Eternal Father had given to them. These faithful souls contended that man must fear God rather than man, that he must meet his obligations to God, and in so doing he could not help but be a good citizen of the state. Those who keep the commandments of God are certain to become a benefit to any community in which they live. Most people shiver at the thought of trouble, especially if it comes to them individually. They may feel all right if it comes to some one else, but when it strikes home those who are inclined to be weak and doubtful in regard to this work become very fearful. For their part they do not want any persecution. All they desire is a smooth road, a pathway strewn with roses, where there are no obstacles to meet. But we claim that this work is divine, and if we expect to receive the reward of obedience thereto, we may expect to labor hard for it. If we gain the great reward, we shall not be able to shun the right, but will have to be valiant for the testimony of Jesus, upholding righteousness, doing our duty to God and to our fellow-men in every respect. When I see men who are filled with fear every time there is prospect of trouble, I always think of the Apostles in the meridian of time. I think of how they, rather than deny the testimony of Jesus Christ, were willing to submit to the most ignominious death for the testimony which God had given them.

157The pride of the Latter-day Saints in regard to this work is that it is true, revealed from God to man, and that, unlike the various man-made organizations, there has been no necessity to call a convention for the revision of its creed, to suit the will and wishes of mankind. This fact has been one of the main features which has stimulated the Saints through all the troubles and trials which have come to them, and one of the things they have cherished most,

157For though all earth and hell should assail this work, yet will it prosper, because it has the stamp of divinity upon it. It is the work of God, not of man. This is my humble testimony, and I rejoice in bearing it, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
