Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Rudger Clawson

Member of the Council of Twelve since October 10, 1898, and President of the Quorum from March 10, 1921, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

In the meridian of time the Lord Jesus Christ appeared among men in the flesh, organized His Church with apostles, prophets, pastors, evangelists and teachers, and preached the Gospel of faith, repentance of sin, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is the spirit of Light and Truth.

158This same Gospel has again been restored to the earth in all its fulness and power, and is taught by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which was organized by Joseph Smith, the Prophet, on the 6th of April, 1830. He declared that he had received divine authority so to do, by the ministrations of angels-namely, that on the 15th of May, 1829, John the Baptist appeared to him and also to Oliver Cowdery, and laying his hands upon their heads conferred upon them the Aaronic or lesser Priesthood, in the following language: "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness;" and that later, Peter, James and John descended from heaven, and laying hands upon them, ordained them Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, thus restoring the Melchizedek, or higher Priesthood.

158 The Church has grown and prospered since its organization until today the Latter-day Saints are numbered by the hundreds of thousands and have become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains.

159I know and solemnly bear testimony that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the true Church.

159I know these things to be true, because the Holy Ghost which I received at the time of my baptism and the laying on of hands, has many times so testified to me, and, furthermore, I am a living witness of the gifts of the Gospel among the Latter-day Saints.

159Had I the tongue of an angel I would declare these things to the world and call upon the nations to repent of their sins and obey the Gospel.
