Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Reed Smoot

Member of the Council of Twelve from April 9, 1900, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

I, like thousands of others born of parents who were members of the Church, never received during my early life, a testimony that God lives and that His Church has been established upon the earth in this, the last dispensation of the fullness of times by Divine revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith. I was from childhood taught the principles of the Gospel. I believed them to be true. I acquired a conviction of the character and attributes of the Divine Being and became convinced that a knowledge of Him and His Son, Jesus Christ, was absolutely necessary before I could take an active part in Church work.

160I knew no person could acquire that knowledge without the assistance of a Supreme Power and by a direct manifestation of self revelation. I had confidence in the simple, yet powerful testimonies of my father and mother. I was taught to pray and have great faith in the power and efficacy of prayer. I prayed earnestly for a knowledge of God, His attributes and His character, and for some manifestation that Joseph Smith was a prophet, and at times I became almost discouraged and ready to cease my entreaties through prayer, but thanks to my Heavenly Father, I had a mother in whom I had absolute confidence, who never wavered in her testimony, never doubted the goodness and mercy of God, never faltered in her devotion to His Church, and when I would complain to her that my prayers were not answered, she never failed to impress me with her sublime faith in God and His promises and would ask me in a way that can be asked only by a mother of her son to still believe in her promises, which were that if I would live a clean, virtuous life and ask God in faith for a knowledge of Him, and a testimony that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was His Church, I would, in God's own due time, receive it.

161I never forgot to ask in my prayers for that knowledge and testimony, but I must confess I set myself up as judge as to just how and in what way that knowledge and testimony should come to me in order that I should be satisfied and convinced. My mother's promise came true, but oh, how different than I had mapped out or anticipated.

161In the space allowed me I can not go into details as to God's manifestations to me, but will content myself by saying that from those manifestations while on an European mission, during the years of 1890 and 1891, I can joyfully testify that God was ready to come to me as soon as I was prepared in humility to go to Him. I have seen His power made manifest in behalf of His people many times; I have seen the sick healed by the power of God. I know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was established by Divine revelation through the prophet of the nineteenth century, Joseph Smith.
