Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Hyrum M. Smith

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 24, 1901, to January 23, 1918.

Almost ninety years have passed away since the opening of the dispensation of the fulness of times, in the which the Father, in person, accompanied by His Son, Jesus Christ, came from heaven to the earth in answer to the prayer offered by Joseph Smith, a boy of 14 years of age. These divine personages made themselves known to this lad, answered his questions and told him that the time had come for the introduction among men, once more and for the last time, of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is the "Power of God unto salvation."

162They promised him that he should become the instrument, in the hands of God, in building up the Church of Jesus Christ in the latter days. These promises and prophecies were, in due time, fulfilled. The Aaronic Priesthood was conferred upon Joseph Smith by John the Baptist, and the Melchizedek Priesthood by Peter, James and John.

162They were resurrected beings and were sent by the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith to restore the priesthood, which is the authority of God by which these great prophecies should be fulfilled, namely, the building up of the kingdom of God in the earth, the establishment of the Church, and the opening of the doors of all nations for the preaching of the Gospel unto every kindred, tongue, and people; and that the cry of repentance should go forth, that all men should have the privilege of hearing it and the opportunity of accepting the Gospel, repenting of their sins and becoming members of the Church, thus putting themselves in the way, by their obedience, to inherit eternal life in the Celestial Kingdom of our Father in Heaven.

163In the midst of persecution, and all manner of evil and slander and opposition that were brought to bear against the Prophet, he was able to accomplish his great mission; and during his brief life, as an instrument in the hands of God, he laid the foundations of this great and glorious kingdom; he effected the organization of the Church, which is the pride of the Saints, the glory of the Lord, and the wonder of the world.

163He was put to death for bearing witness and testimony of Jesus. At his death the Church experienced possibly the darkest moment of its career. They were not in doubt, however, for the Lord raised up one who was to receive the authority and the mantle of the Prophet.

163Brigham Young, President of the Council of the Twelve, was transfigured before the people in their conference. They knew that the Prophet Joseph was dead, yet when President Young arose to address them, they saw in the speaker the Prophet Joseph, in stature and in feature, and they heard his voice speak unto them. This renewed their faith and gave them courage; it convinced them that God had chosen Brigham Young and he was accepted by them as their leader, and in due time was sustained by the people as the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to succeed the Prophet Joseph Smith.

163Guided by the revelation of God, President Young led the people across the plains, and the Lord established them in the valleys of the mountains. He presided over the Church for upwards of thirty years. Not for one moment did he ever prove recreant to his great trust, or prove himself incapable of the wonderful responsibility that descended to him from the Prophet Joseph Smith.

163During the presidency of Brigham Young the Lord was preparing another mighty and good man to take his place, and upon his death, John Taylor, one of the greatest and noblest men of this dispensation, was sustained by the people as their president. He also received the mantle of the prophet of God. He received the revelations of the Lord, and was in constant communication with Him in all things connected with the building up of the Kingdom and the spread of the Gospel.

164When President Taylor had completed his mission, President Wilford Woodruff was raised up, and he, also, was a wonderful man, a mighty man, a man of faith and humility a man of power, of wisdom, of judgment, a man of great inspiration, who, like the others, lived in the hearts of all the people, who recognized in him the Prophet of the Lord, the President of the Church, the man who held the keys of authority and who stood at the head of the Church, having been raised to that exalted position by the Lord Himself, and sustained by the Saints.

164President Lorenzo Snow succeeded him, and, like all the rest, he demonstrated by his life that he labored, advised, counseled, and preached under the inspiration and direction of God, the Heavenly Father. The people loved him. Under his administration the Church made splendid progress. After his death the Lord placed at the head of the Church President Joseph F. Smith, another of His servants, who magnifies nobly that great authority of presidency, and in whom the power and might and wisdom that characterized the lives of all the other presidents of the Church are embodied. He, like them, has the confidence of the Saints of God and enjoys, also, the approbation, inspiration and blessings of the Lord.

164Thus has the Lord blessed the Saints; He has gathered them into the valleys of the mountains; He has made them mighty. They have been obedient; they love the truth; they understand the word of God; the scriptures are plain unto them; and they comprehend the purposes of the Lord in this dispensation.

164I bear testimony to their intelligence, to their wisdom, their greatness, their humility, their faith; that they are a God-fearing people, that they do love the Lord and their fellow-men.

164I know for myself, by the power of the Spirit of God, that the Lord has indeed established this work, and has set His hand for the last time to gather in one all things, in Jesus Christ.
