Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder George Albert Smith

Member of the Council of Twelve from October 8, 1903, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

When a child I was taught to pray and read the scriptures and lead a righteous life. I was impressed with the idea that our Heavenly Father loves us and that His commandments were not intended to deprive us of true pleasure, and, if observed, would add to our peace and contentment here and prepare us for eternal happiness.

165My parents lived as they desired me to live and I soon learned that they believed and practiced what they taught. I was reared in a Latter-day Saint home, where food was not partaken of without first thanking the Giver of all good for it.

165Secret and family prayers were attended to by each member of the household. I learned quite early in life that the Lord would answer prayer, for He answered mine, and in many ways He gave me evidence of His watchful care. As I grew older I compared the faith I had espoused with the beliefs of others and found that "Mormonism" embraced all that the other churches taught that was good, and many other beautiful truths that the scriptures contained that were apparently overlooked by the Christian world. My faith in God was increased by reading the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price. When I was called to leave home and loved ones to travel among strangers to promulgate the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as restored in these latter days, I witnessed the power of the Lord in softening the hearts of men and providing for my necessities and preserving my life. Some of my happiest moments have been when testifying of the beauties of the Gospel as revealed through Joseph Smith the Prophet.

166I have been buoyed up and, as it were, lifted out of myself and given power not my own to teach the glorious truths proclaimed by the Redeemer of the world. I have not seen Him face to face but have enjoyed the companionship of His Spirit and felt His presence in a way not to be mistaken. I know that my Redeemer lives and gladly yield my humble efforts to establish His teachings. The philosophies of men can never take the place of truth as revealed to us by the Eternal Father. Individual happiness and world-wide peace will not be permanent until those who dwell in the earth accept the Gospel and conform their lives to its precepts. It is the power of God unto salvation to all who believe and obey. It is the kind advice of a loving Father who, seeing the end from the beginning, says: "This is the path; walk ye in it, and eternal life and eternal progress and eternal happiness shall be your reward." Every fibre of my being vibrates with the knowledge that He lives and some day all men will know it.

166The Savior died that we might live. He overcame death and the grave and holds out to all who obey His teachings the hope of a glorious resurrection. Eternal life and a fulness of joy are assured to every soul who obeys the natural law on which these greatest of all blessings are predicated, and in no other way, for that is God's way.

166I know this is the work of the Lord, that Jesus is indeed our Savior, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the Lord. I know those who have succeeded him have been men of God, who have honored the calling placed upon them. I know that our Father is blessing Zion at this time, and the man who holds the keys today is honored by all good men and women, where ever they may be in the wide world, who understand him.
