Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder George F. Richards

Member of the Council of Twelve from April 9, 1906, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

"Mormonism" is a positive religion; others in opposition are negative. "Mormonism" affirms; they deny.

167If there is a God and the soul of man is immortal, as the Scriptures teach and as we Latter-day Saints accept as true, the time will come when that truth will be known to all; as also many other great truths which today are a matter of controversy among men. It will be a satisfaction to have been right, a disappointment to have been wrong.

167If faith in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ proves necessary to salvation, as the Scriptures teach and as we believe, how much better off we will be who have possessed such faith than the unbelieving and faithless.

167A correct conception of God-His personality, His attributes, and the relationship we sustain to Him-is necessary in order for one to exercise an intelligent and acceptable faith in Him. Joseph Smith gives to the world such conception in harmony with the Scriptures.

167A correct conception of the Gospel plan is necessary in order for one to exercise an intelligent, active faith in the Gospel, such as leads one to obey the same and thereby obtain salvation. Joseph Smith gave to the world such conception in perfect harmony with the Scriptures.

167"Mormonism" and modern revelation make plain that which is seemingly obscure in the Bible, and which has caused such variance in the creeds of the many religious organizations.

167 If faith in, and acceptance of, the Gospel prove necessary to salvation, as the Scriptures teach and as we believe, how much better off we will be than the unbelievers and disobedient. Should it prove otherwise, we would still be as well off as they, and much better off than we otherwise would have been; for the Gospel restrains the believer from doing wrong and encourages him in doing that which is right. It encourages him to be good and to do good, all of which are conducive to happiness, hope and joy, and "Men are that they might have joy."

168If repentance from sin proves necessary to salvation, as the Scriptures plainly teach and as we sincerely believe, how much better off will they be who repent, making all things right with God and man; and were it possible the reverse were true, how much better off such would still be than the non-repentant.

168If baptism in water by immersion and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost by one duly authorized prove necessary to salvation, as the Scriptures teach and as we believe, how much better off they will be who accept these ordinances, authoritatively administered, than they who reject them.

168If it were possible that authority from God were not necessary to perform Gospel ordinances, as some religionists claim, the Latter-day Saints would still be as well off as they; but should it prove that authority from God is necessary, as the Scriptures teach and as we believe, and that we have that authority through the Holy Priesthood as claimed, how much better off we will be than they who make no claim of authority and do not regard it as necessary.

168If, as the Scriptures teach and the Latter-day Saints accept, marriage for eternity, when properly solemnized by one having the necessary authority, proves binding after this life, and all other forms of marriage are not, how much better off we will be who have entered into that form of marriage than they who have rejected it. Should it prove otherwise than what we claim, are we not still as well off as they?

168If a vicarious work for the dead proves necessary for their salvation, as the Scriptures teach and as we believe, then how much better off the Latter-day Saints will be who have built their temples and redeemed their dead.

168The position of the Latter-day Saints is in every instance Scriptural and true-the safest and best.

169The time will come when all shall know the truth, and blessed are they who are found on the side of truth; but woe unto all those who are found fighting against it, and consequently against God!

169The faith, the principles and the ordinances above set forth as a part of "Mormonism" are true and necessary to salvation.

169The Gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to earth through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, a prophet of God of modern times, with all its gifts, blessings, ordinances and powers, of which I am a living witness, for I have received of the power through the Holy Priesthood. I have enjoyed the spirit of prophecy through the exercise of that Priesthood. I have had the gift of healing by the same means. I have dreamed dreams and have had their significance made known, by which I have received assurances, direction and reproof. I have seen a vision, and do know that Jesus Christ lives, and that He is the Messiah, the Redeemer of the world; and, as a witness for the Lord, I bear my testimony to the truth of these things in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
