Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Orson F. Whitney

Member of the Council of Twelve from April 9, 1906, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

"Mormonism" is no mere nineteenth century religion; it is not merely a religion of time. It is the religion of the eternities, and has come down from the presence of Jehovah, as the preordained plan for the salvation of the children of men. It has been upon the earth many times in a series of dispensations, and this great and crowning Gospel dispensation has been introduced for the purpose of binding together all the dispensations, welding the present and the past, and preparing the world for still greater things in the future.

170When and where did the Gospel originate? I know of no better explanation than that given by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said:

170"In the beginning, God finding Himself in the midst of spirits and glory, because He was more intelligent, saw proper to institute laws whereby the rest might advance like Himself."

170We learn from this, that the Gospel-now called Mormonism-which comprises and codifies those laws that were instituted of God in the beginning, was framed before the world was created; that it is the means of man's progression, both in time and in eternity-the ladder up which all must climb who attain to exaltation. Adam's fall was a step downward, but it was also a step forward-a step in the eternal march of human progress; and it is by means of this everlasting Gospel, and our own individual efforts in making use of the powers that God has given us, that we lay hold upon eternal life, and go on to perfection.

170 This being true, is it reasonable to suppose that God would wait six thousand years before revealing to His children for the first time the plan of salvation? Is it reasonable that He would wait four thousand years, or even two thousand years, before He gave to man a knowledge of the Redeemer who was to come? Would it not be a waste of time? Why not let Father Adam and Mother Eve know? Why not give them the joy of knowing that a Savior had been provided, in anticipation of their fall, and that they and their posterity were heirs to salvation, through the atonement of Jesus Christ?

171"Mormonism" declares that this was done; that Adam and Eve had the Gospel revealed to them before the coming of Christ; that they were baptized for the remission of their sins, and received the Holy Ghost. By their faith in the Redeemer, whose coming Adam symbolized by erecting an altar and offering a lamb thereon-by virtue of Christ's atonement, and their obedience to the principles of faith, repentance, baptism and all other things that God required of them, they were redeemed from the fall. They had to wait for the resurrection of their bodies, but did not have to wait for some one to be baptized for them. They were baptized in person, not vicariously. There will be enough of that kind of work, without the elect being added to the list. It will take a thousand years to redeem the dead for whom we build temples and officiate. But some men and women, all down the ages, have had the Gospel, and have been redeemed by their obedience to it here, in this life. They do not need the vicarious work that will have to be done for perhaps millions of our race who never heard the name of Jesus Christ. Mormonism tells us that Adam, bowed with age, blessed his posterity, and predicted what should befall them to the latest generation. The relationship between that first and this last Gospel dispensation is shown in the fact that Adam is to come again, as the Ancient of Days; that he will call his children before him, and perform a great part in the winding up scene, in binding his dispensation to this dispensation, which is destined to swallow up the others, even as the ocean swallows up the rivers and the streams.

171 After Adam's day, when the world had departed from God, a dispensation of the Gospel was given to Enoch. He built a city called Zion, which was redeemed and sanctified by principles that we, as a Church, have received, but to the perfect practice of which we have not yet attained. We falter, some of us, in the presence of the law of tithing. What shall we do when the greater law comes-the law of consecration, when our all will be required for the building up of the Zion of God, of which the City of Enoch was but a type, a symbol, a foreshadowing, the lesser coming before the greater, pointing out and preparing the way?

172To Noah, also, came a dispensation of the Gospel. In his day the earth was baptized with water, prefiguring the baptism of fire, which our planet is destined to undergo, prior to its glorification. "For as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the coming of the Son of Man."

172 Abraham also had the Gospel revealed to him; and what was the part he played? What is the relationship between his dispensation and our dispensation? God said to him, "In thee and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." That promise was fulfilled in the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ through the lineage of Abraham; but it was also fulfilled in the scattering among all nations of the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, preparatory to the great gathering in the latter days, when they are to be brought from the four parts of the earth, to build up Zion, and make ready for the second coming of the Messiah.

172Next came Moses, standing at the head of a Gospel dispensation, holding the keys to the gathering of Israel. He bestows those keys upon the Prophet Joseph Smith, in order that he may begin the work of the gathering, bringing to God all who will come: the Jew, the Gentile, and the Israelite from among the Gentiles. All who will do the works of Abraham are counted with the children of Abraham, justified by their faith and obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

172In the meridian of time the Savior made His mortal advent, choosing twelve Apostles to preach the Gospel upon the eastern hemisphere, and after His resurrection, appearing to the Nephites

174in America, and choosing twelve among them to preach the Gospel to this part of the world.

174Eighteen hundred years later dawns the great and last dispensation, the dispensation of the fulness of times. "Mormonism," with the Bible in one hand and the Book of Mormon in the other, is reaping the results of all the work done by servants of God in past ages. It avails itself of all the good that has been accumulated by the human race, not only by prophets and apostles, but by poets, philosophers, inventors, discoverers-all the good and wise teachers of Christendom and heathendom. It seeks after and makes use of all that is pure, wise, virtuous, and praiseworthy; and by the learning of the past, and the revelations of the present, proposes to erect a monument to the honor and glory of God that shall endure throughout the endless ages of the future.

174The Gospel designs to save all men, but it will save them upon the principles of eternal justice, every man according to his works. There is a glory of the sun, a glory of the moon, and a glory of the stars, and even as the stars differ in magnitude, so will it be in the resurrection of the dead. The only class of human beings who need fear that there is no salvation for them, are those who have received the Gospel in its fulness, who have been given every key and passport to eternal glory-the power to be exalted to the highest estate of which intelligence is capable, and then have thrown it all away, trampling it under foot as a thing of naught and denying what they know to be true. All others can be saved, because all others can repent. Men can be forgiven as long as they have the power to repent.

174 But some will not repent until they pass into another world, where those spirits went whose bodies were drowned by the deluge in the days of Noah. In these days, a great principle, that of salvation for the dead, has been revealed. This is the welding link that will bind together the dispensations-the child to the parents-the present to the past. Can you think of anything that would turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, or the hearts of the children to the fathers, more effectually than a principle of this kind. "Mormonism" deals with the past, the present, and the future. It proposes to save all who are willing to be saved. It will save even the damned, after they have paid their eternal debt; but these cannot be saved with the fulness of God's glory.

175"Mormonism" is not an enemy to the human race; it is not an enemy to the Gentiles. We do not recognize the word "Gentile" as an opprobrious term, though some of our outside friends take umbrage at it, as if we were trying to fling at them an unsavory epithet. What is the meaning of "Gentile"? The word springs from "gentills," which means of a clan, a family, a race, a nation. In the days of the Jewish commonwealth, Gentile simply meant one who was not a Jew; in the early ages of the Christian Church, it meant one who was not a Christian, and in these times it designates one who is not a Latter-day Saint.

175 The Gentiles are the children of Japheth, while the Israelites are descended from Shem, through Abraham. Ephraim, from whom most of us claim lineal descent, has been mixed with the Gentiles, and is now being gathered out from the midst of them. The Gospel, when the Jews rejected it, went to the Gentiles; God wanted to save them. Cornelius, a righteous man, was a Gentile, and upon him and other Gentiles the Holy Ghost was poured out, even before baptism. The Gentiles of today are the nations of modern Europe, and this great nation of which we form a part. Columbus was a Gentile, moved upon by the Spirit of God to discover America-the land of Zion; Washington was a Gentile, who carved out with the sword of patriotism our independence. They were Gentiles who founded this government, the mightiest and most beneficent upon which the sun shines. God tells us in the Book of Mormon that the Gentile nations shall be mighty in His eyes in carrying forth the children of Israel to the lands of their inheritance. He declares further that if the Gentiles will, they shall come into the Church, partake of the blessings of the Gospel, and help the House of Israel to build the New Jerusalem, preparatory to the glorious coming of the Son of God. The blessing of Noah upon Japheth was, "God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem." We are not the enemies of the Gentiles, we are not the foes of the human race; our mission is friendship, peace, and good-will; our work is to preserve and bind together all that is good, both past and present, and to labor for the consummation of Christ's work in the great and wonderful future.

176May God speed His cause, keep us steadfast in the truth, in lifting up an ensign of peace to the nations, and in preaching to all the world the Gospel of salvation, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.
