Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder David O. McKay

Member of the Council of Twelve from April 9, 1906, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

Just above the pulpit in the meeting house where, as a boy, I attended Sunday services, there hung for many years a large photograph of the late President John Taylor, and under it, in what I thought were gold letters, this phrase, "The Kingdom of God or Nothing." The sentiment impressed me as a mere child years before I understood its real significance. I seemed to realize at that early date that there is no other Church or organization that approaches the perfection or possesses the Divinity that characterizes the Church of Jesus Christ. As a child, I felt this intuitively; in youth, I became thoroughly convinced of it; and today I treasure it as a firm conviction of my soul.

177Another truth that I have cherished from childhood is that God is a personal Being, and is, indeed, our Father whom we can approach in prayer, and receive answers thereto. I cherish as one of the dearest experiences in life the knowledge that God hears the prayer of faith. It is true that the answer may not come as direct and at the time or in the manner we anticipate; but it comes, and at a time and in a manner best for the interests of him who offers the supplication. On more than one occasion, I have received direct and immediate assurances that my petition was granted. At one time, particularly, the answer came as distinctly as though my Father stood by my side and spoke the words. These experiences are part of my being and must remain so as long as memory and intelligence last. They have taught me that "Heaven is never deaf but when man's heart is dumb."

178Just as real and just as close to me seems the Savior of the world. He is God made manifest in the flesh; and I know that "There is no other name given under heaven whereby mankind may be saved."

178I have an abiding testimony that the Father and the Son appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and revealed through him the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is indeed "The power of God unto salvation." I know, too, that a knowledge of the truth of the Gospel may be obtained only through obedience to the principles thereof. In other words, the best way to know the truth of any principle is to live it. Such is the way marked out by the Savior when He said, "If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God or whether I speak of myself."

178The divinity of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is shown in its organization as well as in its teachings. Godhood, Brotherhood, Service-these three guiding principles in the Christ life permeate all our Church activity.

178I love the work. I love the brethren who preside over it; for they are faithful and true men, performing their many duties under the inspiration of the Almighty.

178In conclusion, I desire to testify to another thing, viz.: The Lord is not only guiding His Church, but overruling the destiny of nations, preparatory to the preaching of the Gospel to every "nation, kindred, tongue and people." Dreadful as are the perilous conditions in war-torn countries to-day, we may rest assured that out of it all will come better opportunities for the honest men and women of the world to hear the "Glad tidings of great joy" as heralded again in this the last and greatest of all dispensations. Out of the darkness now brooding over the nations, made more gloomy and terrible by the thunderings and tempests of war and bloodshed, will come the dawn of that long expected day, when "peace and good will" will reign over all the earth.

178Upon the Latter-day Saints rests the responsibility of preaching the true Gospel of peace to mankind. O may we be equal to this responsibility!
