Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith

Member of the Council of Twelve from April 7, 1910, to the present time. Church Historian from March 17, 1921, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

Like Job, I can say, "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." I know that He came into the world to redeem the world from sin, and through the atonement made by Him all men are redeemed from death. There shall be a resurrection of the dead and all shall come forth, they who have done good to receive an exaltation and they who have done evil to receive condemnation, according to their works. I know that all men who repent and accept the Gospel with pure hearts, are also redeemed through the blood of Christ, from their own sins; for He suffered "for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent, but if they would not repent, they must suffer," even as He, for His blood will not cleanse the unrepentant sinner. I know that little children who have not reached years of accountability, and hence are not guilty of sin, are also redeemed through the blood of Christ, and it is solemn mockery to contend that they need baptism, denying the justice and mercy of God. I know that Jesus of Nazareth was the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh, with life in Himself as His Father has life in Himself. Because of this wonderful truth, it was possible for Him to redeem us from death and the grave, and, on condition of our repentance, from our individual sins. I know that men must repent and receive the Gospel, being baptized by immersion for the remission of sins and receive the laying on of hands by one who holds authority, for the bestowal of the Holy Spirit, to enter into the kingdom of God.

180I know that Joseph Smith was called of God and divinely ordained to preach the Gospel and organize the Church of Jesus Christ in these latter days. He was a prophet of God and declared unto the world the word of the Lord as he was taught by heavenly messengers and instructed by the Lord. His testimony, which is duly and sufficiently attested by competent witnesses, will stand against the world, and all who reject it shall come under condemnation at the last day. He was a special witness for Christ in this the last dispensation, and solemnly bore witness that our Redeemer lives, for he saw Him and conversed with him and His Father in heavenly vision. This testimony he sealed with his blood, and it will stand to condemn those who reject it, at the last day. He translated the Book of Mormon "by the gift and power of God," and I know that record is true. It is a history of the ancient inhabitants of this American continent, and contains the Gospel as it was revealed to them. This book has been attacked from the date of its publication to the present time, by those who reject its teachings and try to destroy its influence among the children of men. Such attacks will also be made from time to time, but they shall all fail, as they have failed in the past, and the truth be more firmly established which that record contains.

180In conclusion, I know that "Mormonism" is the Gospel of Jesus Christ restored for the last time for the salvation of souls. All this I know through the teaching of the Holy Spirit. Moreover, I know that it is within the power of all men to receive a knowledge of these things, for the Lord has promised, "If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine," and in all solemnity I can promise any man who will humbly repent and accept these things, that he will receive through the Spirit of the Lord a testimony of the truth. There is no excuse for any to be in the dark, for all may come who will and partake of the bread of life, and the Lord will give them knowledge of these things that their souls may be saved.
