Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder James E. Talmage

Member of the Council of Twelve from December 8, 1911, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

I feel particularly gratified in this opportunity of bearing to you a humble testimony of the divinity of this work, of the sacredness of the labor for which the Church stands. Testimony is ofttimes more effective than argument, ofttimes more potent than reasons, as man counts reasons, and lists them and collates them, and analyzes them; for, after all, he can only base the correctness of his results upon the assurance that his processes are free from error. Whereas, one who is able to stand forth and say "I know," testifies of himself, because of the knowledge that is within him; and that knowledge is given him of God. This people believe in testimony-making, in testimony-bearing, in testimony-speaking; and while they do not believe that the testimony of one man shall of itself convict or condemn another, they do believe that a man's humble, sincere testimony is entitled to respectful consideration. The Latter-day Saints tell you that they know that the Gospel is true, for that knowledge has been given unto them; and when a man is able to say, as said the chief of the apostles of old of the Christ, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God," to him does the answer apply, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." And, let that testimony come in what way it will, it has a saving power for man; this is the kind of testimony that abides and abounds in the hearts of this people, and they manifest it in their lives. Jesus came with His testimony, and the people were astounded at His doctrines, not because He brought them something that was essentially new in all particulars; for He used their scriptures; He brought into service their proverbs, and referred to the things which they well knew; but He gave to all of this a new application and a new meaning; and they said: "He speaks as one having authority, and not as the scribes."

182Such, in a measure, is the testimony of the Latter-day Saint elder. He goes forth in humility. He may, perhaps, not be eloquent. He may be far from learned, as the world reckons learning; yet he is not ignorant, when he is able to stand forth and say, "I know that this Gospel is true."

182The testimony which I bear to you is one of knowledge and assurance beyond doubt, that God has spoken in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times, and does speak today as of old through His servants, the prophets; that in very truth Christ the Redeemer of mankind lives and that His coming is near at hand. The cry is given today as in the wilderness of old, "The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, therefore repent."

182I testify to you that this is the Church of Jesus Christ, that the power of the Christ is in it, the very Christ that lived as a man, that died as a God, the one who was resurrected, who came forth from the tomb with the very body that had been pierced and laid there; that He has again spoken in this day and age of the world, even as had been declared He would speak, that He has again established His saving Gospel among men, and has opened the way by which men may attain salvation and eternal life in His presence and in that of the Father, the only way under heaven by which salvation and exaltation may be attained, the only name under heaven by which man may be saved.

182The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is preaching the same doctrine that was preached in the church of old, and is proclaiming the same great message. It is the dispensation of fullness. It marks the ushering in of the great finale of this drama of the Lord. Right thankful should we be that we are privileged to have a name and standing in the Church in this day and to take part in this great work. I am thankful for that name and for that standing, and for the privilege of testifying

184to you, as one of the special witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ, who verily lives and who verily shall come as hath been predicted, to take His place upon the earth, amongst His people.
