Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Stephen L Richards

Member of the Council of Twelve from January 17, 1917, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

I bear my testimony that I know that this is the work of God. I wish I could deliver it to every young man and every young woman, to every wayward man and wayward woman in the entire Church. I know it just as confidently, just as surely, as I know any other fact that has entered into my life. I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet-of the living God. All of my feelings, every sensation that I can interpret, bears witness of that truth to me. I know, too, that that knowledge will come to every honest man and woman and to every young man and woman who strives for it and who lives for it, but I want us all to help in every way that we can to bring that knowledge to the youth of our Church, and to all those who have fallen by the wayside. I am grateful for that knowledge. It brings into my life more comfort, more satisfaction, more hope, more that is worth striving for, than all else, and I am very desirous that I may live to be worthy of a continuation of that testimony, that it may grow and ripen and strengthen within me.

185 My grandfather was with the Prophet Joseph in Carthage jail. He was his intimate friend; he was his confidential secretary. He knew his thoughts, I believe, as well as one man may know the thoughts of another. He loved him. He was perfectly willing to give his life for the prophet. My grandfather has left his testimony that Joseph Smith was divinely chosen, that he was indeed a prophet of God, and I know that he did not lie, and I know that hundreds of other good men who knew this prophet have not falsified when they have given their testimony of his divine work.

186God grant that the testimony of this Latter-day work may come not only to the great hosts of faithful Saints who, from season to season, gather here to hear the word of the Lord, but to those hosts of worthy men and women who should be saved, who have strayed from the path of truth. I feel for one to consecrate my efforts to their reclamation and retention in the fold of Christ, and I know that every true Latter-day Saint would join in such a dedication.
