Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Melvin J. Ballard

Member of the Council of Twelve from January 7, 1919, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

There is ringing forth over the world the evidence that Christianity is not the vital Gospel, nor has it the power and force that Jesus Christ endowed it with in the beginning. I do not rejoice over the weakness or the failures of my brothers of other Christian denominations, who are struggling against great odds, trying to make the religion of itself effective. I grieve because among them are thousands of honest workers who are handicapped because they do not have the truth; and from this day forward their struggle will be a struggle against great odds, because there will be thrown in the face of all appeals for men to be Christians, the present failure of Christianity to mellow the hearts of men, to soften them towards their fellows.

190Perhaps there is no war that has been waged in the world of any consequence that had so little excuse for its existence as the World War; and yet it came after hundreds of years of the preaching of Christianity. There is a form of godliness over Belgium, Germany, France, Russia and other nations. There are evidences of a form of Godliness in the thousands of church towers that rise to the skies, but I regret to say that the evidence of the Christianity of the men and women of these nations is lacking, as shown by their eagerness to fly at each others' throats with all the venom and greediness for blood and destruction ever exhibited by pagan nations.

190 Men must have a true measuring rod to determine whether knowledge which comes to them is true or false. They must have a true balance or rule that is always dependable, by which they can measure or weigh every particle of information that comes to them. I have discovered that the sure guide of my soul is the knowledge I have that God lives; that Jesus is the Christ, and that our Father in heaven has spoken; that those truths contained in the revelations of God in the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants are the very eternal truth. I have accepted them as my measuring rod, and I have not accepted as the final truth anything that does not square up to those eternal truths; that does not harmonize with the truth as I have it from God. Truth will harmonize with itself.

191I proclaim to you that there is, if we shall observe and study, enough evidence to satisfy all men, notwithstanding our enemies have been numerous, our drivings and mobbings have been many; and though today we stand misrepresented and misunderstood, that the favor of the Almighty is over His people. If God ever had His hand over a people in the history of the world, then that people is the Latter-day Saints.

191There are those who have attempted to blacken our character, who despise us, and seek to make us outcasts, yet the time of our triumph shall come, because of the honest effort, the integrity, the virtue and moral strength of the young men and women of this Church. We have resolved in our hearts never to cease our efforts, nor to slacken our endeavors to make the world hear us, until ignorance, and prejudice, and hatred shall be banished from the earth, and the love of God, and a knowledge of the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall find its way into the hearts and homes of the millions who know nothing of us this day.

191The Church shall stand, and thrive, and increase in its numbers, and shall never diminish. We are only just beginning; we are but forming the nucleus of a great and mighty organization that shall grow as fast as it can absorb new members, and it shall increase in its absorbing, and shall yet be numbered by millions of the children of this generation. This is my testimony and faith, and I may say I speak it with knowledge.

191 We stand in a most enviable position in the world. Our mission is not only to benefit ourselves in these valleys, but our mission extends to the east, west, north and south; all the world is our field. God sent us to labor in His vineyard. He called us here to train us to be the teachers to the nations of the earth; not only to attain blessings and honor for ourselves, but to bestow the same on them also.

192The holy scriptures say that no man can know that Jesus is the Christ save by the Holy Ghost I haven't seen Him, but I know, within my heart and soul, as I live, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Savior of the world. When I shall stand before Him, in His presence, and see Him face to face as He is, I shall not know any better the truth that He is the Christ, and that He lives, than I do today by the witness and testimony of the Spirit of God in my heart and soul. By that same power I know that this is God's work; that Joseph Smith is His prophet, and that the leaders of this Church today enjoy the revelation and the inspiration of God; that they are His prophets; that they stand in the right way, and that no power can destroy this work.
