Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder John A. Widtsoe

Member of the Council of Twelve from March 17, 1921, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

My faith in the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith, places me in possession of an all-comprehensive philosophy, according to which I can order all the affairs of my life, whether of a temporal or a spiritual nature.

193By this faith I draw wisdom from the Past; obtain visions of the Future, and walk fearlessly in the Present, with a full assurance that God's goodness will guide me.

193By this faith I am able to interpret whatever I learn of this or of any other time, and find its place in the eternal scheme of things.

193By this faith, which teaches me that I am eternal, with an existence before this life, and an ever active life hereafter, I am given full courage to battle against evil, whether in myself or in others.

193By this faith, which promises the endless triumph of the progressing spirit of man over the things of the universe, I attack the duties of my daily life with the clear confidence that if I but do my duty well, I shall find the way to the mastery of the earth and all earthly tasks.

193By this faith my joy in life is abundant, my sorrows are tempered, my trust in the ultimate triumph of good over evil is unshakable.

193By this faith I learn more and more to hate sin, and to reach out a helping hand to the sinner.

193 By this faith, which embraces a complete plan of man's endless journey from a dim past into an eternal future, I learn that I need God's help in all that I do, but also, as a glorious comfort, that God, to a small degree, infinitely small perhaps, needs me and all His children, to work out His mighty purposes. It is good to know oneself in partnership with God.

194By this faith, amidst the wearisome toil and the strife and the heat of the day, I am at rest and at peace, for I know my history and my destiny, and the eternal meaning of the day's work.

194By this faith I know that however lowly my task in life may be, before the judgment seat of God, if my work has been well done, it shall be transmuted into spiritual values, and my soul shall know that I have been doing necessary work for the fulfilling of the Master's plan.

194By this faith I am unafraid, for I know that God's power is everywhere and that I never walk alone, but that in joy or sorrow, at home or abroad, God's will guides me.

194By this faith it is easy to lay aside the material for the spiritual things of life; to exchange the honor of men for the service of God.

194By this faith my life is one of gratitude for favors received, and of trust that whatever is for my good, will be given me, if I strive for it honestly.

194By this faith I know the brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God; the joy and necessity of serving and helping my fellow-man; and the satisfying fellowship of my brethren and sisters.

194By this faith I know that whatever of experience I have gained in this life will be mine forever, and that my family and children are mine to the end of an endless day, in which I shall grow to the fuller stature of a God-like man.

194All these and a thousand other things that would fill many volumes does my faith mean to me.
