Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Patriarch John Smith

Brother of Patriarch Joseph Smith, Sen., was the Fifth Presiding Patriarch of the Church from January 1, 1849, to May 23, 1854.

197 John Smith was born July 16, 1781, in Derryfield (now Manchester), Rockingham county, N.H. He was a son of Asael and Mary Duty Smith and uncle to the Prophet Joseph. In 1815 he married Clarissa Lyman, by whom he had three children-George Albert, Caroline and John Lyman. The subject of Joseph Smith's mission was introduced to John Smith by his brother Joseph, the Prophet's father, which resulted in his baptism Jan. 9, 1832, at a time of sickness near to death, and when the ice had to be cut to reach the water; but from that time he gained health and strength, although he had been given up by the doctors to die of consumption. He was baptized and confirmed by his brother, Joseph Smith, Sen., and at the same time ordained an elder. In 1833 he moved to Kirtland, Ohio, where he, on June 3, 1831, was ordained a high priest by Lyman Wight, and in 1838 to Far West, Caldwell county, Missouri, and thence to Adam-ondi-Ahman, in Daviess county, where he presided over the branch of the Church until expelled by a mob in 1839, and arrived in Illinois on the 28th of February of that year. He located at Green Plains, six miles from Warsaw, where he put in a crop of corn, split rails, and performed much hard labor unsuited to his health and years, but obliged to be done for the support of his family. In June he moved to Commerce (since Nauvoo), and on October 5th was appointed to preside over the Saints in Iowa. On the 12th he moved to Lee county to fulfill that mission. In October, 1843, he moved to Macedonia, Hancock county, Illinois, having been appointed to preside over the Saints in that place. He was ordained a patriarch Jan. 10, 1844, by Joseph the Prophet, and in November of that year was driven by mobbers from Macedonia to Nauvoo, where he continued to administer patriarchal blessings, to the joy of thousands, until February 9, 1846, when he was compelled by mob violence to again leave his home and cross the Mississippi river, with his family, in search of a peaceful location, far off amid savages and deserts, in the valleys of the mountains. After passing a dreary winter on the right bank of the Missouri, at Winter Quarters, he again took up the weary ox train march on the 9th of June, 1847, and reached Great Salt Lake Valley Sept. 23, where he presided over the Church in the mountains until October, 1848. Jan. 1, 1849, he was ordained Presiding Patriarch over the Church, under the hands of Presidents Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. He moved out of the Fort on to his city lot in February, 1849, and this was the only spot on which he had been privileged to cultivate a garden two years in succession during the last twenty-three years of his life. In addition to a vast amount of varied and efficient aid to thousands in the way of salvation, during his long and faithful ministry, he administered 5,560 patriarchal blessings, which were recorded in seven large and closely written books, which are now in the Historian's office. He died in Salt Lake City, May 23, 1854. "He closed the arduous duties of a well occupied probation," writes the editor of the Deseret News, "and passed to a position of rest, where his works will nobly follow and honor him and where he will continue his able counsels for the prosperity and welfare of Zion."
