Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Patriarch John Smith

Presiding Patriarch of the Church from February 18, 1855, to November 6, 1911.

I can bear testimony to the truth of this work. I bear you my testimony that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the living God, and that through his labors and the gifts which came from the Father, this work has been thus far established, and that his successors have been in the true path, that they have worked and labored for the furtherance of the cause of truth. They have been men of God, prophets, seers, and revelators and their teachings have been just and true. I can also bear testimony to the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord in many ways, for myself individually. On one or two occasions, from overwork, exposure, and so forth, physically I have been broken down, but through the faith and prayers of the Saints, I have been restored. I can bear testimony that the Lord has heard my petitions, not only in my own behalf but also in behalf of many of the people. I often meet individuals who have received blessings under my hands, promises and so forth, and they have borne testimony that the words which I have spoken under these circumstances have been prophetic, that the promises I have made have come true, every word.

199 I have striven to do my duty; I have tried to do that which the Father has called me to do. I admonish the people to try to understand their duties, to try to live in obedience to the laws of God, and to keep His commandments. If we as a people will listen to the whisperings of the still small voice we will not err in judgment; and if we call upon the Father, in humility, in a proper way, He will hear our petitions and answer them. I often admonish the people when they get their blessings under my hands, and say to them they must first learn to listen to the whisperings of the still small voice; and if they will seek for the gift of discernment, they will be guided by the Spirit of Truth.

200I know that there is a God in Israel. I know that He will hear and answer the prayers of the honest. I know that He has heard prayers in my behalf, and through these blessings I am here with you today.

200I can bear testimony that I know this is the work of God. I know that we are His people, that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of the living God, and that his successors in the presidency of the Church have been strictly in the line and discharge of their duty. They have all been servants of the living God. Their testimony has been borne to the people, and I bear testimony that what they have said and done is right and proper, and has been inspired by the true spirit of our Heavenly Father.
