Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Sylvester Smith

Member of the First Council of Seventy from March 1, 1835, to April 6, 1837.

213 The following letter was written at Kirtland, Ohio, October 28, 1834, by Sylvester Smith to Oliver Cowdery and published in the Messenger and Advocate. The letter is as follows:-"Having heard that certain reports are circulating abroad, prejudicial to the character of Bro. Joseph Smith, Jr., and that said reports purport to have come from me, I have thought proper to give the public a plain statement of the facts concerning this matter. It is true that some difficulties arose between Bro. Joseph Smith, Jr., and myself, in our travels the past summer to Missouri; and that on our return to this place I laid my grievances before a general council, where they were investigated in full, in an examination which lasted several days; and the result showed to the satisfaction of all present, I believe, but especially to myself, that in all things Bro. Joseph Smith, Jr., had conducted worthily, and adorned his profession as a man of God, while journeying to and from Missouri. And it is no more than just that I should confess my faults by saying unto all people, so far as your valuable and instructive paper has circulation, that the things that I accused Bro. Joseph Smith, Jr., of were without foundation; as was most clearly proven by the evidence which was called, to my satisfaction. And in fact, I have not at any time withdrawn my confidence and fellowship from Bro. Joseph Smith, Jr., but thought that he had inadvertently erred, being but flesh and blood, like the rest of Adam's family. But I am now perfectly satisfied that the errors of which I accused him, before the council, did not exist, and were never committed by him; and my contrition has been and still continues to be deep, because I admitted thoughts into my heart which were not right concerning him, and because I have been the means of giving rise to reports which have gone abroad, censuring the conduct of Bro. Joseph Smith, Jr., which reports are without foundation. And I hope that this disclosure of the truth, written by my own hand, and sent abroad into the world, through the medium of the Messenger and Advocate, will put a final end to all evil reports and censurings, which have sprung out of anything that I have said or done.

214"I wish still further to state, for the better relief of my own feelings, which, you must be sensible, are deeply wounded, in consequence of what has happened, that I know for myself, because I have received testimony from the heavens, that the work of the Lord, brought forth by means of the Book of Mormon, in our day, through the instrumentality of Bro. Joseph Smith, Jr., is eternal truth, and must stand, though the heavens and the earth pass away.

214"Please give publicity to the above, and oblige a lover of righteousness and truth.

214"Yours in the testimony of Jesus,

"Sylvester Smith."
