Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Seymour B. Young

Member of the First Council of Seventy from October 14, 1882, to December, 1924.

I testify to you that "Mormonism" is true. It is the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, as testified by one of the mightiest prophets that ever lived, who sealed that testimony with his own blood. Obedience to this Gospel will bring to us salvation and eternal life. "Mormonism" is the Gospel of peace, life and salvation. It has never been a Gospel of war or contention. Contention does not belong to the spirit of the Gospel or the faith of the Saints; but evil and temptation exist in the world, and wherever it is manifest it is for the purpose of overthrowing the good, and this evil power has been fighting against the Latter-day, Saints from the beginning, seeking to destroy the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

215 Though harassed and hated the work has continued to prosper, and the Lord has established His marvelous work and wonder in the earth. The saying of our Savior has been realized and demonstrated, "The world hated me, therefore it hateth you." Yet the Lord so loved the world that He gave His beloved Son for its redemption. The mission of the Latter-day Saints is now and always has been to try to convince the world that it is better to serve God than to serve mammon. But there is no force, no coercion in this Gospel. The spirit of peace, and of gentle persuasion, and of love unfeigned is characteristic of our leaders, and it is pre-eminently exemplified in all their teachings, that they realize the truth of the doctrine that the powers of the Priesthood are inseparably connected with the heavens, and if any man should desire to assume unrighteous dominion, or exercise undue authority over his brethren, Amen to that man's priesthood. The "Mormon" Elder, as he proclaims these grand principles, also exemplifies the fact that he can call sinners to repentance, and teach them the better life, only by that spirit of gentle persuasion.

216I testify to you of the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was divinely inspired. He was filled with the power of his mission to such an extent that he came as near being a perfect man as ever stood upon the earth, excepting our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. In the fulfilment of his mission upon the earth, he exemplified the teachings and actions of his Master. So have the brethren who have followed in his footsteps as Prophets, seers and revelators to Israel. I know the principles of the Gospel which we have received are true. I know that the Prophet Joseph Smith was inspired by the Spirit of the Lord to organize this Church, and to organize the quorums of the Priesthood, and that Brigham Young and those who have succeeded the Prophet have been inspired to gather the people to this land of Zion, and we are here rejoicing this day because of the blessings of the Lord unto us.

216I testify to you that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the living God, and that he went to his fate knowing that he was to be martyred for the truth that God had given to him; yet, like his great leader, the Savior of the world, he did not flinch or turn aside from the course that the Lord had marked out for him to pursue. In like manner the brethren who have been his successors have been unswerving in their integrity, true to their faith, true to their covenants with God and with each other. As the Lord blessed them, so He is blessing His servants and people today; and He will continue His blessings upon us if we will continue to serve Him faithfully. Although we may have the evidence of the hatred of wicked men, that need not discourage us at all, but rather give us more determination, that through the grace of our Father and through the blessings of the Gospel we will remain true and faithful to Him who has thus blessed us. I testify to you, that Joseph Smith and his successors are indeed Prophets of God, that this is the Church of Jesus Christ, and that from it will grow His kingdom that shall fill the earth.
