Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Brigham H. Roberts

Member of the First Council of Seventy since October, 1888; Senior President from December, 1924, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

I love the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was, indeed, a God-inspired man. He looked deep into things and saw them as they are. His sympathies were broad as the human race; his conception of the relationship of man and God exceeded all the teachings of other modern men. To him more than to any other man of modern times was it given to comprehend the heavens and the laws that obtain there; to understand the earth, its history, and its mission. He looked into the deep things of God-always, be it remembered, by the inspiration of God-and out of the rich treasure of divine knowledge he brought forth things both new and old for the instruction of our race, the like of which, in some respects, had not been known in previous dispensations. Hence I repeat that Joseph Smith was great, but great as he was, rising and towering far above him is the work that he accomplished through divine guidance; that work is infinitely greater than the prophet-greater than all the prophets connected with it. Its consistency, its permanency, its power, its institutions, contradict the hallucination theories advanced to account for its origin.

217The Gospel of Jesus Christ is perfect. There is no flaw in it. There is no imperfection in it. The revelations of God stand invulnerable. In our recent experience as a Church, we have had ample demonstration of that truth. You think of the rigid analysis made of our faith by one of the most powerful and intelligent committees in the Senate of the United States. Recall that rigid investigation-what principle of the Gospel failed? For what principle revealed did you have to offer any apology?

219For none. The truth of God stood four-square to every wind that blew upon it. I can conceive of no assembly of men, no congress, no parliament, no assembly of the learned before whom I would have the least hesitation of undertaking the advocacy and defense of the revelations of God. Not because there is any excellence of understanding, or power of advocacy, or adroitness in defense in me; but because I have absolute confidence in the Gospel and in the strength of its truth.

219 And so I ask the question, wherein, then, lies our strength? From what source shall we draw confidence needful to our strength in the great conflict with the world, that confronts us. When I ask myself that question I see the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Therein lies our strength. In the truth of the principles we have received from God, we are strong; not so much, either, because of the little truth that has been revealed to us; the little knowledge to which we have attained, but more because of the great ocean of knowledge that we have access to, through one of the great principles we announce as a doctrine to the world, namely: revelation. Through the acceptance of that doctrine we have access to God's hidden treasures of knowledge; which, in comparison to that which men in this world have received, is as some mighty ocean to a lakelet. In this new dispensation of the Gospel, we indeed have received great truths, and precious withal. God has revealed himself unto His Witness of the new dispensation, Joseph Smith, in a most effective, splendid manner. We know something of the character, and even something of the form and features of that Mighty Intelligence that stands in the councils of the Gods, and out of whose wisdom and power, creation and guidance come as to the affairs of this universe. God has made known unto us, that Jesus Christ is in the express image of the Father, and that as the Christ was, in form and feature, in intellectual and moral quality, the attributes of soul, so indeed also is the Father. To know this and to know it well, to have it take possession of the consciousness, so that when God is spoken of, the image of Christ, holding-as He announced to His disciples that He did hold-all power in heaven and in earth: to have such a consciousness of God, so that when His name or title is spoken this vision of God, revealed through the person and nature of the Christ, arises, is a very great truth indeed.

220The testimony of the Elders of Israel has been accompanied by the witness of God. It has appealed to the honest in heart, and in nearly all the nations of the earth there has been found a response. The gathering has continued until behold, the Saints have their feet made fast in these valleys of the Rocky Mountains, where, in fulfillment of the prediction of the Prophet Joseph himself, the Latter-day Saints have become a great and powerful people.

220I rejoice in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It satisfies me completely. It responds to the hungering of my spirit. It meets the demands also of my intellectual nature. And as I see the growth of intelligence among men, and increase of scientific knowledge, a broader understanding of the universe, a comprehension of the extent and grandeur of the works of God, I see in "Mormonism" that which rises up to meet this enlarged knowledge of man. "Mormonism" teaches man that he is the child of God; it tells him that he has in him divine elements that partake of the nature of God; that he may live forever, and that he may go on from one degree of excellence unto another until he shall attain unto something that is truly grand, truly great, worthy of a God to give, worthy of a son of God to receive.
