Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder George Reynolds

Member of the First Council of Seventy from April 10, 1890, to August 9, 1909.

I bear my testimony that I have been acquainted with the Presidents of this Church intimately for many years-with Presidents Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow and Joseph F. Smith; and though in minor particulars and characteristics they differed very materially, yet they were all the men of God's choice, the men for the hour, the men whom God selected as the leaders of His people, and they all did the work that God required at their hands. They were His mouthpieces, and they accomplished that which He placed them in the position to fulfill, every one of them. They were all prepared of God to do the work assigned them, and they all did it, and did it well. Notwithstanding the differences and peculiarities of their minor characteristics, there were some certain things in which they were all alike, namely, their love for the truth, their faith in God, their willingness to listen to His word, their uncompromising devotion and integrity to God and His work, their full belief in the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph. These characterized them all, and God was with them, and He enabled them to accomplish the work which He called them to do. I want to bear this testimony and I do so because I know it is true. I know further, that God will remain with us if we will be true to Him; and more than this, I know that He is abundantly capable of taking care of His work. At the same time we must do our part; do it in love, in faith, in zeal, and then the blessings of God will follow and His purposes will be accomplished. We none of us need to be afraid, for God's work will prevail. The truth is mighty, and it will prevail.

222I know He is still guiding His people, and with me there is not the slightest shadow of a doubt but what all His holy purposes will be accomplished. I know that this is the work of God. Of this I am more satisfied than of any other fact with which I am acquainted. I have no fears on this point, for the Holy Spirit has witnessed from the beginning, that God is with us, that this is not the work of man. Had it not been so, it would have failed long ago. It would never have brought to pass the wonderful, the miraculous results, I might say, that we see have been accomplished by the revelation of God to Joseph Smith and to His people. No earthly power could have accomplished what has been done by the people who belong to the Church of Jesus Christ. The results are marvelous, not only in the building up of this commonwealth in these valleys of the mountains, not only in the preaching of the Gospel to so many of the nations of the earth, but also in the indirect results that have followed the ministry of the servants of God, the results that have followed materially, spiritually, intellectually, and in every way that I can think of.

222I realize that all these things have been given unto us. There is nothing lacking, but all that is necessary, if we will obey, to give us power to return into the presence of God, and to enjoy the blessings of the celestial kingdom throughout the eternities to come, are ours, are with this Church, have been revealed of God. We have been made partakers of all these things. There is nothing wanting. Not one link is left out. They are all ours if we will be faithful to God and to His cause; and this is my testimony. I know it is true, and I bear it in the name of the Lord Jesus, our Redeemer. Amen.
