Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder J. Golden Kimball

Member of the First Council of Seventy from April 8, 1892 to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

We have the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and it has withstood every test. We have sent out our young Elders without experience, and it is marvelous, it is wonderful, it is one of the great testimonies to me how these young men can meet the men of the world as they do, with so little experience. It is a very strong evidence that we have the truth, that we have the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

223I have a knowledge of the truth of the Gospel. I have been taught it from my youth. I have studied the history of this Church, and I testify that this is the Lord's work, that He has given unto us Prophets and Apostles, the Holy Ghost, and all the gifts and blessings of the Gospel, and that we have been led by inspired men.

223God is the Father of all, and Christ is the Redeemer and helper of all. I believe in Christ's religion as He taught it, and I discover that His doctrines never change. I further believe that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, and that this is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as revealed by the Savior and His authorized servants to the Prophet Joseph Smith; that the Priesthood of God is the Constitution of the Church, and the present living prophets, and those associated with them, are true disciples of Christ, devoted to the interests of the people.

223 The Prophet Joseph Smith received revelations in every way that the Lord communicates His mind and will to man. Like Moses, he knew the Lord face to face, stood in His very presence and heard His voice; he received communications, from angels; through the Urim and Thummim; by divine intelligence; by open visions; through inspiration of God operating upon his mind; and in divers ways in which the prophets in olden times received revelations, all of which agree with the various ways in which God communicated His mind and will to Joseph Smith.

224The testimonies I have received in preaching the Gospel, and the inspiration that God has given me, tell me that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God. God made him a prophet, but the people, when the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, made him the President of the Church. Joseph Smith had revelations, and they are written, and received by the Church. My testimony is that they are true. I have witnessed the fulfillment of many of them. President Brigham Young was his successor, and I have the same testimony as to him. I knew him from the time I was a small child, and I testify of his greatness, and of his bigness; he was a great builder, and he builded well and firmly, and as a Prophet of the Lord he continued where the Prophet Joseph ended. President Brigham Young was succeeded by President John Taylor, a magnificent specimen of manhood, a man of God that I always honored. Never was I in his presence that his bigness and majesty did not impress me. His personality was wonderful. Then came President Wilford Woodruff, President Lorenzo Snow, and President Joseph F. Smith-I had the same Spirit and the same testimony concerning them.

224President Heber J. Grant is the present Prophet of this Church, and he is the man who is appointed. When the Lord wants to give this Church a revelation, or give it instruction, He will give it through Heber J. Grant the Prophet. He is the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and God knows he has earned the place, and the Lord has preserved his life for the appointment.

224I am going to trust in the Lord, and I am going to trust in His Prophet. The dead Prophets we honor, but the living are chosen, ordained, appointed and sustained, and it is to the living we look for counsel, reproof and instruction.
