Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Rulon S. Wells

Member of the First Council of Seventy from April 5, 1893, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

How vain men are, who will presume to formulate a religion for the salvation of our Father's children. It lies only with God to devise a plan whereby His children can be saved. The great trouble in the world is that we have too many man-made religions, and they do not possess the power of God unto salvation. Only that plan that was revealed from heaven, that was given and established before the foundations of this earth were laid, possesses this power. Eternal life is the goal for which we are striving, and men may not attain to it except in the way which has been pointed one by the Savior of the world. In order for men to find out the true way, it is necessary that they shall be obedient unto the will of God, that they turn away from wickedness and sin, that the Spirit of the Lord may possess their souls and bring them to a knowledge of the truth and to a knowledge of God, for it is this knowledge of God that we understand to be eternal life. "This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent." But no man can obtain that knowledge of God through the wisdom of men. Men are unable to devise the plan by which the children of men may attain to that knowledge.

225 In the great plan of the Almighty, men were not to obtain eternal life while in transgression, and a plan must be formed that would cleanse and purify them before they should be permitted to partake of that fruit which gave them eternal life. If it had been possible, or if it had been permitted that our first parents, in their transgression, could have also partaken of the fruit of this tree of life, we would not have attained to the eternal life that the Lord desires His children to obtain, because it would have been an eternal life of sin, and transgression from the ways of the Lord, and the next world would have been no better than this one. The Lord desires that all those who should partake of the fruit of that tree and live forever should first become purged and purified and cleansed from all sin and from all unrighteousness; therefore, He revealed from heaven a plan whereby men and women could obtain eternal life and come to the knowledge of God. Then, to know God is eternal life, and men cannot attain it only through faith and repentance from sin. Likewise, they must receive a remission of sins through baptism of the water, and Spirit, before they can know Him, for we can only know God and the things of God by the Spirit of God. Men may endeavor by their sophistry and philosophy to find Him out, but they will fail. They may undertake, by logic and reason, to uncover His hiding place, but they will not succeed only as they pass through the cleansing process of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

226I am proud to be identified with the people of God, and to have a standing in His holy Church. I feel to rejoice for the testimony that the Lord has blessed me with; for I do know that this is in very deed His work. The Church of Christ has been builded upon the rock of revelation; and those who have received a testimony that this is the work of the Lord, and that Joseph Smith was divinely inspired of God in ushering in this the dispensation of the fulness of times, have received it through the inspiration of the Almighty. We ought to be grateful that our Heavenly Father has blessed us with a knowledge of the truth, and that we are not compelled to rely upon others, but that we know it for ourselves, because we have received it through revelation from our Father.

226I know that this Gospel is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the power of God unto salvation; that through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith it has been restored to earth, never again to be taken away and never again to be thrown down; that those whom God has chosen to stand at the head of His people today are inspired of Him and possess the spirit of their calling.

228I bear testimony to the fact that I know Joseph Smith is a Prophet sent of God. The Lord has manifested it to me as an individual, through His Holy Spirit. When I have been in the missionary field and have borne this testimony, I have felt tingling in all my being the Spirit of the Lord, bearing witness within me that the words which I spoke were true. This is the work of God; the Lord is at our helm and will bear us on triumphantly, and the thing called "Mormonism," despised though it be in the world, is the greatest thing on the earth. It is the Church of God established upon the earth, never again to be thrown down. It is the little stone that was hewn out, of the mountain without hands, and it has begun to roll, and shall continue to roll until it shall fill the whole earth. Through its operations sin and iniquity will be banished from the face of the earth, and righteousness shall predominate and cover the earth, even as the waters cover the mighty deep. This is my testimony, and I bear it in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
