Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Joseph W. McMurrin

Member of the First Council of Seventy from January 21, 1898, to the present time. President of the California Mission from May, 1919, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

I thank God for the testimony I have of the truth. I know that this people have been established in these latter days by the revelation and commandment of the Almighty, and that the predictions spoken through the mouths of the old prophets in relation to the marvelous work of the latter days are being brought to pass. The work we will accomplish hereafter will continue to be a fulfilment of the sayings of the prophets, and nothing can stay it. God has promised it. He has set His hand to accomplish this work, and He has said concerning those who may oppose it, that the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be brought to naught, while the Lord of heaven continues in the accomplishment of His strange and wonderful work. These promises relative to the latter days will all be wrought out in the Lord's own time.

229There is power with God to decree and to fulfill His decree, and there is no power in the nations of men to thwart the decree that He has made. In this we are mighty, though we may be classed among the weak fixings of the world, we are nevertheless doing the thing appointed unto us of God, and the Lord will carry it through. This is my testimony, and I rejoice in it. I bear it to you in fear and trembling, and yet with an unutterable joy, a joy that passes all understanding. I know that God has established His work, and that in this Church there can be found the doctrines and the power of God unto salvation.

229 No division, contention, or quarreling brought into existence the glorious principles we have espoused. Joseph Smith approached our Father in heaven for information concerning his soul's salvation. What better source could he have gone to than the source of light? When he could not decide for himself where to go to find rest for his soul and the means of salvation, what greater power could he approach than his Father in heaven? In doing so he was in strict accord with the commandment of that Father, and in harmony also with the teachings of inspired prophets and apostles. Joseph Smith went to the only source that could lead him in the right path. If the truth was not upon the earth he approached the only power that could reveal and restore that glorious truth. That is the foundation upon which "Mormonism" rests-the foundation of the appearing of the Father and the Son to the Prophet Joseph Smith. We need no better foundation. We need look to no other source of power for the means of salvation. And this marvelous revelation to which Joseph Smith bears record, and to which we bear record, has come in fulfilment of the promises made through the mouths of all the prophets, and through the promise of the Redeemer Himself, for He predicted that before His second coming the same Gospel should again be proclaimed as a sign of that event.

230This Gospel has not come to us in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the power and demonstration of the Holy Ghost. We have not been persuaded by the logic of man to receive the truth, but we have been persuaded by the convincing power of the Holy Spirit. We have received that form of doctrine which is the power of God unto salvation, as taught by the Redeemer, and we can be assured and happy in the knowledge that we have set our hands to the plow, and that we have laid hold of the "iron rod."

230 We need not be moved by the clamor of those who oppose the truth, but we can feel that we have received that which the Lord intended us to have, and that we are in the same position as the apostles of old when the Savior asked them, after a number had forsaken Him, "Will ye also forsake Me?" Their answer was, "Where shall we go, for Thou hast the words of eternal life?" Where can we go to find peace, and comfort, and hope, if we turn from the truth? Nowhere. I joyfully bear my testimony to the truth of this marvelous work. It is the power of God. It is not a delusion; it is not a myth. It is the work foretold by the prophets, and it will prevail.

231I bear record to the truth of the Gospel. I bear record to the integrity, the honor, the uprightness and the nobility of the men who preside over us. I bear testimony to the glorious fact that with us there is divine authority. Let the world say what it may, truth is truth, and the truth in relation to this matter is that God has spoken, and has given to man His authority, and in the exercise of that power we will cry, "Peace on earth, good will to men," and we will preach the doctrines of the Gospel, administer its holy ordinances to those who believe, and save the children of men in the way appointed by the Father.
