Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Charles H. Hart

Member of the First Council of Seventy from April 9, 1906, to the present time. President of the Canadian Mission from February 1, 1927, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

The doctrines, ordinances and organization of the "Mormon" Church are true. This being so, it necessarily follows that Joseph Smith, through whom this work was inaugurated, was and is a Prophet of God. The achievements of this latter-day prophet can be accounted for upon no other hypothesis. An unbelieving world has been trying to explain him away ever since his inspired advent. After the lapse of more than a hundred years no progress has yet been made in this, except progress toward a better understanding of the true nature of this remarkable man. There was involved in his work the giving to the world of three volumes of scripture, viz: the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. If he did not receive the Book of Mormon in the way described by him, how then did he come by it? His testimony is corroborated by eleven credible and unimpeached witnesses, each of whom was cross-examined all during his lifetime by a credulous and skeptical world, without the testimony being broken down or impaired in any substantial detail. The testimony of these witnesses cannot be impeached upon any false theory that there was corrupt collusion or connivance between these witnesses and the Prophet Joseph Smith. When some of these witnesses afterwards failed to live according to the strict discipline enjoined upon Latter-day Saints, the Prophet dis-fellowshipped and excommunicated them from the Church. While some of them afterwards repented and came back into the Church and others did not live long enough to do so, yet none of them ever faltered or quibbled in the testimony theretofore given. To begin with, many tried to explain the advent of "Mormonism" upon the theory that the boy prophet was a conscious fraud.

233Today those who do not accept his teaching very generally concede his sincerity. This may well be the case since very word and act of his life gave evidence of his sincerity, including the voluntary laying down of his life as a solemn testament to his divine mission. Some of those who concede his sincerity admit that he received manifestations, but try to explain them away upon the theory that such manifestations were wholly subjective and had no objective reality; but this theory is not even plausible when it is remembered that not only the sense of sight but that of hearing and touch also were appealed to and that the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses corroborate the Prophet in his statement of the impressions thus received through the various senses. Did the visiting angel refer to golden plates, breastplate and Urim and Thummim. These physical objects were forthcoming and could be seen, felt, and, as some of the witnesses quaintly expressed it, "hefted" by them. Another certain test of the character of this work is that much of it cannot be duplicated by the wisdom of man. This is true of the three volumes of scriptures before mentioned. It is true of the wonderful organization of the Church which is praised by men versed in such matters as being one of the greatest organizations on earth. It is true of the wonderful influence exercised by him over the minds and hearts of the children of men and the fact that he and his followers enjoyed the manifestations of the Spirit as promised in Messianic days. All this is so far above the worldly wisdom of a mere youth with limited opportunities for education, that his work can be accounted for only upon the theory of divine inspiration.

233 There are some things beyond the capacity of man to successfully fabricate. One such is forgery of a volume of scripture. As the crowning glory of the Jewish race was the production through its many prophets of the Holy Bible; so a fitting companion volume cannot be written by an uninspired pretender. The inspiration of heaven cannot be successfully imitated by a designing imitator. It requires greater credulity to believe that Joseph Smith fabricated all of the so-called "Mormonism" which came through him, than to believe that he was inspired of God in this work.

234It has been my privilege to witness many spiritual manifestations in the Church, such as the healing of the sick by the laying on of hands by the Elders of the Church under circumstances precluding the healing being accounted for by mental suggestion; speaking in tongues; prophecy and its literal fulfillment; and the miraculous comforting of those who mourn by a revelation for individual consolation.

234I know that God answers prayer and that He is with the leaders of His Church today as He has been in the past, to support, comfort, protect, guide and inspire them in their high service.

234My soul is so in attune with the restored Gospel of Christ, and I have so many evidences of its truth from both reason and experience, accompanied by the witness of the Holy Ghost, that I testify that Jesus is the Christ, that God lives, that so-called "Mormonism" is His restored Gospel and Church, that Joseph Smith was a prophet, and his successors in the Presidency of the Church have been and are prophets; that the Church will never be overcome or given to another people, and that the faithful in Christ Jesus will be exalted at the last day.
