Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Levi Edgar Young

Member of the First Council of Seventy from October 6, 1909, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

The Gospel of Jesus Christ revealed in this age through the Prophet Joseph Smith is destined to be the most potent influence of all in the betterment of humanity, intellectually and morally. The Gospel is for the children of God. It is the means by which man may reach his higher heaven, and dwell eternally with Jesus Christ, who is the embodiment of all light and knowledge. In this day of the world, human society lives in economic, social, civic and ethical units. It is necessary therefore that Christianity be institutionalized. And this is what "Mormonism" does. "Mormonism" is attempting to bring about economic, social and civic righteousness. It is constructing, unifying and reforming. It regenerates life as no other force in human society can. The Gospel will bring a new nobility, a nobility of soul and will, to those who believe in the absolute truth that God lives, and that we children are His children, and are gods in embryo. The old Gospel faces a new age. It must reenforce the intellectual life of today, and cause mankind to know God and the divine message of Jesus Christ.

235God has been directing His children down through all the ages, that they might keep alive a hunger for the light of truth, though at times this light has been burning low. Today it burns with renewed power. Men are seeking Truth, and though they understand the systems of Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Spencer, Calvin, Luther and Swedenborg, they are learning to know full well that these men of much philosophy have not solved the problems of life. They have, however, helped to throw some light on the laws of Nature and the powers of the human mind. The

237Gospel of Jesus Christ solves life's meaning, for it teaches us how to live and be just; how to act and be clean; how to think and be kind.

237The new day has come. Men are determined to find Jesus Christ. They will seek and will find; they will knock and the door shall be opened. The Gospel of Jesus Christ is true. Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and his message to civilization is to look up and to seek God, wherein mankind will find their happiness. The Lord is all good and all merciful. He will reveal Himself and direct His suffering and hungry children into the newer and better life.
