Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Rey L. Pratt

Member of the First Council of Seventy from April 8, 1925, to the present time. President of the Mexican Mission from September 29, 1907, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

I bear testimony that I know by the Spirit of inspiration that God lives, and that His very Son, Jesus Christ, sent by the Father, came in the meridian of time and wrought out an atonement for all mankind, freeing them from all of the consequences of the original sin, and that He gave to man the blessed Gospel that through a fulfillment of all of its teachings and commandments, on the part of man, would redeem him from all of his own sins.

238I have a knowledge that this Gospel, after the death of the Savior and His Apostles, was departed from by the people of all the world, until, in very deed, "darkness covered the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people."

238But I also know, and I do here solemnly bear testimony to that knowledge, that, in answer to the humble prayer of the boy Joseph Smith for wisdom to aid him in finding, from among the many warring sects of the day in which he lived, the Church that God recognized as His, God, the Father, and his Son, Jesus Christ, revealed themselves to him in their true beings, each having an immortal body as tangible as man's, and the Son told Joseph that none of the churches was right and that none of them was recognized of Him; for, He said, "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

238 I testify that later this same boy, Joseph Smith, was visited by the Angel Moroni, and received from him the gold plates upon which were engraven the Book of Mormon, which contains an abridged history of the people that have dwelt on this American continent since a colony, headed by the brother of Jared, came over to this land at the time of the confounding of the languages at the Tower of Babel; and it also contains the Gospel in its fullness and an account of the handdealings of the Lord with all the people of whom it gives a history. I testify that I know that the Prophet Joseph correctly translated this record, by the power and inspiration of the Lord, into the English language.

239I testify that I know that the same John who baptized the Savior of the world appeared, as a resurrected and immortal being, to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and conferred upon them the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys and the power to baptize with water, by immersion, for the remission of sins. And I also testify that later Peter, James and John appeared in like manner and conferred upon them the Priesthood of Melchizedek which holds the keys and the power to lay on hands and confer the Holy Ghost, or to "baptize with fire," and to administer in all of the ordinances pertaining to the Gospel of Jesus Christ for the salvation of all mankind, both living and dead, throughout all the countless ages of eternity.

239I testify that I know that by the power of God thus received, Joseph Smith, on the sixth day of April, 1830, organized the Church of Jesus Christ upon the earth, and that, built upon the rock of revelation and having in it the power of the Priesthood of the living God, received by Joseph Smith and conferred by him upon his successors, it has remained to the present day, and it will remain as long as the earth remains, and the gates of hell and all of the forces that devils and evil men can bring to bear, can never and will never prevail against it.
