Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Bishop Edward Partridge

First Bishop of the Church from February 4, 1831, to May 27, 1840. Called by revelation February 4, 1831, to be the first Bishop of the Church. (D . & C. Sec . 41.) Later, when the other Bishops were ordained, he became First or Presiding Bishop.

240The following testimony is taken from a letter written by Bishop Partridge at Independence, Missouri, dated August 31, 1833, addressed to his "Dear Friends and Neighbors," and published in the January, 1835, issue of the Messenger and Advocate.

240"The Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of the Gospel of Christ, has made its appearance, and men are once more called to the holy order of God, to build up the Church of Christ, and gather the house of Israel, preparatory to the coming of the Son of Man. But, say you, how am I to know that the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the Gospel? In answer, I say, you have the testimony of men that cannot be impeached, that the Book of Mormon is true, and was translated by the gift and power of God. Those that receive the Book of Mormon, and obey it, have this further testimony: they receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. By comparing the Book of Mormon with the Gospel preached by the apostles, you will be able to judge for yourselves. "Beware, therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken of in the prophets; behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you." (Acts 13:40, 41.)

240 "The Book of Mormon contains the same Gospel that the apostles preached, and its whole drift makes men righteous and happy; and if the men who attest to the truth of the book are men of piety, and men who have sacrificed their property, and even their good name for this cause, which certainly is the case, what does it argue? Does it not argue that this work is true; that the Book of Mormon is the fulness of the Gospel, sent forth to this generation, that a people may be prepared for the coming of the Bridegroom? Surely it does; and I know that if you will be honest before God, these things will carry some conviction to your hearts.

241"I have one testimony further to add, which is the one that was promised by our Savior Himself, which is the signs that were to follow them that believe. Now, if the same signs follow in these days that followed in the days of the apostles, it argues that the Gospel is the same in this, the Church of Christ; the signs follow those who receive the Book of Mormon as the fulness of the Gospel of Christ. In many instances the sick have been healed by the laying on of the Elders' hands, and also devils cast out. Many speak with new tongues, or in other languages; some speak in a number of different languages shortly after they receive the gift; others are confined to one or two. These are not idle assertions; I know that these things are so. Some have the gift of interpretation. But say you these gifts are strange things! Well, strange as they may appear, they are the gifts of the Holy Ghost: many of the world even receive the Holy Ghost in a greater or less degree, but few in comparison receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, the gifts being peculiar to the true Church.

241"O, that you may be wise. O, that all men were willing to be as righteous as God would have them, that they might be prepared to meet Him in peace. I do know that in keeping the commandments of the Lord there is great reward. The Savior said that he that was not willing to forsake houses and lands, father, mother and all, was not worthy to be His disciple.

241"I want you to realize these things and think what it means to give up all for Christ. All the sacrifices that I have made I count as naught, when compared with the hope that I have of one day being able to exclaim with Paul, 'I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love His appearing.' I now ask, do you love His appearing? Is it your prayer that He may come in this generation? O, think on these things, and not suffer the god of this world to blind your eyes.

242"Since I have torn my affections from this world's goods; from the vanities and toys of time, and been willing to love and serve God with all my heart, and be led by His Holy Spirit, my mind has been as it were continually expanding-receiving the things of God, until glories indescribable present themselves before me, and I am frequently led to exclaim in my mind, why is it that men! rational men! will suffer themselves to be led in darkness down the gulf of despair by the enemy of all righteousness, while such glories light up the pathway of the Saints?

242"The testimony that I have borne and now bear to you in favor of the Book of Mormon, and the great things that are to take place in the last days, is such that I feel clear in my mind that I have discharged my duty, and whether you are benefitted by this communication or not, I feel that your blood will not be required at my hands; but without this communication I could not say that I felt altogether clear, as having discharged my duty. I desire that this letter may be read by all my old friends and acquaintances, and also all those into whose hands it may come, hoping that all may be benefitted by the same.

242"O, take the advice of one that wishes you well and would rejoice to meet you in the celestial kingdom of God. Humble yourselves before Him and embrace the everlasting Gospel before the judgments of God sweep you from the face of the earth; for rest assured judgments will increase in the earth until wickedness is not known upon the face thereof. Therefore I say be wise, while you have the opportunity, and not be of that number who will have to take up this lamentation, 'The summer is past, the harvest is ended, and we are not saved.'"
