Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon

Presiding Bishop of the Church from June 11, 1925, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

When the Savior was delivering that remarkable Sermon upon the Mount, among other things he said:

248"By their fruits ye shall know them. Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

248"A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit."

248I am reminded also of the wise man Solomon, who had been trained up in righteousness by his father, King David, and had become King of Israel under the most prosperous conditions, but who went astray and was led into transgression by reason of the luxuries he enjoyed. Toward the close of his life, after having tasted the bitter as well as the sweet of life, he wrote the book of Ecclesiastes, and in the closing verses of that book he makes the following declaration:

248"Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man."

248One other quotation I would like to present to you, and that is from one of the Lectures on Faith, contained in the forepart of the book of Doctrine and Covenants:

248"A religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation."

248 Frequent reference has been made already to the humble beginning of this work. I am reminded of its commencement in the pleasant homestead of Peter Whitmer, in the township of Fayette, located in that beautiful western section of New York state, a section of rolling hills and lovely lakes. While those six men were met together I believe they appreciated to some extent the tremendous power that was in the work; but whether or not they visualized its growth and development from that time to this is a question. When we think of those humble conditions in that obscure village, and then realize that today there are approximately seven hundred thousand members in the Church, located in all the states of this Union, in Canada and Mexico, in South America, in practically every civilized nation and on the Pacific islands, we comprehend what a remarkable growth it has had. Yet in all its development it has not lost in the least that humble faith and devoted spirit which characterized its beginning. When we sense also that in the hundred years that have elapsed since the beginning of this Church the most remarkable developments have occurred in the progress of civilization, and with those developments the Church has kept pace. It has met and helped to solve the problems of humanity and has presented divine truths which have changed and molded spiritual thought throughout the world for good. The doctrines declared by the Church have been constructive in their nature. They have not tended to cause doubt or disbelief in the hearts of men. On the contrary they have helped to bring men to a realization of the fundamental truths which have been declared by prophets and seers in all dispensations.

249"Mormonism" enters into every phase of the lives of its members. It molds their characters in conformity with these principles. It enters into their habits and influences them. It affects their physical beings and their mental development. It affects their hearts and their desires toward their fellow-men.

249 What are some of the effects of "Mormonism"? What have been some of the effects in all the years that it has existed? There are various things by which the faith and sincerity of the people may be measured. Particularly, there are three ways wherein the devotion of the Latter-day Saints has been evidenced in their lives. It is said that "sacrifice brings forth the blessings of heaven." It is declared in the quotation I have read that any religion that cannot require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation. If Abraham had not had the faith necessary to conform to the command given him of the Lord to sacrifice his own son, Isaac, undoubtedly he would not have been able and worthy to receive the great blessings which our Eternal Father gave to him. His obedience to that command, even though it was not required at his hands, proved his devotion, his loyalty, and his entire and complete faith in God.

250The Latter-day Saints who have accepted the Gospel in faith, and with a real desire to serve the Lord, have conformed to the principles of the Gospel, even though they might require what would appear to be sacrifice on their part; and yet I am sure that we all appreciate the fact that every sacrifice is a blessing in disguise. It is a means of progress and development for every one of us.

250One of the ways whereby men may evidence their faith, integrity and sincerity in their religion, is by restraining and controlling their physical appetites, in conformity with the principles which are offered for their welfare. In the Word of Wisdom the Latter-day Saints have the finest set of rules that is to be found, I think, anywhere, affecting the physical being of the people, and also affecting their mental progress and development.

250But there is no compulsion in this or any other principle of the Gospel. We have our free agency. If we obey, we gain the benefits and the privileges accruing therefrom.

250The death rate among the Latter-day Saints for the last few years has averaged about 7.5 per thousand. The average death rate of the United States registered area is 11.4 or more per thousand. In the matter of what are known as epidemic, endemic and infectious diseases the death rate in the United States is more than double what it is among the people of this Church. The death rate from diseases of the nervous system in the Church is less than half that of the United States. In the matter of kidney and kindred diseases which are also affected by the use of stimulants, the death rate through out the Church is about one-fourth that of the other parts of the country. These are the fruits of a good tree.

250I rejoice in the faith which I possess of the divinity of this work.
