Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Bishop David A. Smith

Second Counselor in the Presiding Bishopric from December 11, 1907, to July, 1918. First Counselor from July, 1918, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

Being of the fifth generation, my parents, grandparents, great-grandparents and great-great-grandparents, all having accepted the Gospel of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, my early training and teachings were in harmony with their beliefs and practices. I was taught, and learned to believe that I was a son of God: that I had a dwelling place with Him before coming to this earth; that I had finished my grammar grades, as it were, and had been sent here to continue my education, preparatory to entering back into His presence. I was taught to look forward to the time when all evil would be done away, when if I had been faithful I would be permitted to associate with my loved ones through all eternity, knowing them as I know them upon this earth, partaking of all the joys of this life with added ones, and none of the sorrows.

251The love manifested by my parents towards me so impressed me that I tried earnestly to so live that I might repay them for this manifestation of their sacrifice and self-denial. I was taught to keep my body and mind clean, that I should refrain from vulgar expressions or company, that liquor, tobacco, and drugs were not good for my body, that to properly fulfill the purposes of God it is necessary to have a clean dwelling place for the spirit, which I hoped to possess.

251 As I grew older I was encouraged to study the good in all with whom I came in contact, to study the scriptures and to make myself familiar with the teachings of God and of man, and during all this time kind and loving parents saw to it that nothing was left undone that they could do to have me live as God would have me live; thus during my youth I was not left to flounder in darkness, but was permitted to take advantage of the knowledge gained by others.

252During my life I have been intimately acquainted with men who have been chosen and sustained as the leaders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I know them to be God-fearing men; men who are anxious for the welfare of their fellow beings. I know that these men are the servants of God, having been commissioned by Him to act for Him on earth. I know that God will answer prayers, that He is always ready to listen to His children when they approach Him in faith and humility. Time and time again I have seen His power manifest, and oh, how great has been the joy and happiness this knowledge has brought to me. I am grateful unto God for good parents who diligently guided my footsteps through tender years and carefully moulded my early life.

252I know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that He atoned for the sins of our first parents and thus opened the gates of heaven that God's children might, through their faithfulness and by the resurrection of the just, enter back into His presence. I know that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, having authority to act for Him, and that the present leader of this people was chosen of God, and has authority to act for Him on earth.
