Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Ben E. Rich

President of the Southern States Mission from July 1, 1898, to August 28, 1908. President of the Eastern States Mission from August 28, 1908, to September 13, 1913.

I rejoice that I am going to labor in the Eastern States. I look upon that as sacred ground. It was there that the boy Prophet went into the woods, and kneeling down in solitude, asked God for wisdom. It was in that field where the heavens were opened, after centuries of darkness, and where God the Eternal Father and His Son Jesus Christ condescended to speak once more to their children upon the earth. It was there, in answer to prayer, that God sent the angel Moroni to visit the Prophet and reveal to him concerning the plates that had been hid for centuries, and which gave to the world a knowledge, then unknown. It was there that this sacred record was translated by the gift and power of God. It was there that the Almighty sent John the Baptist with the Aaronic Priesthood, with a promise that it never more would be taken from the earth until the sons of Levi did offer an offering unto God in righteousness. It was there that the Father sent Peter, James and John, who came upon their mission and bestowed the holy Melchizedek Priesthood and ordained those servants Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ. It was there that the first people in this dispensation were led down into the waters of baptism, where they were confirmed members of the Church, where the Church was organized, and where God did many wonderful things in setting up His Church and Kingdom upon the earth.

255 Not only that, it was in that section of the country that God caused the Government of the United States to be formed. That was the work of God just as well as the restoration of the Gospel. There is no church organized upon the face of the earth today whose members have such religious devotion to the Government of the United States as have the Latter-day Saints, because we believe in the statements I have made. The power of God was with the people there in organizing an independent government upon the land of Zion. That the organization of the government was accomplished by the power of God is also a part of the "Mormon" faith, and they cannot be untrue to it.

256The Gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to the earth in fulfillment of prophecy. Once more mankind is clothed with authority, and those having that authority are sent out to all the nations of the earth, and their business is to gather Israel from where they have been scattered, bring them here and teach them how to worship the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. I know that this work is true. No man has told me; I received it as Paul received his testimony-not from man. I do not bear testimony to the truthfulness of the work of God because these authorities bear testimony. I knew it before I saw a majority of them; I know it as well as they know it.

256I know that the Almighty visited Joseph Smith, that he was and is a Prophet of God, and will always stand at the head of the greatest dispensation that the world ever saw. I know, too, that his successors, after his martyrdom, as each man came, was the man that God wanted.

256I know that the testimony God has given me concerning the vision of Joseph Smith is an undying testimony that Jesus is the Christ; that He died for the sins of the world; that He was resurrected-not a mythical resurrection, but a tangible, literal resurrection from the grave.

256If you don't know that this work comes from God, ask, and the information will be given you, but ask in faith and you shall know. I testify that the Gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to the earth in fulfillment of prophecy, and I testify to it in the name of Jesus. Amen.
