Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Joseph A. McRae

President of the Western States Mission from March, 1901, to January, 1909.

257I came to the Western States mission (then called Colorado mission), as a traveling Elder on March 22, 1899. March 1, 1901, I was called to succeed Elder John W. Taylor as the president of the mission. I have enjoyed my labors all the time I have been here, and if my efforts have resulted in good, the glory belongs to my Father.

257For several months, during the early part of my mission, I had the privilege of traveling without money, as did the disciples of old, and if there are any brightest days in all my missionary experience, those few months are the ones. I shall never forget the many acts of kindness shown me by strangers whom God raised up to minister to my wants; and the power of the Lord was made manifest in my behalf many times. Since it pleased the authorities of the Church to call me to the responsible position of presiding over the mission, I have to the best of my ability discharged the duties of that calling.

257The Elders I have labored with during that time have been some of God's noblest sons. I can look over the past with nothing but satisfaction. There have been moments of sorrow of course, but they have been swallowed up in joy. There must be the bitter, God has so ordained it, else our appreciation of the sweet could not be real.

257I would sooner be a humble Elder preaching the Gospel unto the people, bearing testimony that Jesus is the Christ and that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, than to be the greatest "divine" upon the face of the earth.

258I know that this is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and, like the Apostle Paul, I know it is the power of God unto salvation, I have joy and satisfaction in my labors in preaching the Gospel unto the people of the world, and in bearing testimony wherever it is possible for my voice to be raised. I wish to give my life to the service of the Lord. The only desire of my heart is to do what good I can for my fellow-men and to preach the Gospel unto those who know not Jesus Christ.
