Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Joseph E. Robinson

President of the California Mission from April 17, 1901, to May 19, 1919.

I have a testimony of the Gospel. I know that God lives, that He hears and answers the prayer of faith. Every fiber of my being responds to this thought, that Jesus is the Christ, the only begotten Son of the Father, and our elder Brother with whom we are joint heirs to all the powers and prerogatives of our Father's kingdom, if we but keep the faith.

259There is nothing that the heart of man can conceive of, that is desirable and good, that is not included in the Gospel. There has been no system of ethics evolved that parallels the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ, as contained in the fulness of the Gospel. It does not deal with the past alone, nor with the uncertain future, but with the living issues of today. Within it is that agency that will uplift and save humanity in every land and clime, if they will but heed its teachings.

259 How signally has the Lord brought out the forces of this country victorious against overwhelming numbers and older countries. As an earnest of what the future will be, this tells me that we need not fear foreign oppression or foreign arms. God hath established here the tree of Liberty, in this land of Joseph, that the nations of the earth might find shelter under its branches and eat of its fruit; for this is the land where God shall build His city, the New Jerusalem. This is the land from whence shall go forth the law of the Lord. From this land shall go forth His word by His ministers and ambassadors; "and the power and the dominion and the greatness of His kingdom," says Daniel the prophet, "shall be given to the people of the Saints of the Most High God," with whom our interests are identified. He has said, "I will fight the battles of the Gentiles of this land. I will fight the battles of this Nation." So you and I who have faith in this word, who have the precious pearl of great price in our possession, have no doubts, or misgivings, or perplexities in relation to what the future has in store for this land of Joseph.

260I bear witness unto you that God lives; that Jesus is the Christ; that Joseph Smith was a Prophet; that the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ is the power of God unto salvation; that we have founded our faith on a sure foundation, not only of prophets, apostles, evangelists, and pastors, and deacons as we have them to dispense the living word to us daily, but in that same testimony that came to Peter when he bore witness to the Christ that He was the Son of God, and the Master said: "Man hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." In this statement I read more than the fact that a knowledge was revealed to Peter, a philosophy, or an understanding that Jesus was the Christ, but the testimony itself, burned into his soul, that Jesus was the Son of God, that he knew that God lives; and this, we are told by the Master, is life eternal, and surely the gates of hell shall not prevail against the testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ.
