Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder German E. Ellsworth

President of the Northern States Mission from July 2, 1904, to August 1, 1919.

God established this great Latter-day work through the boy Prophet Joseph Smith, who knew that God lives, and that Jesus Christ is His Son, for this was made known to him in his youth; and this knowledge continued with him all the days of his life.

261God prepared him for his great mission in the world in these last days, prepared him as an instrument to establish the Church and kingdom of our Father, which is the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ, and so I rejoice in the life of Joseph Smith.

261In a similar manner God prepared Joseph of old. He prepared John the Baptist. He gave to His only begotten Son the knowledge of who He was and reared Him under that influence to be the Redeemer of the world.

261We are not in doubt as to the purpose of Christ's mission, and therein is the beauty of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, for in it is revealed to us the true character of our Father and His earth-born Son; who they are; what they look like; and their supervision over the human family.

261This restored Gospel has been leavening the whole lump, and the world is being prepared to accept it, not in part, as at present, but as it was revealed from heaven, as to doctrine as well as to authority and organization.

261 The Christian world is beginning to believe in the restoration of the Gospel; they are accepting principles which were revealed by the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The people of the world are growing tired of having leaders that are not certain of their path, for there has been no positiveness or certainty in the declaration of the present day preachers; they have no knowledge concerning the true character of God.

262On the other hand, the positive testimony of the Elders is sweet to the hearts of the honest, for they bear witness that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that He has restored the Gospel to the earth-the Gospel of faith, repentance, and baptism-a Gospel of work which would prepare the earth for the coming of our Lord to reign thereon among His children, and all men and women who will repent and be baptized for the remission of their sins shall know of the doctrine, and know that it is of God.

262I rejoice with you as Latter-day Saints in these great truths that God has given us through the humble boy Joseph Smith. I know they have come from our Father.

262I rejoice in the fact that I am a member of the Church of Jesus Christ. It is a Church that teaches men, women and children to work to prepare themselves to enjoy the presence of our Father and His Son Jesus Christ, as well as to associate with those men who have lived before us, who, by their faith and good works, were prepared to enjoy salvation which comes by the grace of God.

262I rejoice in the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the testimony I have that God lives, and that Jesus Christ is His Son, the Savior of the world.
