Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Charles A. Callis

President of the Southern States Mission from August 28, 1908, to the present time. [Publication date, 1930.]

Latter-day Saints of all people are the most grateful, for we have received more light and truth concerning spiritual things than have any of our fellow-men. God has blessed us with the fullness of the Gospel. The Prophet Joseph Smith opened the heavenly worlds to view, and unto us, by the gift and the power of the Holy Ghost, hath been revealed truths that are withheld from the people of the world because they do not hearken unto the counsels of God. Indeed, the gifts of the Holy Ghost is a strong proof that God is no respecter of persons, because to the poor and to the rich, the learned and the ignorant, if they believe and obey the Gospel with sincere intent, is given the gift of the Holy Ghost, which "leads and guides into all truth." So, then, even the poor man who has never been in a university as a student may say, with Job, when given the Holy Ghost, "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that in the latter-day He shall stand upon the earth." He speaks from the heart, and this heart-knowledge is the most direct, the most convincing knowledge of the Gospel that we can have. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is faithfully pursuing its mission of preaching Christ and Him crucified.

267 Joseph Smith, by the gift and the power of God, translated the Book of Mormon. What are some of the beautiful truths that this sacred Nephite record teaches? Shining as gems of spiritual truth, these two great heavenly truths stand prominent: The Book of Mormon establishes the truth of the Bible. The Book of Mormon declares that Jesus was and is the Christ, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. A book declaring these two glorious truths is surely entitled to a fair and serious consideration.

268In a short time, not long hence, philosophers, scholars and statesmen will ask, Why did the people fight the introduction of the Book of Mormon, which is such a glorious and powerful witness for the Lord Jesus Christ? History will repeat itself, and this answer will be given: Jesus said, "Search the scriptures: they are they which testify of me." The Book of Mormon is scripture, it is the word of God, it testifies of His Son, and because of that, evil powers sought to prevent its translation, and the introduction of that sacred book into the homes of the people.

268Men began to lose faith in God, when "Lo, from Cumorah's lonely hill" was brought forth the Book of Mormon, that declares that Jesus is the Christ, and that men cannot gain salvation except in and through and by the Lord Jesus Christ. And so the devil, knowing the power, knowing the light that was coming into the world, wielded all his powers in fighting that book, and its translator. Joseph Smith gave up his life as a martyr; his life was given to satisfy the cruel, unrighteous demands and the hatred of those wicked men who persecuted him even to death's door.

268It has ever been the case that when new light and truth have been introduced into the world, the powers of darkness have bitterly fought the introduction of that light and truth. "Mormonism" stands for the introduction of the whole truth concerning Jesus Christ.

268The Latter-day Saints, imbued with the sense of duty, feeling that upon them rests the obligation to preach this Gospel, will go forth by the power of God in the discharge of their duty, until the testimony of Jesus, which is the "spirit of prophecy," shall spread over the world like a sea of glory, until it covers the earth from pole to pole.

268I bear testimony to the truth of the Gospel. It is my testimony that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, that the leaders of the Church are men of God, and that our prophet and leader today is a Prophet of God; and I bear this testimony in the fear of the Lord, and in the name of Jesus. Amen.
