Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder John L. Herrick

President of the Western States Mission from January 1, 1909, to June, 1919.

To me the Gospel of our Redeemer, as taught by the Latter-day Saints, presents no irrational or unreasonable theories. It holds out no false hopes but rests squarely upon individual responsibility; recognizes rewards and punishments, and makes plain once and for all, that "Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to the flesh shall reap corruption; but he that soweth to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting"

269A belief that has expression in an abiding faith in a resurrected being who has become a God, is sublime. To repent of and turn away from sin is a glorious opportunity; and to have sins remitted through the sacred ordinance of baptism is a priceless privilege. And then to have the assurance that through the imposition of hands by one who has authority, the Holy Ghost (the special office of which is to prompt and direct the believer in the way of truth) may be conferred, is indeed wonderful.

269My faith and hope, yes, the knowledge I possess convinces me that those fundamental principles are God-given for the benefit, blessing and eternal salvation of man.

269I can easily believe the force and truth of an expression used in commenting upon the works of the great philosopher and writer, Ralph Waldo Emerson, that there is to be found in all of them this underlying thought: "I delight in telling what I think, but if you ask me why I dare to say so, I am the most helpless of mortals. What I have seen teaches me to trust the Creator for what I have not seen."

270The plan of life and salvation teaches me to trust God for many things that I do not know. And it is my testimony that the Church of Jesus Christ, established in latter days through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith, the greatest prophet of modern times, will eventually triumph, for it is founded upon principles of eternal truth.
