Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Walter P. Monson

President of the Eastern States Mission from October, 1913, to June 1, 1919.

My soul is overflowing with joy and gratitude in knowing that my parents possessed the courage of their convictions to leave their European homes and come to this land of Zion, where freedom to worship God as one pleases is made a constitutional right. That they had the strong conviction of an angel having restored the Gospel, as shown by their willingness to endure the hardships and deprivations incident to pioneer life. When the desert was unfruitful and uninviting they prayed for children who might enjoy the results-to-be of their toil. They struggled on uncomplainingly, our Heavenly Father answering their prayers most generously. I rejoice in being sent from my pre-existent home to receive mortal training in an earthly home which was scantily furnished in worldly things, but richly provided with eternal wealth. I am thankful that my swaddling clothes were coarse and irritating, thereby superinducing a struggle which brought, in a measure, worldly and spiritual attainment. A debt of gratitude is acknowledged for having been taught from my earliest childhood to reverence the name of the Lord and sacrifice my life, if necessary, for His cause; to love all mankind and to pray for those who despise and persecute me.

271While yet in youth I discovered that the Lord would answer a boy's prayer. The Gospel became a living reality with me, appealing at all times to the finest sentiments and noblest emotions of my nature. I loved to do good for the joy it brought, while sorrow always resulted from wrong-doing.

272After a severe sickness when I was, as it were, raised from the dead by the power of the Lord, I felt a strong desire to live worthy to hold the authority of the priesthood and become a missionary. I thought over it, I prayed over it, after which a sweet calm would come over me. My prayers have been and are being answered. Application of limited light brought added spiritual illumination. Oh! the joy I experienced when first that Spirit bore witness to my soul that God lives; that Jesus is the Christ; that the Holy Ghost is not shorn of its pristine powers and manifestations; that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God; that the Gospel of Jesus Christ-falsely called "Mormonism"-is the celestial law given for man's development and glory. And those only, who know as I know, can understand the joy I experienced in declaring these eternal truths. It is my desire to always possess this joy which can only be realized by being found doing. No earthly power can separate me from the love of God and this testimony which I bear in all earnestness. Self-chosen sin is the only thing that will darken the soul.

272Would that I had the power to declare my humble testimony to the ends of the earth that I know these things are true: that the Gospel tree, in limb, leaf and fruit, has a growing upward tendency and needs no human props.

272In all sincerity and reverence I bear my testimony that I know that my Redeemer lives, and that if His beckonings are heeded and we follow Him, we shall come into His celestial presence and be crowned with glory, immortality and eternal life. May all to whom this testimony comes partake of the light by which it is given, I humbly pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
