Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Bishop Heber C. Iverson

President of the Northwestern States Mission from April, 1919, to June, 1922.

The Gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed to and taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith has always had such an irresistible appeal to my soul that it has overwhelmed me with a conviction which has dispelled all doubt from my mind and planted in every fibre of my being an absolute testimony of its divinity.

274By the same token, I do know that God our Father lives; that Jesus Christ our Redeemer lives; that Joseph Smith lives, and is a Prophet of the living God.

274"What man knoweth the things of man save by the spirit of man which is in him, even so also the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. For the natural man receiveth not the things of God, neither can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned." They whose spirits are properly adjusted or attuned are open to receive these messages of eternal truth. So may I say, I am of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and I do know what my religious beliefs are. They are not vague or shadowy.

274 I have an overwhelming and an irresistible conviction in my soul that God lives, that He is our Father, that Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, is His eldest Son, the first born of every creature in the spirit and the only begotten of God in the flesh, and that He lives. This sublime message from God to the Prophet Joseph Smith has come to the world. That God Himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heaven, and if the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by His power, were to make Himself visible, I say if you were to see Him today you would see Him like a man in form, like yourselves, in all the perfect image and form of a man, for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from Him.
