Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder George W. McCune

President of the Eastern States Mission from April 29, 1919, to June, 1922.

It always affords me great pleasure and soul satisfaction to bear my testimony concerning the divinity of Joseph Smith's calling and the work he established. Would that as a trumpeter of God I could indelibly impress upon the minds of all men everywhere, the imperative need of giving this momentous Latter-day message the careful consideration its importance should command.

276My testimony of the Gospel was not obtained through the avenues of extended scholastic learning, nor through reasoning ingenuity, but in direct fulfillment of our Savior's promise that, "If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God or whether I speak of myself." When entering into my missionary labors as a young man, my mind was inexorably set to "do the will of my Father," without modification or qualification, to the full limit of my power. By reason of strict adherence to this principle, undeviating from the path to this ideal, I qualified as a suitable recipient of this glorious blessing and the Savior's promise was fulfilled in my behalf. I solemnly testify to all the world that I know that Joseph Smith is a true Prophet of God, that the Church established through his instrumentality is in verity the earthly Kingdom of our Redeemer; and that the Gospel revealed through him is in very deed God's governing code, containing all the saving elements necessary for man's salvation and exaltation physically, mentally, temporally and spiritually.

276 I know these wonderful truths with greater assurance than I know anything possible to obtain by mortal processes. It is branded upon my soul with greater force than anything acquirable through mortal senses, and just as long as I assiduously strive to do my Heavenly Father's will, this testimony and knowledge burns brightly within my heart, illuminating my soul as a guiding star in every activity of life.

277Its inestimable value I place above everything else in the world, stimulating in me a sincere desire to so live that I can always conscientiously bear this testimony to my fellowmen.

277Praying our Heavenly Father to help each and every one to defend the faith; to magnify the name of God throughout your lives, that in due time, if not already, you'll experience the same blessed joy I now derive from the possession of this wonderful testimony.
