Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Nephi Jensen

President of the Canadian Mission from June 17, 1919, to March, 1923.

"Mormonism" is the simple Christianity of Christ's time. It is a religion of industrial, social, ethical, moral and spiritual vitality. It has redeemed deserts and made the waste places wave with golden harvests and smile with radiant flowers. It has made villages and marts of trade grow up in a wilderness. It made the note of praise ring out in the Rocky Mountain fastnesses, where no sound had broke the stillness but the howl of wild beasts and the war whoop of savages. It has fostered the love of music, art and education. It has built schoolhouses in the valleys and colleges and universities on the hillsides.

278It has planted in the hearts of its devotees the deepest faith and the purest love for God and man. It has fired its followers with a zeal for righteousness that sends them to the farthest ends of the world to hold aloft the banner of Christ, without the hope of earthly compensation.

278It has "put a soul under the ribs of death." It has turned despair into hope. It has brought a living faith to a doubting world. It has made bad men good and good men better. It has made friendship real and intensified the ties of kindred. It has turned home into a heaven. It has made fatherhood sacred and deified motherhood. It has made heroes of men and heroines of women. It has eternalized the story of love. It has put sincerity into prayer and given a soul to worship.

278The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a divine institution. Its foundation was laid by the hand of God. Its superstructure was erected by men who were inspired by the Spirit of the Almighty. This Church is vested with the priesthood and power of God. It has the divine right to bind on earth and in heaven. All the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, visions, dreams, inspirations, revelations and prophecy are manifested in its administrations. It is the depository of the riches of God's truth and wisdom and knowledge.

279This Church is God's divine instrumentality to warn the world for the last time to turn from wickedness to righteousness. It is the herald of the golden reign of peace. It is its high mission to prepare a people that will be true enough and pure enough to receive the Christ of God, when he comes to reign from the rivers to the ends of the earth. Amen.
