Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder John M. Knight

President of the Western States Mission from June, 1919, to April, 1928.

The greatest joys of my life have come to me because of the testimony I have of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It has lightened my pathway in life and filled my heart with happiness and thanksgiving.

280I believe implicitly in the mission of Jesus Christ. Within my heart I know that he is in very deed the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, and that he came in the meridian of time and established His Church and gave authority to men to preach the Gospel of repentance to all nations.

280He was crucified and died to redeem a world. His apostles carried on and eventually sealed their testimonies with their lives. Apostasy eventually overcame the Church and the Priesthood was taken from among men. As a result, a long period of gross spiritual darkness covered the earth.

280I further bear testimony that in the nineteenth century, God again spoke from the heavens to a young man, Joseph Smith, introducing anew His beloved Son, Jesus Christ. Instructions were given by the Christ and by angels sent from the presence of God to the boy Prophet, in order that he might restore the Gospel in all its power and glory.

280Joseph Smith was true to his calling and never permitted the message entrusted to his care to be throttled by any power, social, economic or military; and through him every key, power and authority, together with every principle and doctrine essential to the complete salvation and exaltation of man, may be attained.

281Joseph Smith was the pioneer and spiritual pathfinder of the past century. His successors have been equally endowed with the same power and authority and have carried forward the work of the Master successfully and gloriously.

281For forty years I have found my greatest joy in bearing witness to these great and superb truths. The knowledge of the divinity of the Gospel has been borne in upon my soul by the power of the Holy Spirit and by its operation I know beyond the peradventure of a doubt that these things are true.
