Various General Authorities, Joseph E. Cardon, Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of the Church ( 1930)

Elder Winslow F. Smith

President of the Northern States Mission from August 1, 1919, to May, 1923.

"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. "But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed."

282Pondering this promise that James had made, and believing in his heart that the Lord would hear and answer his prayer, Joseph Smith retired to the grove on his father's farm, and there appealed to the Lord in humble supplication. His mind was filled with doubt. He needed wisdom, so he followed the above quoted injunction of James. Just what the answer to his prayer would be, and how it would come, he knew not, but of one thing he was certain, an answer he would receive. Great was his surprize, unbounded his joy, when the glorious vision of the Father and the Son burst upon him, and from their lips he received the instruction for which his heart yearned.

282This vision, which was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith a hundred years ago, and the wonderful blessings from our Father which followed it, are second in importance only to the earthly mission of the Lord Jesus Christ, two thousand years ago. It marked the beginning of the great Latter-day work. It ushered in the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times. In the spiritual darkness, which had covered the earth, it set up a light, and that light to-day shines on Mt. Zion, a beacon to all the world.

282The Lord has sent forth his divinely ordained servants, calling men to repentance, and promising them exaltation in His

284Kingdom, if they will yield obedience to His law, and hold out faithfully to the end. It is a wonderful promise, and all who heed the call and live righteously before the Lord receive from Him the positive assurance that He lives, and that His Church is again on the earth.

284We Latter-day Saints do not doubt the Gospel being true, nor are we in doubt as to the leaders of the Church being men of God. Through the Holy Ghost we know these things. Our faith in what the Lord has in store for us increases day by day, and we strive to live near to Him, thus meriting His richest blessings. We sense the great responsibility that our Father has placed on us, and feel it our bounden duty to declare the glad message of life and salvation to all the world. We send our missionaries, by the thousands, to nearly all lands and climes, fearlessly declaring that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that in this day and age our Heavenly Father has raised up a Prophet, and established again His Church with its Priesthood, and all its gifts, powers, and blessings. We aver that He is our Father, that He loves us, His children, and that He desires us to walk uprightly before Him.

284I rejoice in being called to bear this message to the world, in the mission field. I go forth gladly calling men to repentance, and warning them of the judgments that are to come. I am grateful for the magnanimity of the Gospel plan. It is suited to the weakest and the humblest, yet asks much from the strong and the mighty. I marvel at the magnitude of it, so simple that a child can live it, yet so deep that it invites the most profound consideration by the student. I stand in awe before its possibilities. It holds out eternal progression to the faithful. It is God's plan for His children-the grandest thing on earth. We are all free to accept or reject His offer. He does not compel us to be saved. He loves us, and seeks to persuade us to obey. If we do yield obedience, and remain steadfast to the end, exaltation in His kingdom is the reward.

284My testimony is that the Gospel is true-that the plan of life and salvation is here for you and for me-that eternal life will be ours if we live for it, because it has been promised by the Eternal Father himself.
