Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

iiiFOREWORD

iiiAs this book comes from the press, President Heber J. Grant is preparing to leave Salt Lake City for Great Britain to participate in the commemoration of an eventful and fruitful century of activity in the British Mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And yet, so far as the author is aware, this is the first volume to be published on the story of the British Mission during the entire one hundred years of "Mormon" activity in the United Kingdom. It is earnestly to be hoped that it will not be the last. The contributions of British subjects to the Church and of the Church to British subjects are too numerous and notable to deserve obscurity. A century of "Mormonism" in Great Britain has given many lessons worth knowing and many stories worth telling, and he who contributes further to bringing them to light is serving the perpetuation of worthy tradition and mighty accomplishment.

No writer will ever exhaust the story of the British Mission. Ninety-nine volumes of the Millennial Star, averaging more than eight hundred pages each, have fallen far short of telling the complete story, and the voluminous Journal History in the Church Historian's Office leaves much to be recorded and much that is forever lost, so far as perishable and incomplete manmade records are concerned. But even such sources as are available may never be completely sounded by any searcher. Realizing the inexhaustible nature of the task, no attempt has been made in this brief volume to record statistical or chronological detail to any extensive degree. Rather, emphasis has been placed on "beginnings," and after the "beginnings" have been chronicled, the closing pages of the book have been devoted to broad, long-range generalizations and interpretations.

ivThat this Church should preach the Gospel to "every nation, kindred, tongue and people" was a matter of divine injunction, and the most logical starting point, outside the confines of continental America, where the restoration occurred, was Great Britain, the mother country of the world's greatest empire. The contributions of the Church to the British Mission and of the British Mission to the Church have been mutual, and by no means one-sided. A few of those contributions are herein noted and summarized.

ivThe story of "Mormon" activity in Great Britain is almost as old as the story of the restoration itself, and the results of the labors in this field have been vital beyond power of estimation to the welfare and growth of the Church. Nearly six thousand missionaries have been sent by the Church to Great Britain. More than one hundred and twenty-six thousand loyal British subjects have joined the Church, of whom more than fifty-two thousand have emigrated to be closer to its headquarters. A century of such interchange of thought, culture, ideals, principles and man power has been productive of inestimable consequences which deserve a more exhaustive consideration, and which, it is to be hoped, will be given, as future writers and researchers undertake to investigate and write upon this highly worthy field.
