Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

9CHAPTER 1

9WHEN THE GOSPEL CAME TO BRITAIN

9The story of the British Mission is an intense human drama of a century's duration. Great characters have played leading roles in its development. Tens of thousands of human lives have been touched, affected, uplifted. The goodness and power of God have been manifest; the sick have been healed; the needy have received their needs; the sorrowing have been comforted; the wayward have been caused to return to paths of righteousness; the troubled and tormented have been given peace; truth-seekers—wanderers on uncertain roads—have found shelter from the storms of life, and soul-satisfying joy.

9From the British Isles has ever come stalwart stock—defenders of the faith, carriers of the glad message—men and women who have had the courage of their convictions, and whose convictions have been born of a testimony of truth. They and their children have largely supplied the rank and file of the Church and the majority of its leaders.

Persecution has cast its shadow over the British Mission. The "Mormons" have been perennial subjects of attack by the spoken and written word. Mobbings have occurred; violence has been used. Traveling missionaries and resident members have been shunned, ridiculed, maltreated; but the sustaining hand of the Lord has ever been there to strengthen and bless the faithful.

10Achievement and disappointment have entered, retired and reappeared; but steady progress has been certain and unceasing. Tragedy and comedy, with all of life's intermediate experiences, have taken place, as the action has proceeded. The situations have been real, vital, thrilling. Few stories have equal possibilities for human appeal. The story of the British Mission is a story of courageous lives, of strong convictions, of fearless action.

10It would be pleasing to record that all was well with the Church when the Gospel first came to Britain in 1837, but history deals with stern realities, and such was not the case.

10A financial panic swept over the United States in 1837. Reckless speculation, loose banking and inordinate expansion of paper currency had been in course for two or three years. The crash came soon after Mr. Van Buren became President of the United States in March, 1837. Distress was nationwide. A veritable avalanche of petitions for relief swept into the White House. Financial institutions throughout the country were forced to close their doors. Failures in the city of New York alone during the months of March and April amounted to more than one hundred million dollars. The Church and its members, with the whole nation, were unavoidably drawn into this financial catastrophe, and grievous troubles followed.

At this time Church headquarters were in Kirtland, Ohio. Previously, to render financial aid and facility there, the Prophet and his associates decided to organize a Kirtland Safety Society Bank, for which articles of agreement were prepared in November, 1836. Through prejudice, the State of Ohio refused to grant a bank charter, so in January, 1837, the undertaking was launched merely as the Kirtland Safety Society, complying with all the requisite laws for such an institution. Church leaders and other members subscribed for stock, and the business became operative.

11The repeated warnings of the Prophet were not generally heeded, and he, therefore, disposed of his holdings and withdrew from the Society in the late spring, at which time he stated that after five months' experience he was satisfied that "no institution of the kind, established upon just and righteous principles for the blessing, not only to the Church but to the whole nation, would be suffered to continue its operations in such an age of darkness and speculation and wickedness."

11Then the cashier, a former trusted clerk of the Prophet, became disaffected because of transgression, and misappropriated over twenty thousand dollars—which he later confessed. Although the stockholders pledged redemption of all outstanding liabilities, the Society was forced to discontinue business, with many others throughout the nation.

Besides this widespread financial disaster, other causes contributed to the distress of the Church at this time. Obligations, with extreme sacrifice, had been incurred during the construction of the Kirtland Temple. The Saints were being persecuted and driven from their homes in other parts of the country, and were moving in poverty to Kirtland for relief. At considerable expense large tracts of land were obtained for their accommodation. Disaffection was contagious; apostasy was widespread. It was a day of testing for the souls of men, and only the pure in heart survived. Amid these grievous scenes the Prophet wrote:

12"At this time the spirit of speculation in lands and property of all kinds, which was so prevalent throughout the whole nation, was taking deep root in the Church. As the fruits of this spirit, evil-surmising, fault-finding, disunion, dissension, and apostasy followed in quick succession, and it seems as though all the powers of earth and hell were combining their influence in an especial manner to overthrow the Church at once, and make a final end. Other banking institutions refused the Kirtland Safety Society's notes. The enemy abroad, and apostates in our midst, united in their schemes; flour and provisions were turned towards other markets, and many became disaffected toward me, as though I were the sole cause of those very evils I was most strenuously striving against, and which were actually brought upon us by the brethren not giving heed to my counsel.

12"No quorum in the Church was entirely exempt from the influence of those false spirits who are striving against me for the mastery; even some of the Twelve were so far lost to their high and responsible calling as to begin to take sides, secretly, with the enemy. History of the Church, Vol. II, pp. 487-8.

12So much by way of introduction, to tie up the story of the British Mission with the happenings in Kirtland, and to give insight into the spirit of the times. The Prophet continues:

"In this state of things, and but a few weeks before the Twelve were expecting to meet in full quorum (some of them having been absent for some time), God revealed to me that something new must be done for the salvation of His Church. And on or about the 1st of June, 1837, Heber C. Kimball, one of the Twelve, was set apart by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, prayer and laying on of hands, of the First Presidency, to preside over a mission to England, to be the first foreign mission of the Church of Christ in the last days. While we were ordaining him, Orson Hyde, another of the Twelve, came in, and upon listening to what was passing, his heart melted within him (for he had begun to drink of the cup filled with the overflowings of speculation); he acknowledged all of his faults, asked forgiveness, and offered to accompany President Kimball on his mission to England. His offer was accepted, and he was set apart for that purpose."—History of the Church, Vol. II, p. 489.

13Heber C. Kimball, be it remembered, was of hardy New England stock, a native son of Vermont, and a potter by trade, who, with Brigham Young, heard and accepted the Gospel at Mendon, New York, and subsequently sold all his possessions and moved to the body of the Church to be near the Prophet, where he devoted most of his time to the service of the Church in traveling throughout the states, preaching, and in doing other important labor. He engaged in his trade as opportunity afforded, for the support of himself and family. At the time the mission call to Great Britain came to him he was in his thirty-sixth year—a vigorous and able minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. He had been ordained to the Apostleship two years previous.

13Elder Orson Hyde was also New England born, and had been an Apostle for two years when he accepted the British Mission call as a young man of thirty-two. He, too, had served the Church well on former missions, and possessed outstanding abilities.

13The feelings of Heber C. Kimball, when he was called to this stupendous task, are well described in his own words, and those of his biographer, Elder Orson F. Whitney, as follows:

"'On Sunday, the 4th day of June, 1837, the Prophet Joseph came to me, while I was seated in front of the stand, above the Sacrament table, on the Melchizedek side of the Temple in Kirtland, and whispering to me said: "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me: Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my Gospel, and open the door of salvation to that nation."

14"The thought was overpowering. He had been surprised at his call to the Apostleship; now he was overwhelmed. Like Jeremiah he staggered under the weight of his own weakness, exclaiming in self-humiliation: 'O Lord, I am a man of stammering tongue, and altogether unfit for such a work; how can I go to preach in that land, which is so famed throughout Christendom for learning, knowledge and piety; the nursery of religion; and to a people whose intelligence is proverbial!'

14"'Feeling my weakness to go upon such an errand, I asked the Prophet if Brother Brigham might go with me. He replied that he wanted Brother Brigham to stay with him, for he had something else for him to do. The idea of such a mission was almost more than I could bear up under. I was almost ready to sink under the burden which was placed upon me.

14"'However, all these considerations did not deter me from the path of duty; the moment I understood the will of my Heavenly Father, I felt a determination to go at all hazards, believing that He would support me by His almighty power, and endow me with every qualification that I needed; and although my family was dear to me, and I should have to leave them almost destitute, I felt that the cause of truth, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, outweighed every other consideration.'"—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 116.

Dr. Willard Richards, also one of New England's stalwart sons, then in his thirty-third year, had joined the Church six months before, and shortly after had been promised by Heber C. Kimball that he should accompany the Twelve, or those who should go, on their first mission to Europe, which Elder Kimball had prophesied would come. Elder Richards had returned from the Eastern States, where he had been on a business mission for the Church, the day before the departure for Britain, and was set apart to go on the mission.

15The other member of the party from Kirtland was Joseph Fielding, a native of England, born in Bedford-shire in 1797, who emigrated to Canada in 1832 and four years later became a convert to "Mormonism" as a result of the Canadian labors of Parley P. Pratt. Joseph Fielding then moved to Kirtland, soon to return to his native land with the first missionary party, to bear witness of the Gospel restoration to his kinsmen and friends. Through his brother, the Reverend James Fielding of Preston, Lancashire, the first chapel in England in which the Gospel was preached was later opened—and closed.

15There was much interest in Canada in the British Mission undertaking. Many, like Joseph Fielding, had left friends and loved ones in the mother country, to better their opportunities in a new land, and had there heard and accepted the Gospel. Like all who are possessed of the true Christ-like spirit, it was their desire to pass on to others this true plan of life that had brought such joy and comfort into their own lives. Many letters bearing Gospel tidings had crossed the sea. Many in England were informed of Gospel truths and of the progress of the Church, and were awaiting with expectancy the coming of authorized servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, who could expound the scriptures with the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, and perform required ordinances of the Gospel in the name of God. Thus the way for the coming of the Gospel to Great Britain was made easier by the labors of the missionaries in Canada.

Doubtless this Canadian interest was an added argument in favor of opening the mission to Britain at this time; and without doubt affairs in Kirtland brought pressure to bear upon the undertaking; but the fundamental reason does not lie in either of these causes. For seven years the public ministry of the Church had been conducted in America. The time was ripe for the Gospel to go forth to the other nations of the earth. The Lord had so spoken. The particular charge of the Church is to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ to all the world; and Great Britain, rightly, was designated to be the first benefactor. It was an age when religious feeling ran deep; it was a day when thousands of truth-hungry men and women were waiting and praying that their souls might be fed, as later events testify. The petitions that were sent to heaven were many, and earnest and fervent, from both sides of the water; and the Lord opened up the way for the granting of those petitions.

16The day decided upon for the departure from Kirtland, June 13th, 1837, quickly arrived. The Kirtland party of four—Elders Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, and Willard Richards, and Priest Joseph Fielding—were to travel to New York City by way of Buffalo, where they were to meet three missionaries from Canada—Brothers John Goodson, Isaac Russell, and John Snyder—who had been chosen to join the mission, and who were anxious to bear witness to friends and relatives on the other side of the water.

In this day of rapid communication and luxurious travel it is hard to understand the departing feelings of those who undertook such a journey in that day of uncertainty. Had the Prophet let his human desires prevail, he would in all probability have chosen to have these faithful brethren remain. They were leaving well-loved families in uncertain circumstances without visible means of support, and with only remote hopes for a distant reunion. They were leaving homes for a life of wandering; friends for strangers; the known for the unknown. And to what purpose? The Lord had spoken! That was purpose enough for those men of courage—mighty among men, but humble and weak before God. They were departing upon one of the greatest missionary journeys of all time, to introduce the Gospel, restored anew, into one of the greatest nations of all history. A stupendous task for mere men—but the Lord was with them, and, in their faith and devotion, it never occurred to them to question that He had chosen such a troublous time for this undertaking, nor to doubt the wisdom of the task that had come to them through the Prophet.

17The parting of Heber C. Kimball from his family is thus feelingly described by Elder Robert B. Thompson:

17"The day appointed for the departure of the Elders to England having arrived, I stepped into the house of Brother Kimball to ascertain when he would start, as I expected to accompany him two or three hundred miles, intending to spend my labors in Canada that season.

17"The door being partly open, I entered and felt struck with the sight which presented itself to my view. I would have retired, thinking that I was intruding, but I felt riveted to the spot. The father was pouring out his soul to that 'God who rules on high . . .' that He would grant him a prosperous voyage across the mighty ocean, and make him useful wherever his lot should be cast, and that He who careth for sparrows, and feedeth the young ravens when they cry, would supply the wants of his wife and little ones in his absence.

"He, then, like the patriarchs, and by virtue of his office, laid his hands upon their heads individually, leaving a father's blessing upon them, and commending them to the care and protection of God, while he should be engaged in preaching the Gospel in a foreign land. While thus engaged his voice was almost lost in the sobs of those around, who tried in vain to suppress them. The idea of being separated from their protector and father for so long a time was indeed painful. He proceeded, but his heart was too much affected to do so regularly. His emotions were great, and he was obliged to stop at intervals, while the big tears rolled down his cheeks—an index to the feelings which reigned in his bosom. My heart was not stout enough to refrain; in spite of myself I wept, and mingled my tears with theirs. At the same time I felt thankful that I had the privilege of contemplating such a scene. I realized that nothing could induce that man to tear himself from so affectionate a family group, from his partner and children who were so dear to him—nothing but a sense of duty and love to God and an attachment to His cause."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 120, 121.

18The missionaries had little money. Mary Fielding gave Heber C. Kimball five dollars with which he paid his own fare and that of Orson Hyde on the Lake Erie boat for Buffalo. The Canadian brethren did not meet them there as prearranged, but joined the party in New York, which made seven in all. On the way, Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards departed from their companions to call at the home of Elder Richards' father, where his brother paid him a forty-dollar debt, which enabled them to continue their journey to New York, where they arrived on June 22nd.

A good vessel bound for Liverpool was sailing on the following day, but they did not have sufficient funds among them to pay for passage and procure the necessary outfit, which in those days usually included both bedding and food. Elder Elijah Fordham was the only member of the Church known to be living in the great city of New York at that time. He met them, but having no home of his own, took them to the home of his sister-in-law, where they did not stay because of expenses; "and so," says Heber C. Kimball, "we hired a small room in an unfinished storehouse of Brother Fordham's father, who was very wealthy, as he owned many storehouses and buildings, but never invited us into his house to sleep or eat, though he did invite us to assist him two days in raising a building, as a compensation for lying on his storehouse floor."

19On the 23rd of June the party booked passage on the Garrick, which was to sail on July 1st. On Sunday, June 25th, Elder Kimball records:

19"We fasted, prayed, administered the Sacrament, held council for the success of the mission, and had a joyful time. In the afternoon two sectarian priests came in, to find fault, but they were soon confounded and left.

19On the 28th we deposited one hundred eighty of Orson Hyde's Timely Warnings in the New York post office, addressed to the priests and ministers of different denominations in that city. We also distributed many to the citizens, and at the same time conversed with them on the subject of the Gospel."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 123.

19At ten o'clock on the morning of July 1st, 1837, the Garrick, a nine-hundred ton sailing vessel, weighed anchor. It was with intermingled feelings of regret and joy that the brethren saw their homeland sink beyond the horizon.

19Those early missionaries did not wait until they reached their destination before they began to deliver their message. They were ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and as such, the world was their field, and every son and daughter of God their particular charge.

A sick child on board, whom the ship's doctor had given up to die, gave Elder Kimball opportunity to preach the healing power of God to its parents. They had prepared to consign their little one to a watery grave, and were vitally interested. Secretly, Elder Kimball blessed the child and rebuked the disease that was preying upon it—this in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. From that time on it began to improve, and in three days was playing about the ship in good health. Elder Kimball told the parents what he had done, and they acknowledged the hand of God in the recovery.

20On the last Sunday out, July 16th, Brother Kimball sought permission from the captain for one of the brethren to preach on board. It was readily granted, and a meeting was called for the afternoon on the aft quarter deck. Elder Hyde was the speaker, and chose the resurrection for his theme. He spoke eloquently, powerfully and sincerely, to a congregation of between two and three hundred persons, who listened with deep interest to truths that were strange, yet not foreign to their understanding. Witness a picture long to be remembered—mid ocean; the sea and the sky; a frail craft with sails full spread; weather-beaten seamen and seasoned passengers—both Christian and Jew—of English, Irish, Scotch, French, German and other nationalities, all listening to an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ—a special witness—declaring truths that feed the hungering souls of men—truths that the Master declared, but that the world has undervalued and lost. Men of many nations heard convincing testimony that day. A committee was appointed by the congregation to return thanks to the missionaries for their service.

The passage had been favorable. The coast of Ireland was sighted on the 18th, and at daybreak on the 20th the Garrick anchored in the River Mersey opposite Liverpool, twenty days out of the harbor at New York. The South America, another packet ship that had left New York at the same time, arrived a few lengths behind, thereby losing a wager of ten thousand dollars that had been made between the operators of the ships on the day of starting. Elder Kimball recorded:

21"When we first sighted Liverpool I went to the side of the vessel and poured out my soul in praise and thanksgiving to God for the prosperous voyage and for all the mercies which He had vouchsafed to me, and while thus engaged, and contemplating the scene presented to my view, the Spirit of the Lord rested down upon me in a powerful manner, and my soul was filled with love and gratitude. I felt humble, while I covenanted to dedicate myself to God, and to love and serve Him with all my heart.

21"Immediately after we anchored, a small boat came alongside, when several of the passengers, with Brothers Hyde, Richards, Goodson and myself, got in and went to shore. When we were within six or seven feet of the pier, I leaped on shore, followed by Elders Hyde and Richards, and for the first time in my life I stood on British ground, among strangers, whose manners and customs were different from my own. My feelings at that time were peculiar, particularly when I realized the importance and extent of my mission—the work to which I had been appointed and in which I was shortly to be engaged. However, I put my trust in God, believing that He would assist me in publishing the truth, give me utterance, and be a present help in time of need."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 130-131.

21Such, in brief, are the conditions under which the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ first made its entrance upon British shores in modern times. Such is the manner in which the prophetic world-wide mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints first began its reach beyond the shores of continental America.
