Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

22CHAPTER 2

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC22TRUTH PROCLAIMED IN VAUXHALL CHAPEL

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC22Humility is a virtue that well becomes servants of the Lord. Humility and a message of truth were virtually the entire stock-in-trade of Heber C. Kimball and his associates when they arrived in the port of Liverpool on July 20th, 1837. Brother Heber, Brother Orson Hyde and Brother Willard Richards were penniless. The means of the other four members of the party were very limited.

22They were strangers in a strange land, upon their own resources, separated from home aid and home news by a month's travel, with no precedent to follow, no headquarters in Britain to communicate with, no human source of advice or direction. The work was before them. The task loomed mountain-high—everything to do, no trails broken, no paths beaten. With these prospects, if they may be termed such, the brethren walked the streets of Liverpool—and only the poor and downcast may know how depressing the streets of Liverpool may be. Says Elder Kimball of this time:

22"Elders Hyde, Richards, and myself, being without purse or scrip, wandered in the streets of Liverpool, where wealth and luxury abound side by side with penury and want. I there met the rich attired in the most costly dresses, and the next minute was saluted with the cries of the poor, with scarce covering sufficient to screen them from the weather. Such a wide distinction I never saw before. Looking for a place to lodge in, we found a room belonging to a widow in Union Street, which we engaged for a few days."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 131.

23Under such conditions, depression of spirit is understandable. Under such conditions God-fearing men are led to turn unrestrainedly towards the God of heaven, the only Friend who is always approachable, who always gives comfort, who always aids and counsels. And to this all-wise heavenly Friend the brethren turned at this time as the bar of highest and last appeal.

23During the brief time spent in Liverpool, council meetings were held, during which hearts were opened, souls were unburdened, and the Lord was earnestly sought, for direction and for success. The appeals of the brethren were not unheeded. They felt the spirit and power of God with them; they were encouraged and lifted from a passing shadow of doubt and gloom. Although of themselves they continued to feel as weak instruments, they did not discount that they were on the business of the Master, and that as His commissioned servants they were entitled to comfort, protection, support and guidance. These they received. The answer came: Go to Preston.

23Preston, Lancashire, England, a manufacturing town on the River Ribble and about thirty miles in a northerly direction from Liverpool, was now their destination. On Saturday, July 22nd, they took coach from Liverpool and arrived at their journey's end about four o'clock in the afternoon.

It was election day in Preston. Queen Victoria had ascended the throne but a short time before their arrival in Britain, and had called for a general election of members of Parliament. The town was at its gayest. Bands were playing; flags were flying; men, women and children were parading and frolicking; streets were bedecked with varicolored streamers and ribbons, bearing mottoes and catch-phrases such as one would expect to see on occasions of great political movements. Supporters of candidates apparently had left nothing undone that could reasonably have added to the day's festivities.

24Just as the coach carrying the missionaries reached its destination, a large banner was unfurled almost above their heads. In bold gilt letters it bore the inscription: "Truth Will Prevail." With joy in their hearts the stalwart messengers of truth caught the spirit of the favorable omen, and cried aloud: "Amen! Thanks be to God! Truth will prevail!"

24With the exception of Joseph Fielding the brethren took lodgings in Wilfred Street at the home of a widow. Joseph Fielding went in search of his brother, the Reverend James Fielding, pastor of a vigorous congregation and modest chapel in Preston. Joseph was received kindly, joyfully, and accepted an invitation for other members of the party to call at the home that evening. Elders Kimball, Hyde and John Goodson, with Joseph Fielding, filled the appointment. Besides the Reverend Mr. Fielding, they were met by his brother-in-law, Mr. Watson, also a minister, who lived in Bedford. The evening was not of the chatty, gossipy variety that is sometimes indulged in while more important matters wait. The time was spent in serious and earnest discussion of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and its restoration, and the small gathering did not break up until well into the night. There some deep impressions were made.

24The next morning Mrs. Watson—Mr. Fielding's sister—sent each of the brethren a half crown; and, it being the Sabbath, they received and gladly accepted an invitation from Mr. Fielding to hear him address his own congregation in Vauxhall Chapel at the morning service.

25Mr. Fielding had been informed by letter of the restoration of the Gospel, of the progress of the Church in America, and of the newly-restored doctrines, taught by the Master, but not generally accepted by religionists. He had likewise been informed, and had advised his congregation, of the coming of the missionaries from America. He had assured his flock that they could place unrestrained confidence in the statements of his brother, Joseph Fielding, concerning the Church. Many of his following, particularly the more earnest and devout, had been praying for the coming of the message and messengers of light and new hope. They were prepared and expectant.

25Of the first service attended in Vauxhall Chapel Heber C. Kimball says: "We sat before him, praying to the Lord to open up the way for us to preach."

25The prayer was answered. Without any request for the privilege having been made, of his own accord, at the close of his service, Mr. Fielding announced that an Elder of the Latter-day Saints would preach in Vauxhall Chapel at three o'clock that afternoon. An unusually large congregation assembled at the given hour. As first speaker, Elder Kimball describes this initial public meeting in Great Britain:

25"I declared that an angel had visited the earth, and committed the everlasting Gospel to man; called their attention to the first principles of the Gospel, and gave them a brief history of the work which the Lord had commenced on the earth; after which Elder Hyde bore testimony to the same, which was received by many with whom I afterwards conversed; they cried "Glory to God!" and rejoiced that the Lord had sent His servants unto them. Thus was the key turned and the Gospel dispensation opened on the first Sabbath after landing in England."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 137.

26A place of worship had been opened; truth had been proclaimed from the pulpit; a large congregation had listened and had been impressed. The work was actually under way. But a few days before in Liverpool this progress would have seemed incredible. But all things are possible with God, and mighty works can be accomplished by His servants.

26The labors of the first meeting bore fruit. Invitations were given and accepted to preach from the same pulpit at the Sunday evening service, and on the following Wednesday evening. On Sunday evening Elder Goodson spoke and Joseph Fielding bore testimony. On Wednesday Elder Hyde spoke and Elder Richards bore testimony. On both occasions audiences overfilled Vauxhall Chapel. Many were convinced, and rejoiced. As the Reverend James Fielding later said—when he was less friendly: "Kimball bored the holes; Goodson drove the nails, and Hyde clinched them." But the Lord was directing, and the honest in heart never knowingly turn their faces from truth.
