Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

27CHAPTER 3

27THE FIRST FRUITS OF BRITISH LABORS

27Administering to the spiritual needs of men is a glorious business, but when it becomes a means of livelihood it becomes a dangerous business, and jeopardizes the happiness and salvation of both the pastor and the flock. A striking illustration of this truth is found in the story of the Reverend Mr. James Fielding, of Preston, Lancashire.

27That he, in the summer of 1837, had a testimony of the restoration, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, is almost a certainty. His brother, Joseph Fielding, and his two sisters, Mary and Mercy Fielding, had accepted the truth in Canada, and by letter had passed on knowledge of the life-giving truths to their reverend brother in England, on the strength of which he had prepared himself and his congregation for the coming of the missionaries. He had kindly received and entertained them; had publicly borne witness of their veracity; had, without solicitation, three times opened Vauxhall Chapel for them to preach in, and, undeniably, had himself been impressed.

27Then came the test. Communicants are the paid minister's customers, and as a matter of sound business he resents their loss. The business instinct in Mr. Fielding—as in so many of his kind—overshadowed the altruistic instinct. Livelihood and the devil were ranged on one side; conscience and conviction of truth on the other. As far as Mr. Fielding personally was concerned, the livelihood-devil league won—but the progress of the Lord's work was unimpeded.

28It came about in this manner. Truth appealed to Mr. Fielding's congregation, and many applied for baptism at the hands of the newly-arrived missionaries. Mr. Fielding, as a minister, held a position of some prominence and of some income. Should he humble himself and enter the waters of baptism as a lay member of the restored Church of Christ, which he would have to do, he would lose his prominence, and his income, as a minister. Should his flock thus comply with the requirements of the Gospel the result would be the same. And so, Vauxhall Chapel was closed to the missionaries. Of this occurrence Heber C. Kimball says:

28"The Reverend James Fielding, who had so kindly invited us to preach in his chapel, learning that a number of his members believed our testimony, and that some had requested to be baptized, shut his doors against us and would not suffer us to preach in his chapel any more; alleging for an excuse that we had preached the doctrine of baptism for the remission of sins, contrary to our arrangement with him.

"I need scarcely assure my friends that nothing was said to him from which any inference could be drawn that we should suppress the doctrine of baptism. We deem it too important a doctrine to lay aside for any privilege we could receive from mortals. Mr. Fielding had been apprised of our doctrines before we saw him, having received several communications from his brother Joseph Fielding and his two sisters, Mary and Mercy, who wrote to him from Canada, in which letters our doctrines were clearly laid down. We likewise conversed with him on the subject at our interview. He, having been traditioned to believe in infant baptism, and having preached and practiced the same a number of years, saw the situation he would be placed in if he obeyed the Gospel—that notwithstanding his talents and standing in society, he would have to come into the sheepfold by the door, and after all his preaching to others, have to be baptized himself for the remission of sins by those who were ordained to that power. These considerations no doubt had their weight upon his mind, which caused him to act as he did; and notwithstanding his former kindness he soon became one of our most violent opposers.

29"However, his congregation did not follow his example, they having some time been praying for our coming, and having been assured by Mr. Fielding that he could not place more confidence in an angel than he did in the statements of his brother Joseph, respecting this people. Consequently they were in a great measure prepared for the reception of the Gospel, probably as much so as Cornelius was anciently.

29"Having now no public place to preach in, we began to preach at night in private houses, which were opened in every direction, when numbers came to hear and believed the Gospel."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 141-143.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC29When the time for the first baptism was set, the powers of evil marshalled their forces together in a determined effort against the lives and plans of the missionaries. Elder Kimball continues:

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC29"Saturday evening it was agreed that I should go forward and baptize the next morning in the River Ribble, which runs through Preston.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC29"By this time the adversary of souls began to rage, and he felt determined to destroy us before we had fully established the kingdom of God in that land, and the next morning I witnessed a scene of satanic power and influence which I shall never forget.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC29"Sunday, July 30th, about daybreak, Elder Isaac Russell (who had been appointed to preach on the Obelisk in Preston Square that day) who slept with Elder Richards in Wilfred Street, came up to the third story, where Elder Hyde and myself were sleeping, and called out: 'Brother Kimball, I want you should get up and pray for me that I may be delivered from the evil spirits that are tormenting me to such a degree that I feel I cannot live long, unless I obtain relief.'

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC29"I had been sleeping on the back of the bed. I immediately arose, slipped off at the foot of the bed, and passed around to where he was. Elder Hyde threw his feet out, and sat up in the bed, and we laid hands on him, I being mouth, and prayed that the Lord would have mercy on him, and rebuked the devil.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC30"While thus engaged, I was struck with great force by some invisible power, and fell senseless on the floor. The first thing I recollected was being supported by Elders Hyde and Richards, who were praying for me; Elder Richards having followed Russell up to my room. Elders Hyde and Richards then assisted me to get on the bed, but my agony was so great I could not endure it, and I arose, bowed my knees and prayed. I then arose and sat up on the bed, when a vision was opened to our minds, and we could distinctly see the evil spirits, who foamed and gnashed their teeth at us. We gazed upon them about an hour and a half (by Willard's watch). We were not looking towards the window, but towards the wall. Space appeared before us, and we saw the devils coming in legions, with their leaders, who came within a few feet of us. They came toward us like armies rushing to battle. They appeared to be men of full stature, possessing every form and feature of men in the flesh, who were angry and desperate; and I shall never forget the vindictive malignity depicted on their countenances as they looked me in the eye; and any attempt to paint the scene which then presented itself, or portray their malice and enmity, would be vain. I perspired exceedingly, my clothes becoming as wet as if I had been taken out of the river. I felt excessive pain, and was in great distress for some time. I cannot even now look back on the scene without feelings of horror; yet by it I learned the power of the adversary, his enmity against the servants of God, and got some understanding of the invisible world. We distinctly heard those spirits talk and express their wrath and hellish designs against us. However, the Lord delivered us from them, and blessed us exceedingly that day."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 143-145.

30In seeking an explanation of this manifestation some years later from the Prophet Joseph Smith, Heber C. Kimball received this axiom of truth:

30"The nearer a person approaches the Lord, a greater power will be manifested by the adversary to prevent the accomplishment of his purposes."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 146.

Therein lies at least partial explanation for the bitter opposition to the Church and people of God in this dispensation and in former times.

31Reverend James Fielding had taken his stand, and from then on let it be said of him that at least he was consistent—consistent in opposition. When he learned that the missionaries meant to go forward with the baptismal service, in anger he went to the lodge of the brethren and forbade Elder Kimball to carry out his plans. Said the latter:

31"They are of age, and can act for themselves; I shall baptize all who come unto me, asking no favors of any man."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 147.

31This terse reply left no doubt in the reverend gentleman's mind as to the effect of his unauthoritative injunction upon the actions of the missionaries. In the above reply are embodied the principles of religious freedom and worship according to the dictates of conscience, as also the doctrine of man's inalienable right to free agency, which is fundamental and which is God-given—the very cornerstone of the plan of salvation. There is no predestination—no superimposed divine will upon the actions of men; neither is it right or just that one man should hedge about the freedom of another in matters that pertain only to him and the Lord. This, and more, was all implied in the brief retort that an Apostle of the Lord gave to a minister of the world who commanded that God's will should not be done.

31The baptism proceeded as planned. Speaking of the services, Elder Kimball records:

"Notwithstanding the weakness of my body from the shock I had experienced, I had the pleasure, about 9 a. m., of baptizing nine individuals and hailing them brethren and sisters in the kingdom of God. These were the first persons baptized into the Church in a foreign land, and only the eighth day after our arrival in Preston.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC32"A circumstance took place which I cannot refrain from mentioning, for it will show the eagerness and anxiety of some in that land to obey the Gospel. Two of the male candidates, when they had changed their clothes at a distance of several rods from the place where I was standing in the water, were so anxious to obey the Gospel that they ran with all their might to the water, each wishing to be baptized first. The younger, George D. Watt, being quicker of foot than the elder, outran him, and came first into the water.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC32"The circumstance of baptizing in the open air being somewhat novel, a concourse of between seven and nine thousand persons assembled on the banks of the river to witness the ceremony. It was the first time baptism by immersion was administered openly, as the Baptists in that country generally have a font in their chapels, and perform the ordinance privately."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 149.

32The River Ribble rises well to the north in West Riding, flows by factories and fields, picturesquely, through Preston, Lancashire, and shortly opens into a long river-mouth off the Irish sea. The traveler by its banks today may well imagine that most unusual and inspiring sight, when commissioned servants of the Lord baptised by immersion, as the Lord prescribed, the first European converts of this dispensation—this, as thousands of spectators thronged the banks of the river on that memorable Sunday morning.

32The names of the nine—the first fruits of British labors—follow: George D. Watt, Brother Charles Miller, Thomas Walmesley, Ann Elizabeth Walmesley, Miles Hogden, George Wate, Henry Billsbury, Mary Ann Brown and Ann Dawson.

Ann Elizabeth Walmesley, wife of Thomas Walmesley, was a consumptive invalid, and had been given up by the doctors to die. She was promised that if she would believe, repent and be baptized, she would be healed. She was carried to the water, and after her baptism began to recover. At her confirmation, later, a blessing was pronounced upon her head and the disease rebuked. Her recovery was immediate; within a week she was attending to her household duties. She lived to go to Utah, and died several decades later in Montpelier, Bear Lake county, Idaho.

33George D. Watt, the first baptized, distinguished himself as a faithful missionary throughout Great Britain, and emigrated to America before the Prophet Joseph Smith's death. In America he took active part and rendered valuable service in many undertakings. He long served as reporter of sermons for the Journal of Discourses, during the days of Brigham Young in Salt Lake City.

33Other baptisms followed closely, and it was not long before a considerable branch was raised up in Preston.
