Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

34CHAPTER 4

34THE CHOICEST OF THE FLOCK

34The Obelisk, Preston, and the old buildings that once surrounded the market place itself, have been altered and shifted in position. The modern opening is graced by an imposing war memorial and a finely appointed Town Hall. But engravings of the old scenes are still to be had, and as one gazes upon the faded reproductions, mental pictures of bygone days arise—there is the Obelisk monument in the old square, from which town criers, politicians, peddlers, revivalists, statesmen and missionaries lauded their wares or gave utterance to their messages. Be it known that of the countless men who there lifted voice, none were more worthy than the early missionaries of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; none proclaimed messages so vital, so indispensable to the human family. And of those who listened, none received such joy, such priceless truths, as those who there heard, believed and obeyed the words of Heber C. Kimball and his associates. Such glorious tidings were never before proclaimed from that historic stand.

34That much interest had been aroused at the first baptismal service in the River Ribble on the morning of Sunday, July 30th, 1837, was made obvious by the great numbers who gathered to the Obelisk in the afternoon to hear words of truth and life as they fell from the lips of Elder Isaac Russell. About five thousand listened, with respect and interest, and many were touched in their hearts, and were led to seek further.

The work was now fairly established in Preston. A nucleus had been formed to which other truth-seekers would gather. It was now thought expedient to branch out into other parts. With this purpose in view the missionaries assembled on the day following the baptism. They remained together, fasting, praying, and rendering thanks to God for His many mercies, until two o'clock on the following morning. At this meeting Brothers Willard Richards and John Goodson were appointed to labor in the city of Bedford. Brothers Isaac Russell and John Snyder were assigned to the region of Alston, in Cumberland. It was agreed that Orson Hyde, Heber C. Kimball and Joseph Fielding should remain in the vicinity of Preston for a time. Those who were to travel departed for the new fields of labor within a day or two.

35The brethren realized their chief duty—to carry Gospel tidings to those who were in ignorance of the restoration. It was not their custom to remain longer in any field than was necessary. Granted, to do so would have been the easiest course. Where friends are, and where ties have already been made, is always the inviting place; but personal comfort was not their concern; they were vigorous, alert—seeking new friends, new methods, new opportunities for delivering their message. They used the means and conveniences of their day to advantage. Branches, districts, and even missions, were entrusted largely to the care of the resident members, while the traveling ministry was left free to carry on active campaigns in untouched territory. Their success in part is thus accounted for.

As would be expected, however, they were frequent visitors at the homes of those who had embraced the Gospel. Conversions often had their beginnings at these visits—friends and relatives would meet the missionaries, hear of the latter-day work, and investigate further. One case of this kind is here related:

36As a visitor at the home of Brother Thomas Walmesley, one of the first to be baptized in Preston, Heber C. Kimball met Miss Jennetta Richards, a friend of the Walmesley family and a daughter of an independent order minister of Walkerfold, a village about fifteen miles from Preston. The subject of the conversation turned, as it invariably did in the presence of these brethren when there were any willing to listen, to the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ. Miss Richards was impressed, and attended two small gatherings at which Brother Kimball spoke, on the evening of their meeting and on the following evening. The next day, August 4th, she applied for baptism. The ordinance was performed the same day in the River Ribble by Heber C. Kimball, who, assisted by Orson Hyde, also confirmed Miss Jennetta Richards at the water's edge. This was the first confirmation in the British Isles in this dispensation of the Gospel.

36When the time for her return home arrived, Miss Richards had some misgivings as to the effect the tidings—to her, joyful and glorious—would have upon her father. Speaking in the spirit of prophecy, as it was frequently given him to do, Elder Kimball assured her that her father would not only receive her kindly, but would open up his chapel and request him, Elder Kimball, to preach in it. This shortly occurred.

At this time the services of the brethren were sought for in many quarters. They filled appointments to preach nearly every night and frequently during the day. At times they were under the necessity, so crowded were they, of declining invitations to speak before gatherings. Because of their strenuous labors and irregular habits of living, their health was not the best, but they continued diligent and met with success.

37Often they held forth at the Obelisk, Preston Square, where they were always assured a large gathering. At this place, on Sunday, August 6th, a clergyman, an advocate of infant baptism, began to oppose them and their doctrines. The audience would not let him be heard until Elder Hyde intervened, assuring them that he was prepared to meet all arguments, and asking their permission for the reverend gentleman to express his views. When the clergyman had stated his objections, Elder Hyde answered them to the satisfaction of his auditors. The general reaction of that gathering toward the interrupter was such that the meeting could not proceed until someone had led the infant baptism advocate out of the crowd.

37By this time, which was only the third Sunday in England, many persons had been baptized in Preston, but only one of these had been confirmed. A meeting was called at the home of Sister Ann Dawson, one of the first baptized, with whom the Elders lodged. At this meeting, Sunday, August 6th, between forty and fifty Preston converts were confirmed, and further instructed in their duties, obligations and privileges as members of the Church of Jesus Christ. Here the Preston Branch, the first branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain, was organized. The Spirit of the Lord was felt in power and abundance, and all were led to rejoice.

37In the early part of the ensuing week, two letters—one from Miss Jennetta Richards and one from her father—arrived. The latter read:

38"Mr. H. C. Kimball,

38Sir:

38You are expected to be here next Sunday. You are given out to preach in the forenoon, afternoon and evening. Although we be strangers to one another, yet I hope we are not strangers to our blessed Redeemer, else I would not have given out for you to preach. Our chapel is but small and the congregation few, yet if one soul be converted, it is of more value than the whole world.

38I remain, in haste,

38JOHN RICHARDS."

38—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 154.

38To fill this appointment, Heber C. Kimball traveled by coach the next Saturday to Walkerfold, where he arrived towards evening, to be warmly received and hospitably entertained by John Richards and his family. The next morning Elder Kimball went with Mr. Richards to his chapel and preached. He also filled the afternoon and evening appointments, one on Monday evening, and, at the request of the congregation, another on Wednesday evening. At these times many shed tears of joy, and on Thursday, August 17th, six members of Mr. John Richards' flock applied for baptism.

Mr. Richards felt that he must close his chapel to the preaching of Elder Kimball, as a matter of self-preservation; but, unlike the Reverend Fielding, he did not oppose the work, but continued to treat his guest with respect. Following the procedure that had been observed at Preston, Brother Kimball continued preaching, in private houses or wherever there were auditors. Before he left he had baptized most of the younger and more vigorous members of Mr. Richards' congregation. Personally, he felt regard and pity for the old gentleman, but he was not one to let personal affections or feelings stand between him and his duty in proclaiming the Gospel. Had he been, he would never have set out upon his mission to Great Britain. Those of Mr. Richards' flock who answered truth's call, also, did so in spite of personal regard for the tender old man who had for over thirty years ministered to them in love and kindness.

39Jennetta Richards was grieved when Mr. John Richards closed his chapel to Elder Kimball, but she was assured by the latter that her father would again open it for him to preach in. This happened two weeks following the first appointment. Heber C. Kimball accompanied John Richards to his chapel in the morning, and that worthy old clergyman gave out an appointment for him to occupy the pulpit in the afternoon and evening, which he gladly did.

39On the day following this preaching engagement, August 28th, Heber C. Kimball left for Preston, where the brethren were anxiously awaiting his return, with letters from his home in Kirtland and with news from the other missionaries. Elder John Goodson had returned from Bedford, and reported that he and Willard Richards had already been successful in raising up a branch of nineteen there.

The brethren in Bedford were befriended and aided by a minister, Timothy R. Matthews, a brother-in-law of Joseph Fielding, who invited them to preach in his chapel. This they did on several occasions. Many, including Mr. and Mrs. Matthews, were convinced. Mr. Matthews himself bore testimony to his congregation and invited them to accept baptism at the hands of the Elders. The time was set for his baptism; but before it arrived, contrary to positive counsel, Elder Goodson read to Mr. Matthews and some of his followers the vision of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon (Doctrine and Covenants, Section 76), which these new friends apparently were not yet prepared to receive. Mr. Matthews did not appear for baptism at the appointed time and place, but received the ordinance elsewhere, and soon after denounced the missionaries, saying that their doctrines were false. He then began to preach those very doctrines on his own account.

40There is a lesson of deep import to be derived from this unfortunate occurrence. It is one of unnumbered instances in which evil consequences have followed the disobeying of counsel by missionaries and others.

40Brother Snyder, who had been laboring with Brother Russell in Cumberland, returned in late summer and reported that although opposition had been strong, thirty had been baptized, and others were investigating.

40Soon after this Brothers Goodson and Snyder departed for Liverpool, from whence they sailed for America on about the 1st of October. Urgent business was the reason given for this action. Elder Goodson took with him two hundred copies of the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants, despite Heber C. Kimball's request that he leave them, and despite his offer to pay for them. These, writes Elder Kimball, he burned soon after he reached Iowa Territory, at which time he apostatized and left the Church.

40An interesting comment on Elder Goodson, written by the Prophet Joseph Smith, appears in the History of the Church, Vol. 2, p. 498; it may serve as a clue to his difficulties. Writing of the first landing of the missionaries at Liverpool on July 20th, 1837, the Prophet says:

"While the passengers were going on board a steamer, Elders Kimball, Hyde, Richards and Goodson jumped into a small boat and were rowed toward shore. When within leaping distance Elder Kimball sprang from the boat as if impelled by some superior power, and alighted on the steps of the dock, followed instantly by Elders Hyde and Richards, all three of whom had not one farthing on earth at their command, while Elder Goodson, having a heavy purse of silver in his hand, waited until the vessel touched shore.

41"A heavy purse" has been the undoing of many. It was so with Judas in the day of the Master. It has been so countless times before and since that day. "Heavy purses" do not ordinarily contribute to the best in human endeavor. Particularly is this true of those engaged in the service of the Lord.

41Three clergymen of this early period may well bear comment: Mr. Timothy Matthews, of Bedford, was well educated, and a man of some talent. Formerly he had been a minister in the established Church of England, but realizing its inconsistencies and contrary doctrines, and feeling its lack of authority and vitality, had separated from that organization and as an independent preacher had raised up a moderately large congregation.

41A similar story may be told of Mr. Fielding. He had been a clergyman of the Methodist faith, but became dissatisfied, and withdrew from that body for like reasons. He gathered his own following in Preston.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCAnother independent reform clergyman, the Reverend Robert Aitken, played a prominent part in the early labors of the missionaries in Great Britain. He had vigorously opposed the established Church of England, and, being an eloquent preacher, had been successful in establishing and supporting chapels in Liverpool, London, Manchester, Preston, Burslem and elsewhere. The restoration of a church in the latter days in fulfilment of inspired prediction was one of his much-used themes. He capitalized the idea, and had a numerous following. Many of his members in various places left his order and joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC42In a state of deep concern and agitation, caused by the loss of many of his best members, this leader of the Aitkenites, as his followers were called, went to Preston with the avowed purpose of "exposing 'Mormonism'" and discrediting the Book of Mormon. Of this action Heber C. Kimball writes:

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC42"He made a very long oration on the subject, was very vehement in his manner, and pounded the Book of Mormon on the pulpit many times. He then exhorted the people to pray that the Lord would drive us from their coast; and if the Lord would not hear them in that petition, that He would smite the leaders.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC42"The next Sunday Elder Hyde and myself went to our meetingroom, read the thirteenth chapter of First Corinthians, and strongly urged upon the people the grace of charity, which is so highly spoken of in that chapter, and made some remarks on the proceedings of the Reverend Robert Aitken, who had abused us and the Book of Mormon so very much. In return for his railing we exhorted the Saints to pray that the Lord would soften his heart and open his eyes that he might see that it was hard to "kick against the pricks." This discourse had a very good effect, and that week we had the pleasure of baptizing fifty into the kingdom of Jesus, a large number of whom were members of Mr. Aitken's church."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 164.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCMr. Aitken was one of the first—probably the first in Great Britain—to thus "expose 'Mormonism'." Since his day thousands of carping critics, false religionists, pseudo-reformers, hireling lecturers and sensational journalists, by press, by public discourse, and in private conversation, have, with like results, "exposed 'Mormonism'." But still it persists—not only persists, but grows and prospers; and the penetrating searchlight of world scrutiny has not yet "exposed" anything but truth and good works in the "Mormon" Church.

43The cry of this unhappy trio of disconcerted clergymen—Mr. Fielding, Mr. Matthews and Mr. Aitken—was this: Our best members have left us. So wrote Mr. Matthews to Mr. Fielding; so bitterly declared Mr. Fielding on more than one occasion; such was the condition that roused the ire of Mr. Aitken. The missionaries made no defense, nor does the Church today. It was true then. It is true today. It was and is as it should be. The choicest of the flock continue to be the harvest of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
