Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

44CHAPTER 5

44THE COCKPIT AND THE TEMPERANCE MOVEMENT

44As soon as their presence and their message were heralded, private houses, small meetingrooms and chapels were thrown open to the first missionaries to Great Britain. Opportunities to preach in such places were thankfully received and utilized to the utmost. Of the first five or six weeks of this procedure Heber C. Kimball writes:

44"Calls from all quarters to come and preach were constantly sounding in our ears, and we labored night and day to satisfy the people, who manifested such a desire for the truth as I never saw before. We had to speak in small and very crowded houses, and to large assemblies in the open air. Consequently our lungs were often very sore, and our bodies worn down with fatigue. Sometimes I was guilty of breaking the priestly rules—I pulled off my coat and rolled up my sleeves and went at my duty with my whole soul, like a man reaping and binding wheat, which caused the hireling priests to be very much surprised."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 169.

Many thousands heard the word at these smaller indoor gatherings, and at the larger outdoor gatherings; scores believed and were baptized. Much effective preaching was done beneath humble roof and open sky; but the brethren realized that there were advantages to be gained by having a large and central meeting place in which services could be held regularly. Such a place was the "Cockpit," Preston, Lancashire. The use of it was obtained, and on the first Sunday in September, 1837, the members of the Church in Preston began to hold regular meetings in that spacious auditorium.

45The acquisition of the "Cockpit" calls forth an interesting story. The building was erected about 1801 by the then Lord Derby, the twelfth earl. It was originally used for the purpose revealed by its name. Its location in Preston was ideal—near Stoneygate, at the bottom of St. John's Place and Greystock's Yard, near the center of town, close to the market place. It was neither the first nor the only building in Preston devoted to a sport once popular and widely patronized but now virtually extinct, but of all such places it was the largest and most famous. It had seating room for approximately eight hundred persons.

45The "Cockpit" is now demolished. It fell in, old-timers say, late in the nineteenth century. At the time of the author's last visit there, nearly nine years ago, only a portion of one wall, with a window casing or two, remained standing. The ground upon which it stood was then used for the storing of contractor's tools and equipment, and occasionally to accommodate a small fair or circus.

45Of its acquisition and of the building itself, Elder Kimball records:

45"We obtained a large and commodious place to preach in, called the 'Cockpit,' which had formerly been used by the people to witness cocks fight and kill one another, and where hundreds of spectators had shouted in honor of the barbarous sport which was once the pride of Britons. And now, instead of the huzzas of the wicked and profane, the Gospel of Christ and the voice of praise and thanksgiving was heard there. The building had also been used for a temperance hall."—Heber C. Kimball's Journal, pp. 27 and 28.

"The space for cock-fighting was an area of about twelve or fifteen feet in the center, around which the seats formed a circle, each seat rising about a foot above another, till they reached the walls of the building. When we leased it the area in the center was occupied by the singers, and our pulpit was the place where the judges formerly sat, who awarded the prizes at cock-fights. We had to pay seven shillings per week for the use of it, and two shillings per week for lighting; it being beautifully lit up with gas."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 166.

46"It is situated about twenty rods from the 'Old Church,' probably the oldest in Lancashire. This church has twelve bells which are rung at every service, the noise of which was so great that we were unable to proceed in our services until they had done ringing them.

46"Our meeting was once disturbed by some ministers belonging to the Methodist Church; however, we got our place licensed, and two gentlemen, who were constables, proffered their services to keep the peace, and protect us from any further disturbances, which they continued to do as long as we stayed in that land."—Heber C. Kimball's Journal, p. 28.

46Although the name "Cockpit" was the first given to the building in question, and although that name stayed with it as long as it existed (and still lingers), sheltering cock-fights had ceased to be one of its functions. When "Mormon" missionaries first went to Preston in 1837, it was the official meeting place of the Preston Temperance Society.

46A brief digression may be pardonable at this point. An account of early British labors, dated March 24th, 1841, which appeared in the first volume of the Millennial Star over the names of Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde and Willard Richards, makes the following comment concerning the "Cockpit" and the temperance movement:

"Some years previous, the principles of the Temperance Society (originally established in America) were introduced into England, and Preston was the first town to receive them [the total abstinence pledge]. Among the many interesting and valuable items held forth by the temperance people, it was often remarked by them that temperance was the forerunner of the Gospel, which prophecy proved true, for when the fulness of the Gospel came from America to England, it was first preached in Preston, and through the influence of the Temperance Society the Latter-day Saints procured the use of the Temperance Hall in Preston (a commodious building, originally erected for cock-fighting) for their chapel, and commenced meeting there on the 3rd of September, 1837, and continued until they were ejected through the influence of others, the Temperance Society not having it entirely at their control. Similar favors have been received from several other Temperance Societies in England, for which, the Lord reward them."—Millennial Star, Volume I, p. 294.

47In his private journal, Heber C. Kimball further states:

47"In almost every place we went where there was a Temperance Hall, we could get it to preach in, many believing that we made men temperate faster than they did; for as soon as any obeyed the Gospel they abandoned their excesses in drinking; none of us drank any kind of spirits, porter, small beer, or even wine; neither did we drink tea, coffee, or chocolate."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 165.

47According to authorities the temperance movement in Great Britain did not begin in Preston, but "teetotalism" did begin there; and, what is more remarkable and noteworthy, not only the initial steps of the movement in Britain, but the coinage of the word itself—"teetotal"—occurred in Preston, in the "Cockpit" of which we are speaking, and at the hands of the very society of men through whose influence that commodious assembling place was opened to the first missionaries.

The coinage of the word and the impetus of the movement are said to have come about as follows: Technically there is a distinction between temperance and total abstinence; and, although the two terms are used somewhat synonymously in this day, formerly there were distinct movements upholding the two degrees of abstinence, and there was some quibbling about the merits of each. Mr. Joseph Livesey, then the leader of the Temperance Society in Preston, and an outstanding figure in the temperance movement in Great Britain and in the world, was a pioneer of the total abstinence agitation. Quoting Chambers Encyclopedia, 1892 edition:

48"In British North America abstinence from all alcoholic beverages was common even under the old form of pledge, and on May 25th, 1832, at St. John, New Brunswick, a society was formed with a constitution expressly committing its members to abstinence from all intoxicating liquors, save as a medicine. It was, however, reserved for the Preston Temperance Society in England to apply such missionary power in the diffusion of the total abstinence principle as to justify for it the supremacy in the advocacy of the new reform. On September 1st, 1832, seven members of the Preston Society allowed Mr. Joseph Livesey to attach their names to a pledge of total abstinence, and in later days it became common to speak of the "seven men of Preston" as having commenced the new crusade."

48A year later, in September, 1833, Richard Turner, a reformed drinker and a member of the Preston Temperance Society, better known as "Dicky" Turner, was attending a temperance meeting in the "Cockpit" at which the relative merits of "total abstinence" and the "moderation system" were being discussed. "Dicky" Turner, who is described as a rough, humorous speaker, was a staunch disciple of the "total abstinence" faction, and wishing to express himself in emphatic terms, he exclaimed in broad Lancashire: "I'll have nowt to do wi' this moderation botheration pledge; I'll be reet down out-and-out tee-tee-total for ever and ever!" [^1]

49This brought cheers from the audience and the following comment from Mr. Livesey: "Well done, Dicky! That shall be the name of our new pledge." In his reminiscences, Mr. Livesey assures us that "Dicky" did not stutter, and that if he ever lacked an expressive word, he was nothing loath to coin a new one. Repeating the first letter—"tee-tee"—was his way of emphasis. And "tee-total" it has continued to be.

49Four years later, to the month, "Mormon" missionaries were proclaiming the Gospel of Jesus Christ in the same town, in the same building, by courtesy of the same society of men to whom credit is given for giving impetus to the total abstinence movement. Extending this privilege to the servants of the Lord is another service that the "Cockpit" and the Preston Temperance Society rendered humanity.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Chamber's Encyclopedia, 1892 edition, Temperance, W. & R. Chambers, Edinburgh.
