Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

50CHAPTER 6

50SUCCESS IN SCATTERED FIELDS—THE FIRST BRITISH CONFERENCE

50Opposition to the Church of Christ in Britain grew with its progress in 1837. Heber C. Kimball and his associates were repeatedly threatened with expulsion and with physical violence, but little was done. What disturbances did occur were incited by opposing ministers, whose services were not in demand where the Gospel of Jesus Christ was being preached by divinely commissioned messengers of truth.

50Following September 3rd, 1837, the first Sunday on which meetings were held by the Church in the "Cockpit"—the work seemed to gain momentum, and to roll forth with greater power and breadth.

50Shortly before this, a letter sent by Heber C. Kimball to his wife, who was in Kirtland, showed that plans were being considered by others of the Twelve to leave for Britain the following spring. In this epistle Brother Kimball advised his brethren, should they come to England, to leave their families at home, because of the uncertainty of means and the poor living conditions that the unremunerative nature of their work forced them to accept. Part of the letter read:

"We have hired our lodgings since we have been here, and bought our own provisions. We eat but one meal a day at home, for the brethren invite us to dinner and supper with them, and they frequently divide their last loaf with us. They do all in their power, and I feel to bless them in the name of the Lord. There are fifty-five baptized in Preston, and it is as much as they can do to live, and there are but two or three that could lodge us over night if they should try; in fact, there are some that have not a bed to sleep on themselves. The Lord says 'take no thought for the morrow' and this is the way I feel for the present. I commit myself into His hands, that I may always be ready to go at His command. I desire to be content with whatsoever situation I am placed in."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 167.

51Elder Kimball returned to Walkerfold early in September, and found that those who had joined the Church were being severely persecuted. He left them with renewed courage and conviction of truth, and later returned to find them prospering. Several more were there added to the Church by baptism. Following the later Walkerfold visit the Gospel was taken to Barshe Lees, where two persons were baptized. By invitation, Brothers Kimball and Hyde took a journey into the country about ten miles, where they preached twice to very large assemblies.

51The three missionaries in Preston, Brothers Orson Hyde, Joseph Fielding and Heber C. Kimball, and Brother Willard Richards in Bedford and Isaac Russell in Alston, were pursuing their labors diligently and using to the fullest the time and services the local brethren were able to give. Brother Kimball went on a short journey to the villages south of Preston in company with a newly-baptized Church member. The people flocked in great numbers to hear them. At Long-bridge five preachers were among those who believed the doctrines they advanced. At Eccleston they preached in a Methodist Chapel. On the journey ten persons were baptized, two of them Methodist preachers.

51At Barshe Lees, on October 7th, 1837, the first child in Great Britain, Mary Smithies, infant daughter of James and Nancy Smithies, was blessed by Heber C. Kimball.

52The Church in Preston had grown rapidly. Although a loose branch organization had previously been effected there, to operate under the immediate supervision of the missionaries, it now became expedient to divide the Preston members into five branches, and to ordain Priests and Teachers to take charge. This was done on October 8th, 1837, at which time arrangements were made for the entire membership to meet in the "Cockpit" on the Sabbath to partake of the Sacrament. Thursday evenings were devoted to prayer meetings, at which times the branches met separately in private homes or in smaller meetingrooms. Harmony prevailed in the branches. The resident brethren and sisters worked in unity and love, and largely conducted their own affairs, in accordance with general instructions, thus leaving the missionaries free a greater part of the time to proclaim their message to others, which they willingly and effectively did.

52On October 12th Heber C. Kimball wrote from Preston to Brother Willard Richards at Bedford, a letter, advising the latter to preach first principles, and giving other instructions and information. His words may be taken to heart by those who are called to preach the Gospel in this day; they follow in part:

52"Brother Hyde and myself have labored all the time, night and day, so that we have not had much time to sleep. There are calls on the right and left. In Preston there are about one hundred and sixty members. At Walkerfold I have built up one branch; one in Barshe Lees, in Yorkshire; one in Ribchester; one in Penwortham, and one in Thornley.

"The harvest is ripe and many are thirsting for the word of life. May God give you energy to go forth in His name, and cry aloud and spare not; and I say unto you, Brother Richards, if you stay in that place much longer there will be contentions arise, until the little branch will be broken up and scattered to the four winds. And I say this in the name of the Lord: Go forth into the country without purse or scrip, as God has commanded, and if you should leave the branch two or three weeks the Saints will take no harm, and the Lord will bless you in so doing. Go fifteen or twenty miles; cry repentance, and let the big things alone; for this is the way that the hearts of the people are closed up in Bedford, by Elder Goodson preaching those things he was commanded to let alone. I have scarcely meddled with the prophecies; I have only preached the first principles of the Gospel to the people, doing the same that I teach you to do. The churches in the country I stay with a few days, and then leave them two or three weeks; they are praising the Lord and are glad to see me when I visit them."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 171-172.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC53When the number who were leaving other sects became noticeable—particularly noticeable to those sects they were leaving—much was said about the brethren not being licensed preachers. Mr. John Richards, the worthy old minister at Walkerfold, had a son who was a practising attorney in Preston. From this son the brethren sought counsel on the matter, and were told that it would be to their advantage to become licensed. Brothers Hyde and Kimball applied to the Quarter Sessions through Mr. Richards and obtained preachers' licenses on October 18th. For this service the young attorney refused to accept payment.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC53Of this occurrence—obtaining licenses—Brother Kimball says:

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC53"Having now obeyed the requisitions of the law, we felt ourselves tolerably secure, knowing that our enemies could not lawfully harm us. I wrote to Brother Richards that I had taken the oath to be true to Her Majesty and see that the laws were executed, also the abjuration oath provided for foreigners who were not naturalized, and obtained a license as a preacher of the Gospel; and recommended him to do the same at Bedford. . . .

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC54"After we had obtained our licenses, to our surprise we found there were only a few licensed preachers in Preston; and when they abused me I told them if they did not cease their abuse I would see the laws put in force according to the oaths I had taken; and this generally silenced them."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 173-174.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC54On one journey to Wrightington, by request Brother Kimball with Brother Amos Fielding called on the family of Matthias Moon, and remained in conversation on the subject of the Gospel until a late hour. The family appeared to be unfavorably prejudiced, and Brother Fielding expressed the thought that the visit had been in vain. Brother Kimball proceeded to Wrightington and Hunter's Hill, where he spent two or three days, baptized seven members of a Benson family, and others, and established a branch.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC54On his return, as he was passing by the lane that led to the home of the Moons, he was forcibly impressed to go in. He was welcomed literally with open arms, and heard their story—that they had tried to discredit and forget his words, but, after so doing, when they endeavored to pray the "heavens seemed as brass" over their heads. Then they asked the Lord to enlighten them as to the truth or falsity of the message to which they had listened. In answer to this prayer their hearts were filled with joy and they received a testimony of the Gospel. They were praying for the return of Elder Kimball when he came. That evening Mr. and Mrs. Moon and four of their daughters were baptized. Later the entire family, numbering thirteen in all, the youngest of whom was over twenty, were baptized; and before Brother Kimball left England over thirty connections of the family embraced the Gospel, five of whom, Hugh, John, Francis, William and Thomas Moon, labored as missionaries.

55Following the labors in this section, Elder Kimball and Joseph Fielding went to the northeast of Preston, where they labored for a short season with much success. At Clithero a preacher, Thomas Smith, and six members of the Methodist Church, were baptized immediately after they had heard the Gospel preached the first time.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC55In Ribchester a mob often gathered to pelt the brethren with stones when they went to baptize. On one occasion, to thwart their evil designs, Elder Kimball arranged to have the applicants go singly to the appointed place. He followed quickly and baptized them all. As he was baptizing the last one, the mob arrived on the scene, disappointed; they were unable to find out how many were baptized, or to discomfort them.

55It was decided to take the Gospel into Downham and Chatburn. Many well-meaning friends advised the brethren against going to those places, as they had a reputation for wickedness, and it was said that for over thirty years ministers of many sects had attempted to raise up churches there without success. This convinced Elder Kimball that those were the very places to which he wished to go.

55The next day came a pressing invitation from Chatburn for the brethren to preach there that evening. Another appointment in Clithero conflicted, but those who were sent to request the favor were insistent, and so Joseph Fielding went to Clithero alone, and Elder Kimball to Chatburn. Of this occasion Heber C. Kimball says:

"In Chatburn I was cordially received by the inhabitants, who turned out in great numbers to hear me preach. They procured a large tithing barn, placing a barrel in the center, upon which I stood. I preached to them the first principles of the Gospel. . . . When I concluded I felt someone pulling at my coat, exclaiming: 'Maister! Maister!' I turned around and asked what was wanted. Mrs. Elizabeth Partington said: 'Please, sir, will you baptize me?' 'And me!'—'And me!' exclaimed more than a dozen voices. Accordingly I went down into the water and baptized twenty-five. I was engaged in this duty, and confirming them and conversing with the people until after midnight.

56"The next morning I returned to Downham and baptized between twenty-five and thirty in the course of the day."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 183, 184.

56The next evening Elder Kimball returned to Chatburn. This night the congregation was so large that he had to preach outdoors from a stone wall; he afterwards baptized several. On this journey the brethren were absent from Preston five days, during which time Brothers Kimball and Fielding baptized one hundred ten persons and organized branches in Downham, Chatburn, Clithero and Waddington. On one occasion when they were traveling through Chatburn to Downham, the noises from the looms in the village were hushed, and the people flocked to their doors to welcome them. Brother Kimball records:

56"More than forty young people of the place ran to meet us; some took hold of our mantles and then of each others' hands; several having hold of hands went before us, singing the songs of Zion, while their parents gazed upon the scene with delight, and poured their blessings over our heads and praised the God of heaven for sending us to unfold the principles of truth and the plan of salvation to them. The children continued with us to Downham, a mile distant."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 184.

56Who knows where the truth-hungry are waiting! Had the brethren listened to hearsay, Downham and Chatburn would have been shunned. To follow the promptings of the Spirit of the Lord and the counsel of presiding officers is the only safe course in such matters.

57At length it was decided to hold a conference—the first general conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain—in the "Cockpit," Preston, on Christmas day, 1837. Branches had been raised up in Preston, Walkerford, Alston, Bedford, Eccleston, Wrightington, Hexton, Euxton Bath, Daubers Lane, Chorley, Whittle, Leyland Moss, Ribchester, Thornley, Clithero, Waddington, Downham, Barshe Lees, Askin, Hunter's Hill, Stoney Gate Lane, Chatburn, Penwortham, and other places.

57About three hundred Saints, representing a much larger membership residing in branches extending thirty miles and more around Preston, attended that first conference. Priest Joseph Fielding was ordained an Elder. Ten Priests and seven Teachers were ordained to minister in the various branches; one hundred little children were blessed at this time, and the Word of Wisdom, which had heretofore been taught more by example than by precept, was first publicly proclaimed in Great Britain.

57A glorious day of glorious deeds! It was fitting that such a body of Saints should meet under the direction of two of the Lord's Apostles on the day that is celebrated as that of His birth. And on that day it was fitting that a hundred little children should be blessed. It was fitting, too, that in the old "Cockpit," the cradle of "teetotalism," the Word of Wisdom—the Lord's law of health and vigor, life and vitality—should first be publicly proclaimed in Great Britain.
