Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

58CHAPTER 7

58THE SECOND BRITISH CONFERENCE - AND PARTING

58The first British Mission Conference—Christmas Day, 1837, in the "Cockpit," Preston, Lancashire—was a success. No one could or cared to deny that fact. The missionaries had been in England scarcely over five months, and yet the fruits of their labors were shown forth in a manner that must have exceeded anticipation.

58Immediately after that memorable day, Elders Orson Hyde and Heber C. Kimball went to Longton, a village near the sea, and declared their all-important message. Brothers Hyde and Goodson had preached there before. Many had believed; but no baptisms had been performed. On this occasion, however, after the first meeting ten were baptized, and others followed the next morning. The notable feature of this occurrence, besides the severity of the weather, was the faith of the converts, which gave them courage to be born of the water in the cold brine of the open sea when the temperature was such that fresh-water streams were frozen thick with ice.

58That winter was characterized by inclement weather to a degree that caused abnormal economic conditions; and the poor, as always under such circumstances, were called upon to bear the brunt of the suffering. Describing those bitter months, Elder Kimball records:

"This was very extraordinary weather for that country, as I was informed that some winters they had scarcely any frost or snow, and the oldest inhabitants told me that they never experienced such weather before. In consequence of the inclemency of the weather, several manufacturing establishments were shut up, and several thousands of men, women and children were thrown out of employment, whose sufferings during that time were severe; and I was credibly informed, and verily believe, that many perished from starvation.

59"Such sufferings I never witnessed before. The scenes which I daily beheld were enough to chill the blood in my veins. The streets were crowded with men, women and children who begged from the passengers as they walked along. Numbers of those poor, wretched beings were without shoes or stockings, and scarcely any covering to screen them from the inclemency of the weather; and daily I could discover delicate females walking the streets gathering up the animal refuse, and carrying it to places where they could sell it for a penny or half-penny. And thus they lived through the winter.

59"At the same time there were hundreds and thousands living in wealth and splendor. I felt to exclaim: O Lord, how long shall these things exist! How long shall the rich oppress the poor, and have no more care or interest for them than the brutes of the field, nor half so much! When will distress and poverty cease, and peace and plenty abound! When the Lord Jesus shall descend in the clouds of heaven, then the rod of the oppressor shall be broken. 'Hasten the time, O Lord,' was frequently the language of my heart when I contemplated the scenes of wretchedness and woe which I daily witnessed.

59"Great numbers were initiated into the kingdom of heaven; those who were sick were healed; those who were diseased flocked to us daily; and truly their faith was great, such as I hardly ever witnessed before; consequently many were healed of their infirmities. We were continually employed day and night, some nights hardly closing our eyelids."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 202-203.

Inclement weather did not halt those valiant servants of the Lord. They were not the ones to huddle in lodges and let precious time speed by, while groping souls went unenlightened, while the wretched went uncomforted, while opportunities went unheeded. Notwithstanding frosts that chilled to the bone, winds that blustered and discomforted, and rains that blinded and wet meagre clothing to the skin, they were out, up early and late—about their "Father's business!"

60Of the last six months in England Brother Kimball states that he could not recall having retired once to bed before midnight; and it was the same with the other brethren. Because of strenuous labors Orson Hyde was broken in health, and forced to partial retirement for five or six weeks. Elder Kimball continues:

60"Some days we went from house to house, conversing with the people on the things of the kingdom, and would sometimes be instrumental in convincing many of the truth; and I have known as many as twenty persons baptized in one day, who have been convinced on such occasions. I have had to go into the water to administer the ordinance of baptism six or seven times a day, and frequently after having come out of the water and changed my clothes, I have had to turn back to the water before I reached my lodgings; this, too, when weather was extremely cold, the ice being from twelve to fourteen inches thick. The weather continued so about twelve weeks, during which time I think there were but ten days in which we were not in the water baptizing. The harvest was indeed plenteous, but the laborers were few."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 201-202.

60The time for the first missionaries to return to their native land was set for early April, 1838. There were affairs in Kirtland that called for their presence, and there were loved ones there to be cared for. But these considerations would not have drawn them away from British shores had not the work there been sufficiently well established so that others would be able to carry on.

In consequence of the close approach of their departure, greater numbers flocked to hear them; baptisms increased; and the demands upon their time were more insistent and exacting. Call after call, of necessity, went unanswered.

61Elder Willard Richards returned from Bedford to Preston on March 7th. Ill health and other unfortunate conditions had prevented the spread of the work there to the same extent as in Preston; but he had been successful in raising up two small branches of about forty members—which is by no means an inconsequential accomplishment for seven months of missionary endeavor. He left these, happy and prosperous, in charge of Elder James Lavender, whom he had ordained.

61It was thought advisable to spend the remaining time in strengthening and further organizing the branches that had already been established—a means of entrenching and fortifying the territory that had already been claimed from the enemy of righteousness. To do this in a short time was a tremendous task. It meant visiting a branch nearly every night.

61During this strenuous "wind-up" campaign, a pressing invitation to preach came from a Baptist congregation of a village between Burnley and Downham. The time at their disposal being already overfilled, the brethren declined this invitation, or attempted to; but further insistence led them to go.

61When they arrived at the chapel they found a large congregation already assembled. Elder Hyde addressed them, followed by Elder Kimball, who says: "During the services the congregation was overjoyed; tears ran down their cheeks, and the minister could not refrain from clapping his hands for joy, while in the meeting." He took the brethren to his home and entertained them.

The next morning, when they were about to leave, a large number of the inhabitants of the place gathered about, and, with tears in their eyes, requested that they preach again. News of their coming departure having spread, a number of factories suspended operations to enable their employees to hear, but previous appointments forced the brethren to refuse them at this time.

62Many touching farewell scenes were to be witnessed on this final circuit of the branches—final so far as they knew. The temptation to elaborate rather than condense the details of this period is great. All that has been recorded—both of journal entries and discourses—could well bear reprinting. Such material is fraught with interesting accounts, words of counsel and other valuable information. But there is much ahead in the story of the British Mission.

62The second general conference of the Church in Great Britain was held Sunday, April 8th, [^1] 1838, in the "Cockpit," Preston. In the early hours of the day the members began to gather from the surrounding countryside, and by nine o'clock between six and seven hundred had assembled. The branches represented were as follows: Preston, Penwortham, Walkerfold, Thornley, Ribchester, Chatburn, Clithero, Barshe Lees, Waddington, Leyland Moss, Leyland Lane, Eccleston, Hunter's Hill, Euxton, Whittle, Dauber's Lane, Bamber Bridge, Longton, Southport, Downham, Burnley, Bedford, Alston, Brampton, Bolton, Chorley and others. The membership of the Mission at that time was between fifteen hundred and two thousand. There were about four hundred in the Preston Branch alone. The five missionaries from America who still remained in England were in attendance, Brother Isaac Russell having recently returned from Alston, where, in spite of much opposition, he had left a membership of about sixty under the care of Elder Jacob Peart.

63Several Elders, Priests, Teachers and Deacons were ordained and given special assignments. Again little children were blessed, and about forty persons who had previously been baptized were confirmed.

63In view of the impending departure it was necessary to leave someone in charge of the Mission. Accordingly it was proposed that Elder Joseph Fielding be sustained as President of the British Mission, with Willard Richards as first and William Clayton as second counselor. These brethren were sustained by the members, and set apart to these positions of great responsibility. At about five p. m. the conference adjourned, having continued without intermission since nine in the mornng. Another meeting was called for seven o'clock, following which the brethren who had been called for special work, about eighty in number, met for instructions and remained together until about one o'clock in the morning.

63Elder Joseph Fielding, a member of the first missionary party and second President of the British Mission, it will be remembered, was a native of Honeydon, Bedfordshire, England, where he was born in March, 1797. His devoted service to God and his countrymen was acknowledged in this appointment.

63Willard Richards, two years later, became the only Apostle ever to be ordained in Great Britain. One account of his appointment states that he returned from Bedford with the intention of going home with Brother Kimball, until the conference Sunday, at which time he willingly, as always, agreed to stay where he was needed.

William Clayton was born July 17th, 1814, a native of Penwortham, near Preston. He had been baptized soon after the arrival of the missionaries. Shortly after he was made second counselor to Joseph Fielding he discontinued all other business and devoted his entire time to the ministry of the Gospel, in which he was eminently successful.

64On Sunday, April 8th, [^2] the brethren delivered their farewell testimonies in the "Cockpit." The scene at this time was one of joy in the Gospel, and sorrow in parting. Those who were to leave and those who were to stay were in tears. Severing the ties of friendship and brotherhood was an ordeal. It would almost seem that a necessary part of our earth experience is to meet, to enjoy kindred company, and to part—to meet again under happier conditions, the Gospel of Jesus Christ assures us.

64On the 9th Elders Kimball, Hyde and Russell took their leave from Preston for Liverpool by coach. They were waved farewell by a sorrowing multitude. Those good Saints had provided them with means sufficient to pay their transportation back to Kirtland. Elder Kimball writes:

64"Notwithstanding the variegated scenery of the country, which in England is very beautiful, my mind reverted back to the time when I first arrived in that country, and the peculiar feelings that possessed me when I traveled from Liverpool to Preston eight months before. Then I was a stranger in a strange land, and had only to rely upon the kindness and mercy of that God who had sent me there. While I mused on these things, my soul was humbled within me, for I had now hundreds of brethren to whom I was united in bonds the most endearing and sacred, and who love me as their own souls, and whose prayers would be continually offered up for my welfare and prosperity."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 207.

In about four hours—the ride of an hour to-day—they reached Liverpool, and found that because of storms the ship on which they had planned to sail would not leave as early as expected. The opportunity to counsel longer with Elders Fielding and Richards, who had accompanied them to Liverpool, was welcomed. But when word reached Preston that they had been detained, Elder Clayton and others hastened to Liverpool, and largely filled their time. Before embarking Brother Kimball wrote several letters of encouragement, counsel and warning to the branches. On April 20th Elders Kimball, Hyde and Russell boarded the Garrick, the same sailing vessel that had brought the seven to British shores nine months before—Brothers Goodson and Snyder had previously departed; Elders Richards and Fielding were remaining.

65The forepart of the passage was stormy. After twenty-two and one-half days at sea, during which time they preached on board again, the brethren landed in New York on May 12th—after an absence of nearly ten and one-half months. There they had left only one member of the Church. Returning, they found a large branch. There they met Elder Elijah Fordham, who had waved them farewell.

65So ends the first period of the British Mission story. The Gospel seed was planted in British soil. It was cultivated by able gardeners of the Lord. In less than nine months it yielded a glorious harvest. It has borne fruit each succeeding year.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This date is according to the Journal History of the Church.
[^2] 2. This date is according to the History of the Church.
