Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

66CHAPTER 8

66THE "JOSEPH FIELDING PERIOD"

66From April, 1838, to April, 1840, may conveniently be termed the "Joseph Fielding Period" in the British Mission account; for between these approximate dates that earnest disciple of truth—Joseph Fielding—held presidency there, with Willard Richards and William Clayton as counselors.

66As the winds carried the good ship Garrick—with Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde and Isaac Russell aboard—out of the River Mersey, and out of sight, on April 20th, 1838, a sense of heavy responsibility settled upon the shoulders of the three brethren in whose charge had been left the duties and cares of presidency. A stout support upon which they had leaned heavily had been removed—for Apostle Heber C. Kimball had been both father and brother, both spiritual and temporal adviser to them.

66They, true men of God that they were, realized, however, that it was not in any man or group of men that their strength lay. It was an opportune time to demonstrate that the cause they represented was not of man's making, but of God's bidding. Their further labors in Great Britain were fraught with success, but by no means were they characterized by tranquility.

Enemies of the Church in Great Britain at that time made the same mistake that enemies of the Church of Christ have always made. They planned the time and nature of their attacks according to the movements and supposed strength of men, not admitting as a factor in their calculations the vital force—the power of God, which verily has carried this work until now, and which insures its ultimate triumph.

67The time was ripe, so thought mischief-makers, to launch an attack. Before Heber C. Kimball and his fellow travelers had sailed, the first onslaught came. Previous to this time the brethren had been frequently, sometimes violently, opposed. Falsehood and calumny concerning them and their work had been circulated. Comments upon their activities had appeared in the press; but few of the now well-known slanderous lies had found their way into print. However, about the 15th of April, 1838, in the region near Longton, Lancashire, a Methodist minister, known as the Reverend Richard Livesey, offered for sale an anti-"Mormon" pamphlet. Speaking of the incident, a later account published in the first volume of the Millennial Star over the names, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde and Willard Richards, makes the following comment:

67"When Elders Fielding and Richards had returned to Longton (after April 20th, the day on which farewells were said in Liverpool) they found a pamphlet purporting to be by the Reverend Richard Livesey, a Methodist minister who had spent some time on a mission in the United States, as he says; and having nothing more important to attend to during his mission, it appears that he spent his time gathering up a heap of lies and filth from the American papers, and imported them to England on his return; and finding that the work of God had commenced in his native land, and was likely to destroy his craft, set himself at work to (compile) his heterogeneous mass of trans-Atlantic lies, and form the wonderful production of the Reverend Richard Livesey's attack against the Latter-day Saints, it being the first thing of the kind that the enemy of all righteousness had found means to export from America, and circulate in England, but since which he has found servants in abundance to assist in this nefarious merchandise of his heart's delight."—Millennial Star, Vol. 1, p. 295.

68The Reverend Livesey's pamphlet did not enjoy a ready sale, however, as he contradicted himself several times in introducing it before a public congregation. At first he had denied any knowledge of the Latter-day Saints in America. Later, when he thought the time opportune, he brought the pamphlet forth and publicly declared that he had found the subject matter accidentally in some old papers in his trunk. In the course of the same address he stated that he wished the people to buy it because he had "been at great expense to procure the materials for writing it." It is said that his hearers retired.

68Such works fall with their own weight.

68The members in Great Britain at this time were comparatively young in the faith, and uninformed as to the doctrines and procedure of the Church, beyond the first principles and ordinances. To instruct them, and to put the machinery of the great Church organization into working order, were the first tasks of Joseph Fielding and his brethren. For some months this occupied their time to such an extent that they were hindered in the work of proclaiming the Gospel. Consequently growth was not as rapid as formerly; but the branches continued to gain numbers steadily.

68An incident that culminated in early October is amusing, despite its serious nature. Sister Alice Hodgin of the Preston Branch was the first member of the Church in Great Britain to die. She passed away September 2nd, 1838. The usual services incident to death were attended to by the Latter-day Saint missionaries. An entry from the 1840 Millennial Star account, page 295, quoted above, makes the following comment:

"Sister Alice Hodgin died at Preston on the 2nd of September, 1838, and it was such a wonderful thing for a Latter-day Saint to die in England, that Elder Richards was arraigned before the mayor's court at Preston, on the 3rd of October, charged with 'killing and slaying' the said Alice with a 'black stick,' etc.; but was discharged without being permitted to make his defense as soon as it was discovered that the iniquity of his accusers was about to be made manifest."

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC69Mistaken notions of the doctrines and practices of the Church, and of the authority of the brethren in whose care the Mission had been left, coupled with differences of a personal nature, contributed to the disaffection of some. This ultimately led, when the offenders made no show of repentance, to the excommunication of several. Among this number was one Thomas Webster. He had been a member of the Preston Branch in good standing, and is described as a man of ability, pleasing personality and apparent integrity. On April 13th, just a few days before sailing for America, the spirit of prophecy rested upon Heber C. Kimball and he was led reluctantly to pen a few lines to the effect that Brother Webster would depart from the faith and become an enemy to the people of God. When he did, instructions were given that the prophecy should be opened and read to the congregation as a warning to all.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC69This letter was read by Joseph Fielding and Willard Richards, and then sealed, so that no others should know of its contents until its fulfilment. The sealed epistle was marked and examined by Brothers William Clayton and Arthur Burrows, and placed in safe keeping.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCBecause of this foreknowledge, Brothers Fielding and Richards were particularly anxious for the welfare of Brother Webster. They earnestly instructed him and prayed for him. He grew in wisdom and favor. Soon, however, a change was apparent. He became ambitious for office and authority, and began to criticize affairs in general. At length he brought open charges against the presiding brethren, which he could not substantiate, or which were of no consequence. He was then called upon to acknowledge his error or to cease officiating in his calling, both of which he refused to do.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC70On the Sunday following, he administered the Sacrament in a private home to six people, one of whom had not been baptized, and one of whom had been excommunicated. For this defiant action, and other counts, he was excommunicated.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC70Because of his popularity, Thomas Webster might have carried many of the Saints into error with him, but the sealed prophecy was opened and read to the congregation, the witnesses of its genuineness testifying of its origin. This voided the influence of Thomas Webster with the members, and further strengthened their faith in the divine direction of the Church. This disturbance occurred in September and October, about six months after Heber C. Kimball had left the Mission.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC70Having formerly ignored opportunity to state his case in public meeting, his subsequent request to do so was refused. He then felt it his duty to "expose 'Mormonism'." Placards to the following effect soon appeared about Preston: "A lecture will be delivered at Mr. Giles' Chapel, to expose 'Mormonism,' by Thomas Webster." This appointment he filled, but with negligible effect.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC70Unrighteous ambition and malicious criticism of authority were ever the forerunners of downfall.

On October 19th, 1838, William Clayton gave up his business pursuits and devoted himself wholly to Church activities. His first move after this worthy action was to proceed to Manchester. To him is accredited the first preaching of the Gospel message in that great manufacturing town of the English Midlands. The Lord prospered him in his labors. Many believed and were baptized, and a healthy, vigorous branch was soon organized.

71Willard Richards had been designated by revelation given to Joseph Smith at Far West, Missouri, July 8th, 1838, as one to be ordained an Apostle. This information was not transmitted by letter, but had been made known to Elder Richards also by revelation. Of the calling, however, he told no one; "but it appeared from that time," says the Prophet Joseph Smith, that "the devil seemed to take a great dislike to him, and strove to stir up the minds of many against him."

71To begin with, Elder Richards was in poor health for a time. For this he was criticized. Then, in September, 1838, he had married Miss Jennetta Richards—the first person confirmed in the British Mission, it will be remembered. The following entry appears in his journal:

71"September 24th, 1838, I married Jennetta Richards, daughter of the Reverend John Richards, independent minister at Walkerfold, Chaigley, Lancashire. Most truly do I praise my Heavenly Father for His great kindness in providing me a partner according to His promise. I receive her from the Lord, and hold her at His disposal. I pray that He may bless us forever. Amen."

71This marriage tried the shallow faith of many, and called forth cutting criticism. Under entry of March 9th, 1839, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote:

"Some were tried because his wife wore a veil, and others because she carried a muff to keep herself warm when she walked out in cold weather; . . . to gratify their feelings she wore the poorest clothes she had, and they were too good, so hard was it to buffet the storm of feeling that arose from such foolish causes. Sister Richards was very sick for some time, and some were dissatisfied because her husband did not neglect her entirely and go out preaching; and others, that she did not go to meeting when she was not able to go so far.

72"From such little things arose a spirit of jealousy, tattling, evil-speaking, surmising, covetousness, and rebellion, until the Church but too generally harbored more or less of those unpleasant feelings; and this evening (March 9th, 1839) Elder Halsal came out openly in council against Elder Richards and preferred some heavy charges, none of which he was able to substantiate."—History of the Church, Vol. 3, pp. 276-277.

72Such petty meanness is not consistent with membership in the Church of Christ. From the pulpit Elder Richards invited any who had grievances against him or his wife to come to him and state them, and let him acknowledge the fact if he had erred. Only one came, and he to acknowledge his own error in passing judgment without cause.

72During this period the Church in America was experiencing bitter trials and persecutions. The Saints were being driven and mobbed, particularly in Ohio and Missouri, and apostasy claimed many, among whom was Elder Isaac Russell.

72Loving his British brethren as a father would his children, and fearing lest Isaac Russell should influence them for ill, Heber C. Kimball sent a message to the presidency of the British Mission, which reached them early in May, 1839. It follows in part:

"I have only received two letters from you since I came here. If you knew the feelings I have for the welfare of that people your pen would not be so idle. May God stir you up to diligence to feed His sheep; for they are the children of my begetting through the Gospel. Think it not strange that I speak thus, for you know the feelings that a father has for his children.

73"Mobs are common in this country; it is getting so that there is no safety anywhere in this land. Prepare yourselves for trouble wherever you go, for it awaits you and all others that love the Lord and keep His commandments.

73"Brethren, I want you to go to the north where Brother Russell labored, and see what situation the Saints are in, for I have some fears about them. Go and strengthen them in the name of the Lord, for I think that Russell is leading them astray.

73"Brethren, I can truly say that I have never seen the Church in a better state since I have been a member of it. What there are left are firm and steadfast, full of love and good works.

73"They have lost all their earthly goods, and are now ready to go and preach the Gospel to a dying world!"—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 258, 259.

73Upon receipt of the above, Willard Richards departed for Alston, to find that Elder Russell had written a misleading letter to the Saints there, a copy of which he secured. The Prophet Joseph Smith writes:

73"Elder Richards, being led by the Spirit of God, soon unfolded the sophistry and falsehood of this letter to the convincing of the Saints in Alston and Brampton, so as to entirely destroy their confidence in the apostate Russell, although they had loved him as a father."—History of the Church, Vol. 3, p. 344.

73While the hardships of the Saints in Britain at this period may not be compared for severity with those of the Saints in America, still, there was much to contend with in Britain. But then, hardship, dealt by an unbelieving world, has ever been the lot of truth's allies. Progress in the face of stubborn opposition is one of the things that puts the very stamp of divinity upon this work.

74Steady gains were made by the Church in the United Kingdom, despite all difficulties. Besides the organization of the large Manchester Branch, through the efforts of the presiding brethren and local missionaries, among the latter being John Moon, Thomas Richardson and Elder Wilding, the Gospel was established in the vicinity of Stockport, Bolton, Salford and Burslem.

74During this period, too, the Gospel was taken into Scotland, an account of which appears in the succeeding chapter.

74In April, 1840, the brethren who labored for the cause of truth in Great Britain during the "Joseph Fielding Period," were able to report increased membership, more branches and a sound spiritual condition throughout the British Mission. Although Joseph Fielding was not formally released until July 6, 1840, the active direction of the mission was largely taken over as Brigham Young and other members of the Council of the Twelve began to arrive in Great Britain between January and April, 1840.
