Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

75CHAPTER 9

75SCOTLAND HEARS THE GOSPEL

75It was reserved for two of Scotland's valiant sons to carry the Gospel into that fair and rugged land. Elders Samuel Mulliner and Alexander Wright were the men thus to serve their Church and their countrymen. Both were born in Scotland in the early nineteenth century; both emigrated to Canada and there embraced the Gospel, later to return and bear witness that God had spoken again from the heavens—a service that was appreciated by many in their day, and for which untold thousands have since blessed their memory.

Samuel Mulliner was born in Haddington, East Lothian, Scotland, on January 15th, 1809. His youth was spent in Dunbar, where he became a shoemaker. Shortly following his marriage in 1830 he made plans to emigrate to Australia, but financial considerations led him to change his choice to Canada. There he went in 1832, and located near the city of Toronto. Five years later he heard the Gospel, and, with his wife, was baptized at the hands of Elder Theodore Turley, September 10th, 1837. Desiring to be with the body of the Church, the next spring, he, with his family, set out for Missouri, but stopped with a temporary settlement of Saints in Springfield, Illinois. In the late spring of 1839 the call came to Elder Mulliner—as calls do come in this Church and Kingdom—to prepare for an overseas mission. True Latter-day Saint-like, within two months he was on his way. He visited Kirtland, preached as he traveled eastward, and was in readiness to sail from New York by the first week in November.

76The preliminary story of Elder Alexander Wright is very similar. He was a native of the parish of Marnoch, near Banff, Banffshire, Scotland, where he was born January 27th, 1804; he emigrated to Canada in 1835, joined the Church in 1836 and removed to Kirtland. His mission call came early in 1839. By March 14th of the same year he was on his way with several companions. They traveled eastward afoot about twenty miles a day, and preached along the way. In New York Elder Wright halted for some of the Twelve, who were also preparing to leave for distant lands. In early August he was joined by Elder Samuel Mulliner. From then their stories run together for a time.

76They preached and labored on the Atlantic seaboard until they had accumulated means sufficient to pay for passage. On November 6th, 1839, they sailed, in company with Elder Hiram Clark, for British shores.

76For nearly a month they were tossed on the high seas. Finally, on December 3rd, Liverpool was reached. During the voyage some of their identification papers were mislaid, and they experienced difficulty in landing, but were admitted. They reached Preston on December 8th, and after eleven days of visiting with Joseph Fielding, Willard Richards and members of the branch in Preston—exchanging news and experiences and receiving instructions—they again set out on December 19th, this time for Glasgow. On December 20th, 1839, they reached that city as the first Latter-day Saint missionaries to Scotland.

This much is by way of introduction, to follow two native Scotsmen on a round trip from land of birth, half a world away, back to land of birth. The Gospel brought them together. The Gospel brought them back to the homeland. Each had left in the interest of material comforts and financial prosperity. Both returned without thought of worldly aggrandizement, each being the possessor of that which he would not exchange for the gold and glory of men—a testimony of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the peace of soul and fulness of living that come with it. They earnestly strove to help their fellows gain like knowledge; in that undertaking they enjoyed more than meagre success.

77The day after their arrival in Glasgow the brethren continued their journey to Edinburgh by canal boat, to visit the parents of Elder Mulliner. There they were joyfully received and comfortably housed.

77Elder Wright limited his stay to three or four days. He was anxious to reach his parents and other friends and relatives in the north of Scotland. Inquiry showed that no boats were running that way during the winter season. This knowledge, however, did not change his plans—he was a hardy Scot and a true "Mormon" missionary—a happy combination to produce stead-fastness of purpose. He crossed the Firth of Forth and set out on foot for Northern Scotland in mid-winter.

Exposure, irregularity and poor food began to tell on him. Some nights he slept in the open—in a Scotch winter, and with little or no covering. In spite of a persistent illness, the nature of which he did not know, he doggedly covered the distance to Aberdeen, more than one hundred miles. There a druggist diagnosed his ailment as smallpox—before the days of rigid quarantine, of course. On the strength of this information he rested, but not for long. Within two or three days, still afoot, he continued his journey to his father's house in the neighborhood of Banff. After a brief rest he was well again, with no apparent permanent ill effects.

78Despite his illness and other difficulties and discomfortures incident to traveling afoot in winter weather, on the journey northward Elder Wright had proclaimed the Gospel on many occasions, wherever there were any who would listen. Many times he had borne testimony to old friends and to chance acquaintances met in travel. Such procedure is characteristic of Latter-day Saints abroad in the world, for they who have the spirit of the Gospel have also the missionary spirit. Every person encountered is a subject for the message of "Mormonism."

78To return to Elder Mulliner in Edinburgh: He had remained with his parents until early January, 1840, and had explained his mission as often as opportunity afforded. He then began systematic missionary work, making Bishopton, a village near Paisley, the starting point. A member of the Church from England, a Brother James Lea, was employed in Bishopton at the time. Through him Brother Mulliner was introduced to the family of Alexander Hay. On January 10th, 1840, in a small meetingroom that had been procured for the purpose, Elder Samuel Mulliner first proclaimed the Gospel in public meeting in Scotland.

78Four days later, on the evening of January 14th, 1840, Alexander Hay and his wife, Jessie Hay, were baptized in the River Clyde, near Bishopton. These two were the first fruits of Scottish labors.

On January 19th they were confirmed; their children were blessed, and the Sacrament was administered in their home. It was the initial administration in Scotland of each of these ordinances. The blessings of the Lord were with that little gathering. Peace and joy entered the home and the hearts of the Hays. That the Lord approved the action of that evening and the labors of the humble missionary was made known by spiritual manifestation; Elder Mulliner spoke in tongues. The tiny assembly that was to form the nucleus of the Church in Scotland was led to praise God and rejoice.

79But truth was not long permitted to proceed on its way unopposed. As interest in the Gospel message grew, so did resistance to its messengers. Clergymen began publicly and vehemently to denounce the doctrines of the Master—for such are the doctrines taught by Latter-day Saint missionaries.

79On one occasion in late January Elder Mulliner engaged in public debate with a Mr. Crowley. The result was an overwhelming victory for the former—with no apparent results, save it were increased opposition. The experience of the Church has proved that few souls are saved in public debate, or, in fact, in argument of any description. A humble testimony that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that Gospel truth has been restored through the Prophet Joseph, touches, mellows and convinces where eloquent persuasion and bombastic oratory and argumentation can do nought but thicken the wall of resistance around stubborn hearts.

79By this time Elder Wright had accomplished his purpose in going North, and so the two missionaries planned to continue their labors together. Elder Wright plodded and preached his way from Banff, as he had done on the northward journey—still in winter weather. According to appointment the two met in Edinburgh on January 31st, 1840, and began to spend their united efforts for the advancement of the Lord's work.

At a cottage meeting held in Edinburgh in early February two young men, Messrs. Gillispie and McKenzie, received an irresistible conviction of truth. Both impelled to action, they stood upon their feet and bore testimony of their belief in the message of the restoration. That same evening both were baptized in the open waters near Leith harbor. The Gospel of Jesus Christ works wonders. Out of the congregation assembled that evening faulty human judgment would probably have considered Messrs. Gillispie and McKenzie the least likely so to humble themselves. None can tell who will be touched, nor how; but blessed is he who is so favored, and who yields himself with full purpose of heart to the message of truth. Thereby lives are transformed and made joyous and meaningful.

80In February Elders Mulliner and Wright returned to Bishopton, and commenced activities in the neighborhood of Glasgow, Paisley, Bridge-of-Weir, Kilpatrick, Houston, Johnston, Kilbarchan, Kilmalcolm and elsewhere. Public meetings were regularly held in a rented hall in Paisley. The missionaries were forced to leave Kilpatrick under shower of stone and rubbish, ably projected by a mob. They experienced rebuffs, tongue-lashings, slanders, successes, and surpassing peace and joy in the knowledge of duty well-performed—all incident to the life of a "Mormon" missionary.

80When Elder Orson Pratt arrived in Scotland, in early May, 1840, to coordinate the work of Elders Mulliner and Wright, he found there about eighty members of the Church. On May 8th, 1840, the Paisley Branch was organized under his direction, as the first organized branch in Scotland, Robert McArthur, a local brother, was chosen to preside over the branch.

On May 18th, Elder Pratt with Elder Mulliner traveled to Edinburgh, and hired a hall for public meetings, in which on the 24th of the same month, Elder Pratt preached the first public Gospel discourse in that city. The previous activities of Elders Mulliner and Wright had been carried on privately among friends and acquaintances. Baptisms followed the arrival of Orson Pratt, and among the number baptized were the parents of Elder Mulliner, with whom the brethren lodged during their stay. On a high level, above the Castles of Holyrood and Edinburgh, one sees in the distance a majestic, rugged hill. It is known as "Arthur's Seat." There Orson Pratt retired the morning after his arrival in Edinburgh, and earnestly pleaded with the Lord to give him two hundred souls. That number and more was the answer to the earnest prayer of that humble servant of the Lord. The Saints in those early days referred to the elevation on which this prayer was uttered as "Pratt's Hill." [^1]

81Elder Reuben Hedlock arrived in Paisley on May 26th, 1840, and took up his labors with Elder Wright. Under his direction, on June 6th, a branch was organized at Bridge-of-Weir, consisting of twenty-seven members. Much opposition was quickly aroused in Scotland. Ministers warned their flocks. One employer of a large cotton mill threatened to discharge any who went to the "Mormon" meetings—but despite all threats and warnings, many heard and were baptized.

81Elder Hedlock began to labor in Glasgow on June 17. With the aid of a friend, Mr. John McAuley, he was able to secure a large hall in Anderson University. Concerning the incident Elder Hedlock wrote:

"I told the trustees I had no means to pay for the hall, only what I collected at the door; I was a stranger, and could not give them security, but if they would let me have the hall I would pledge my word that they should have their rent; this they did, though it was the first time they had let it on such conditions. Having procured a place to preach in, I put up bills through the city that an angel of God had appeared and restored the everlasting Gospel again to the earth. This excited the curiosity of about one hundred people to come and hear. After the first Sabbath my hearers dwindled to about twenty in number, but having agreed for the hall for five months I was determined to preach my time out, if I had only two hearers. I soon began to baptize."

82Orson Pratt did not feel justified in spending the time or money required to attend the general conference of the Church on July 6th, 1840, in Manchester, The progress of the work was reported at the conference by Elder Hedlock, who represented five branches and nearly one hundred and twenty members.

82Elder Orson Pratt remained for some time in Scotland. At the conference of the Church held in Manchester, October 6, 1840, he and Elder Samuel Mulliner represented the Scottish branches, reporting a membership of nearly two hundred fifty members in the region of Glasgow, Edinburgh and Ancrum.

82Elders Samuel Mulliner and Alexander Wright had laid the Gospel ground-work in Scotland, upon which the Lord's laborers who followed have built. Before they left, many persons had been baptized, and many more were friendly and were seeking further knowledge. Thus two of Scotland's own sons rendered mighty service to God and their fellowmen.

82Since these two humble and worthy missionaries first trudged into their beloved Scotland, thousands of the honest in heart have been gathered from the highlands and the lochs and the heather-covered hills. The membership of the Church in Scotland was reported as high as 3291 back in 1853, according to available records.

83From the coal mines of Hunterfield, Midlothian, Scotland, came Charles W. Nibley, an emigrant lad, who later became successively Presiding Bishop of the Church and a member of the First Presidency, and who, by his business canniness, became also a wealthy industrialist and financier in his own right.

83From Caithness, Scotland, came David McKay, father of President David O. McKay. From Scotland, also, as a "Mormon" emigrant lad, came the late David Eccles, who later became one of America's wealthy men, and whose son, Marriner S. Eccles, Governor of the Federal Reserve Board of the United States, himself returned to Scotland, the land of his fathers, to serve for two years as a "Mormon" missionary. Another notable Scotch convert was William Budge, who later was president of the European Mission, president of the Bear Lake Stake, and president of the Logan Temple. He was in the presidency of the European Mission before emigrating to Utah in 1860.

83And so, the notable Scottish contributions to the Church could be multiplied by many score, but the greatest contribution is yet to be mentioned: the contribution of clean blood, of noble heritage, of honest frugality and independence, of worthy traditions and unshakable loyalty to truth. These have been fused into the ranks of modern Israel from the great Scottish clan whose plaid is the fabric of the Gospel and whose banner is truth at any price.

Recently, called to the bedside of an ailing and aged Scottish widow, the writer heard the story of her fourteen "bairns," some of whom had died, others of whom were scattered over the world, save for one young daughter who cared for her mother as best she could while earning for both a living. Asking nothing, and still willing to give much, this woman who had left her highland home for the Gospel's sake, and who had fared poorly in the way of finding material comfort, knew not whether this illness would be her last. But with bright, clear eyes and steady gaze she looked full into the countenance of her visitor and said in broad Scotch: "Aye, but it's been worth it, lad. And if I ken what I hae to go through before I started, I would go through it all again, and mair for what I ken to be true."

84And of this ilk from the northern bulwark of the United Kingdom, have come to the Church clean and honest and loyal men and women. What more could any land give to any cause!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Millennial Star, Vol. 96, p. 332.
