Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

85CHAPTER 10

85THE OVERSEAS CALL OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES

85To Joseph Smith the Prophet the word of the Lord came on July 8th, 1838, at Far West, Missouri, as follows:

85"Verily, thus saith the Lord: Let a conference be held immediately; let the Twelve be organized; and let men be appointed to supply the place of those who are fallen.

85"Let my servant Thomas remain for a season in the land of Zion, to publish my word.

85"Let the residue continue to preach from that hour, and if they will do this in all lowliness of heart, in meekness and humility, and long-suffering, I, the Lord, give unto them a promise that I will provide for their families; and an effectual door shall be opened for them, from henceforth.

85"And next spring let them depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name.

85"Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next, on the building-spot of my house, saith the Lord.

85"Let my servant John Taylor, and also my servant John E. Page, and also my servant Wilford Woodruff, and also my servant Willard Richards, be appointed to fill the places of those who have fallen, and be officially notified of their appointment."—Doctrine and Covenants, Section 118.

85The stormy scenes of Kirtland, Ohio, and regions round about, shortly preceded the receiving of this revelation. Most of the Saints had relinquished homes and property and had left Ohio because of severe persecution. A temporary refuge was found in Missouri, although uprisings and mobbings had already occurred there. Disaffection had claimed many; but just at this time at Far West there was a brief lull in the storm.

More than two months previous, April 26th, 1838, the Lord had accepted Far West as a gathering place for the Saints, and had commanded that a house holy to His name be built there. On the 4th day of July, 1838, the site for the Lord's house was to be dedicated, and a beginning to be made. One year from April 26th, 1838, the laying of the foundation was to be recommenced. (See Doctrine and Covenants, Section 115.) The requirements of this revelation were fulfilled in detail up to and including the date of the divine instruction given above, July 8th, 1838.

86It appeared for a time that all would be well in Far West. But it was not to be. Before the specified time had arrived for the Twelve to take their mission to distant lands from the building spot in Far West, a storm broke with pent-up fury, and changed conditions materially. The blackest, most hateful of the Missouri persecutions intervened. Between July 8th, 1838, and April 26th, 1839, the Haun's Mill massacre occurred; the President of the Church, members of the Twelve and many of the brethren were falsely imprisoned and unlawfully detained for months at a time; death and apostasy had claimed some; others were driven from their homes, and scattered—forced to flee for their lives because of the Boggs "exterminating order."

Mission of the TwelveHC86By the 20th of April, 1839, the last of the Saints had departed from Far West, leaving homes and other property, fleeing before point of gun on threat of death for non-removal. In fact, the situation appeared hopeless for the Twelve to leave from the building site on the 26th, and to recommence building the foundations. It seemed probable that Satan had personally supervised the mob activities, and had left no detail uncared for in making fulfilment of the revelation impossible.

Mission of the TwelveHC87It was rather unusual for a definite date and a particular place to be given for such an appointment. In most revelations of the Lord are given words of counsel, eternal principles and general rules of conduct, while men are left to use their God-given faculties for application, and for arrangement of details. The reason for this exception was not made known directly, but the conditions under which it was fulfilled justify the inference that it was both to prove the fidelity of the Twelve Apostles and to demonstrate to the enemies of truth that the Lord's word would be carried out.

Mission of the TwelveHC87Mobocrats had sworn that if all of "Joe" Smith's other revelations came true, this one would not be fulfilled. An entry in the History of the Church, under date of April 5th, 1839, twenty-one days before the Twelve were to leave, reads as follows:

Mission of the TwelveHC87"Eight men—Captain Bogart, who was the county judge, Dr. Laffity, John Whitmer, and five others—came into the committee's room (i. e., the room or office of the committee on removal) and presented to Theodore Turley the paper containing the revelation of July 8th, to Joseph Smith, directing the Twelve to take their leave of the Saints in Far West on the building site of the Lord's house on the 26th of April, to go to the isles of the sea, and then asked him to read it. Turley said: 'Gentlemen, I am well acquainted with it.' They said: 'Then you, as a rational man, will give up Joseph Smith's being a prophet and an inspired man? He and the Twelve are now scattered all over creation; let them come here if they dare; if they do, they will be murdered. As that revelation cannot be fulfilled, you will now give up your faith.'

Mission of the TwelveHC87"Turley jumped up and said: 'In the name of God that revelation will be fulfilled.' They laughed him to scorn."—History of the Church, Vol. III, pp. 306-307.

Mission of the TwelveHCIt was fulfilled. But even faithful members of the Church had their doubts beforehand. Surely, argued some, the Lord will take into consideration prevailing conditions—will accept the labors of the Twelve and appoint another time and place for departure. This, however, was weak argument for weak men, which phrase is not descriptive of any member of the Twelve. Those who were at Liberty and in the vicinity met at Quincy, Illinois, on the 24th of April, and when the proposition was placed before them they were in favor, to a man, of fulfilling the revelation, and trusting in the Lord to deliver them.

Mission of the TwelveHC88In the early morning hours of April 26th, 1839, while it was yet dark, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John Taylor and John E. Page met on the designated spot. Other members of the Council were absent because of death, imprisonment and apostasy. Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, who had previously been called, and accepted by the body of the Church, were ordained Apostles. This made seven, or a majority of the Quorum, in attendance.

Mission of the TwelveHC88Many other members of the Church were there. Some ordinations to the Priesthood were attended to. Several persons who had proved false to the Church were excommunicated. The Twelve prayed in the order of their standing in the Quorum; and a song was sung. A stone near the southeast corner of the Lord's house was rolled into place under the direction of Alpheus Cutler, the master workman. When the business at hand had been disposed of they departed for Quincy, taking their families with them from Tenney's grove, where they had sought temporary refuge. Quoting from the History of the Church:

Mission of the TwelveHC"As the Saints were passing away from the meeting, Brother Turley said to Elders Page and Woodruff: 'Stop a bit, while I bid Isaac Russell good-bye;' and knocking at the door, called to Brother Russell. His wife answered: 'Come in, it is Brother Turley.' Russell replied: 'It is not; he left here two weeks ago;' and appeared quite alarmed; but on finding it was Brother Turley, asked him to sit down; but the latter replied: 'I cannot, I shall lose my company.' 'Who is your company?' inquired Russell. "The Twelve.' 'The Twelve!' 'Yes, don't you know that this is the 26th, and the day the Twelve were to take leave of their friends on the foundation of the Lord's house, to go to the islands of the sea? The revelation is now fulfilled, and I am going with them.' Russell was speechless, and Turley bid him farewell."—History of the Church, Vol. III, pp. 339-340.

89The command was obeyed and the word of the Lord vindicated, despite mob threats to the contrary.

89It was the purpose of the Twelve to leave at the earliest possible date for distant lands; but they had first to locate their families, who were homeless, in poverty and without visible means of support. Many settled in the region of Commerce—later Nauvoo, Illinois—and Montrose, just across the Mississippi River in Iowa Territory. Exposure, short rations, and unhealthful, damp living conditions in rude log huts and tents induced widespread disease. Malarial fever and other ailments were prevalent, and caused many deaths and much suffering and hardship.

89Council meetings were frequently held with the Prophet, who had gained his freedom shortly before the 26th of April. On the 2nd of July, 1839, the First Presidency met with the Twelve and some of the Seventy, to set them apart for their missions to Europe and to the islands of the sea. The following are some of the many words of counsel and instruction given them by the Prophet at this time:

"Then, O ye Twelve! notice this Key, and be wise for Christ's sake, and your own souls' sake. Ye are not sent out to be taught, but to teach. Let every word be seasoned with grace. Be vigilant; be sober. It is a day of warning, and not of many words. Act honestly before God and man. Beware of Gentile sophistry; such as bowing and scraping unto men in whom you have no confidence. Be honest, open and frank in all your intercourse with mankind.

90"I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is an eternal principle that has existed with God from all eternity: That that man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent will apostatize, as God lives."—History of the Church, Vol. III, p. 385.

90This was followed by a discourse on Priesthood, in which many fundamental points of Church doctrine are contained.

90It was a momentous occasion. The Twelve Apostles of the latter-day Church of Christ receiving commission by revelation to preach to all the world! The first time since the Twelve of the former-day Church of Christ had received like commission direct from the lips of the Master!

90It was neither possible nor desirable that all should travel together. The first of the Twelve to start for the mission overseas were John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff—two giants in spiritual strength, two of the Lord's noblemen, both of whom later became presidents of the Church, successively.

90John Taylor was a native of England. He was born on November 1st, 1808, at Milnthorpe, West-moreland County, where his parents were the owners of a small estate. In boyhood he was raised as a member of the Church of England. At fifteen years he joined the Methodist sect and later became a local preacher. In 1829 he emigrated to Canada and settled near the city of Toronto, where he met Parley P. Pratt, heard the Gospel, and, with a number of friends of the Methodist society, was baptized in 1836.

During the succeeding years of persecution and apostasy, John Taylor ever defended the Prophet of the Lord, frequently at the risk of his life. After having been called to the Apostleship by revelation, he was ordained to that holy office in Far West on December 19th, 1838, at the hands of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. A year later he returned to his native land to bear witness of truth's restoration.

91Wilford Woodruff was born March 1st, 1807, at Farmington (now Avon), Hartford County, Connecticut. He was the hardy son of a New England miller. In his youth he was deeply religious, but held aloof from the inconsistencies of sectarianism throughout his most eventful life. He moved to New York State in 1833, and there heard the Gospel from two "Mormon" missionaries, Zera Pulsipher and Elijah Cheney. He was baptized later that same year. In 1834 he was advised by Parley P. Pratt to remove to Kirtland, which he did. Throughout the dark and troublous days that followed, he, too, supported the Prophet upon all occasions. His call and ordination to the Apostleship are related above.

91On the morning of August 8th, 1839, John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff separately left their homes in Montrose. They crossed the river, met in Nauvoo, and proceeded on their way together. Elder Taylor left his family in log barracks, scarcely fit for human habitation. He dedicated his wife and family to the care of the Lord and departed. Of his reflections on leaving he wrote:

"The thought of the hardships they had just endured, the uncertainty of their continuing in the house they then occupied—and that only a solitary room—the prevalence of disease, the poverty of the brethren, their insecurity from mobs, together with the uncertainty of what might take place during my absence, produced feelings of no ordinary character. These solicitations, paternal and conjugal, were enhanced also by the time and distance that was to separate us. But the thought of going forth at the command of the God of Israel to revisit my native land, to unfold the principles of eternal truth and make known the things that God had revealed for the salvation of the world, overcame every other feeling."—Roberts' Life of John Taylor, pp. 67-68.

Mission of the TwelveHC92The conditions under which Wilford Woodruff left his family are described by himself thus:

Mission of the TwelveHC92"The 7th day of August was the last day I spent at home in Montrose. Although sick with chills and fever most of the day, I made what preparations I could to start on the morrow on a mission of four thousand miles, to preach the Gospel to the nations of the earth; and this, too, without purse or scrip, with disease resting upon me, and an attack of fever and ague afflicting me once every two days.

Mission of the TwelveHC92"Early upon the morning of the 8th of August I arose from my bed of sickness, laid my hands upon the head of my sick wife, Phoebe, and blessed her. I then departed from the embrace of my companion, and left her almost without food or the necessaries of life. She suffered my departure with the fortitude that becomes a saint, realizing the responsibilities of her companion. I quote from my journal: 'Phoebe, farewell! Be of good cheer; remember me in your prayers. I leave these pages for your perusal when I am gone. I shall see your face again in the flesh. I go to obey the commands of Jesus Christ.'

Mission of the TwelveHC92"Although feeble, I walked to the banks of the Mississippi River. There President Young took me in a canoe—having no other conveyance—and paddled me across the river. When we landed, I lay down on a side of sole leather by the post office, to rest. Brother Joseph, the Prophet of God, came along and looked at me. "Well, Brother Woodruff, you have started upon your mission 'Yes,' said I, 'but I feel and look more like a subject for the dissecting room than a missionary.' Joseph replied: 'What did you say that for? Get up and go along; all will be right with you.'

Mission of the TwelveHC"I name these incidents that the reader may know how the brethren of the Twelve Apostles started upon their missions to England in 1839. Elder John Taylor was going with me. We were the first two of the Quorum of the Twelve who started upon that mission. Brother Taylor was about the only man in the Quorum who was not sick."—Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, p. 109.

93The two traveled by team and wagon, on foot, or by any means that presented itself. On the first lap of the journey they met Parley P. Pratt, who was hewing logs for a cabin. He had no money, but gave Elder Woodruff a purse. A few paces further they came to Heber C. Kimball, who was engaged in like occupation. He gave them a dollar he had to put in the purse.

93Both were repeatedly ill. On September 2nd they parted company; Elder Woodruff was afforded a means of transportation, and was advised by John Taylor to accept it, and to leave him behind to recover. After much sickness, and many experiences in preaching the Gospel along the way, they next met in New York City on December 13th, in company with Elder Parley P. Pratt. At a conference held on that day in New York, Parley P. Pratt prophesied that the mission of the Twelve to Great Britain would be known to all nations of the earth. It has been fulfilled.

93Brother Woodruff booked passage on the packet ship Oxford for himself, John Taylor and Theodore Turley, who arrived on the scene and asked to sail with them. The latter two had no money, but Elder Taylor was assured that it would come before the boat sailed. It did—enough to pay for two steerage passages at fifteen dollars each.

Elder Theodore Turley's prominence in early British Mission activity deserves brief biographical comment at this point. He was born April 10, 1801, at Birmingham, England, and married Frances Kimberley there, from which place they emigrated to Canada. Their first children were born in Toronto. He accepted the Gospel there, and then joined the main body of the Church in Missouri. He was a prominent figure in the early history of the Church before going on his mission. He later laid the logs for the first house built by the Saints in Nauvoo, and figured in the events that culminated in the martyrdom of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum. He was a lieutenant-colonel in the Nauvoo Legion. He carried the Prophet's last letter to Governor Ford.

94On the 19th of December the party embarked, and after a stormy passage of twenty-three days arrived in Liverpool on the 11th of January, 1840. Two days later they left for Preston, where a happy reunion with Willard Richards and Joseph Fielding occurred.

94On the 17th of January, 1840, a council was held at the home of Willard Richards. It was decided that Elders John Taylor and Joseph Fielding should go to Liverpool; Elder Wilford Woodruff to the Staffordshire Potteries; Elder Theodore Turley, to Birmingham, his native city; Elder Willard Richards, wherever the Spirit might direct him, and Elder William Clayton, to preside over the branch in Manchester. At early dates the brethren left for the fields assigned.

94These men were among those who in the weeks and months to come converted the inhabitants of whole towns and villages, and who baptized entire congregations and their preachers.
