Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

95CHAPTER 11

95JOHN TAYLOR—GOSPEL MESSENGER TO LIVERPOOL

95No account of the introduction of the Gospel to Great Britain would be complete should it fail to dwell at some length upon the labors of Elder John Taylor, a native of England, an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, and later the earthly head of the latter-day Church of God.

95When John Taylor arrived in Liverpool aboard the packet ship Oxford on January 11th, 1840, in company with Elders Wilford Woodruff and Theodore Turley, Elder Taylor called at the home of George Cannon, the brother of his wife, Leonora Cannon Taylor.

95It would not be well to pass on without briefly commenting upon Leonora Cannon Taylor and the part she and her family connections played in the labors of John Taylor in Liverpool and on the Isle of Man.

95This family of Cannons, illustrious members of which have played many parts of leadership and service in the subsequent history of the Church, were natives of Peel, Isle of Man. Leonora, whose father was Captain George Cannon, had gone to Canada as the companion of an intimate friend who had married the secretary to the Governor of Canada. Leonora had intended to return soon, but during her Canadian sojourn the inevitable happened—two kindred souls met, and began a new life together.

The kindred souls in this instance were Leonora Cannon and John Taylor. Both were devout members of the same Methodist society. Both were not quite satisfied with that sect. Both heard the Gospel of Jesus Christ from the lips of Apostle Parley P. Pratt, and together they joined the Church and spent their lives in service for the cause of truth.

96In earlier years her brother George, who lived in Liverpool, had refused Leonora's invitation to join the Methodist sect on the ground that it could not satisfy his spiritual needs. He was searching for truth, and truth alone. For this reason she felt confident that he would accept the message of the restored Gospel of Christ when it was presented to him. With this end in view John Taylor made the call mentioned above. George Cannon was not home at that time; but as Elder Taylor left the house after a brief visit, George's wife spoke to her twelve-year-old son, George Q.—who later served as first counselor in the First Presidency of the Church to Presidents Taylor, Woodruff and Snow, respectively—and said: "Your uncle is a man of God."

96As related before, at a special consultation meeting held in the home of Willard Richards in Preston on January 17th, among other matters it was decided that John Taylor should take up his labors in the city of Liverpool, to be accompanied by Elder Joseph Fielding.

It is peculiar to note that although every missionary who had arrived from or departed for America had done so by the port of Liverpool, yet not one missionary of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints during the three years that the Mission had been opened felt prompted to engage there in the serious business of bearing witness of the Gospel restoration to the inhabitants. Acting on the promptings of the Holy Spirit all had been led elsewhere, and it seemed that the public introduction of the Gospel to that particular city had been reserved by a Master Executive for the especial charge of John Taylor. Considered in the light of his connections there, and in the light of subsequent results, why it should be so is not hard to understand.

97Delaying no longer than was necessary after their destination had been decided upon, John Taylor and Joseph Fielding traveled to Liverpool on January 22nd, 1840, and began work in earnest.

97A character to whom we have been previously introduced, but who has been forgotten for some time, enters again—the Reverend Timothy R. Matthews. It will be remembered that Mr. Matthews was a brother-in-law of Joseph Fielding; that he was a non-conformist preacher of Bedford in 1837; that he had opened his chapel then to the preaching of Willard Richards and his companion; that he had been convinced of the truth of their message, had borne witness of it to his congregation, had himself arranged to be baptized at their hands at a given time and place; and had then closed the shutters of his mind to the light of the Gospel, denounced the missionaries and their doctrines as being of the devil, and had gone his way, preaching the same doctrines in a distorted form, administering the same ordinances without authority—crying the while that his best members had left him to join the "Mormons."

97But Mr. Matthews had not been inactive during the two or three years intervening. Financially, materially, numerically speaking, he had been a success. He had assumed the role of a religious founder, and had instituted a new sect, congregations of which had grown up in several cities, Liverpool among them.

Mission of the TwelveHC98On a Sabbath shortly following the January 22nd return to Liverpool, John Taylor and Joseph Fielding attended services at the chapel in Hope Street in which Mr. Matthews' Liverpool congregation met. Mr. Matthews was not present on this occasion, but one of his devout young followers conducted the services. His remarks were in the nature of regrets for the woeful state of the religious world, for the absence of spiritual power and authority, for the pride and worldliness of churches in general. He prayed for the gifts of the Holy Ghost and for the second coming of Christ.

Mission of the TwelveHC98Such a frame of mind on the part of preacher and congregation was an opportunity not to be passed by. As the meeting was breaking up, John Taylor arose and asked permission to speak. He was directed to the vestry, where about a score of the local leaders of the sect gave him audience and requested to know what denomination he represented. Without answering them directly, he spoke as follows:

Mission of the TwelveHC98"Gentlemen, friends and brethren: I have listened with deep interest to the things that I have heard this morning. I have observed with peculiar emotions the deep anxiety, the fervent prayer and the strong solicitude manifested by you in relation to obtaining the Holy Ghost. I have been pleased with the correct views you entertain in regard to the situation of the world. We believe in those things as you do. We hear that you believe in baptism and the laying on of hands; so also do we. Brethren and friends, we are the humble followers of Jesus Christ and are from America. I lately arrived in this place, and have come five thousand miles without purse or scrip, and I testify to you, my brethren, that the Lord has revealed Himself from heaven and put us in possession of these things you are so anxiously looking for and praying that you may receive. ('Glory be to God' was shouted by many present, and great emotion manifested.)

Mission of the TwelveHC"The thing has taken place which is spoken of by John in the Revelations, where he says: 'I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, Saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come.' Brethren, we the servants of God are come to this place to warn the inhabitants of their approaching danger, and to call upon them to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, and they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Mission of the TwelveHC99"I feel an anxious desire to deliver this testimony. I feel the word of the Lord like fire in my bones and am desirous to have an opportunity of proclaiming to you those blessings that you are looking for, that you may rejoice with us in those glorious things which God has revealed for the salvation of the world in the last days."—Roberts' Life of John Taylor, pp. 77-78.

Mission of the TwelveHC99These words caused much excitement in the little gathering. Some believed and were led even to weep for the joy of it. The power of evil led others to bitter anger. To all, the doctrines and message sounded familiar, and the brethren were asked if they were "Mormons." To this query Elder Taylor replied: "No, we belong to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, called by our enemies the 'Mormon' Church."

99This confirmation of a fact they all suspected brought to the minds of the company vivid and untrue tales told them by Mr. Matthews, and circulated by hearsay, concerning the "Mormons." The brethren were refused permission to preach in the chapel.

99In the afternoon of the same Sabbath they attended a service of non-communion Baptists, following which they asked permission of the leader of that congregation for the use of the meeting place. All they wanted, they told him, was to speak—he could make the collection and keep the money. He treated them in a friendly manner and politely refused their request.

Nothing daunted, they returned to Mr. Matthews' chapel for evening services. John Taylor prophesied that many of the congregation would shake off the influence of the priests, who held them in error, and become members of the Church of Christ. The first steps for the fulfilment of this prophecy occurred immediately after the meeting. Mr. William Mitchell, a preacher of the sect, came forward and invited Elder Taylor to his home, which, within the next week, was opened for small gatherings. The congregation of Mr. Matthews' were strenuously exhorted by their religious leaders not to attend these gatherings. Despite warnings the house was repeatedly filled. Following the first of these informal meetings Mr. and Mrs. Mitchell expressed their desire to join the Church.

100A hall in Preston Street, with accommodations to seat three hundred, was rented for regular meetings. It was filled on the first night. In his address at this time Elder Taylor paid his respects to the work of fearless religious reformers, from Luther down. He lauded the efforts of those great men, and showed how their accomplishments laid the ground-work for the restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

100His auditors were deeply affected; many friends were raised up; ten offered themselves for baptism. Mr. Matthews sent a letter of warning to his flock against all things "Mormon." The warning did not accomplish its purpose, however. The ten baptisms were performed, and among the number were Mr. and Mrs. William Mitchell. Of Church progress in Liverpool, in particular, and throughout the Mission in general, at this time, John Taylor wrote the following to his wife, under date of March 16th, 1840:

"As regards the situation of things here, they are still progressing. I told you about our coming to Liverpool. The first time I preached, ten came forward. We have been baptizing since. Last week we baptized nine. We are to baptize to-morrow; how many I know not. The little stone is rolling forth. One of the brethren dreamed he saw two men come to Liverpool; they cast a net into the sea and pulled it out full of fishes. He was surprised to see them pick the small fish out first and then the large; well, if we get all the fish I shall be satisfied.

101"Brother Woodruff has written to the editors, and another letter has gone from here, so I suppose you will know all things pertaining to the Church. Elder Woodruff has lately left the Potteries where he was, and has gone to another neighborhood and is making Methodist preachers scarce. He baptized thirty-two persons in one week; thirteen of them were Methodist preachers. I received a letter from him two days since with this intelligence. He is well.

101"Elder Clark is preaching and baptizing in and about Manchester. The latest account from Elder Turley, he was well, preaching and baptizing in the Potteries."—Times and Seasons, Vol. I, pp. 110-11.

101During the labors of Elder Taylor in Liverpool we may be reasonably sure that he spent much time with the near relatives of his well-beloved wife. George Cannon, her brother, read the Book of Mormon through twice before he was prepared for baptism. Upon completing the second reading he said: "No wicked man could write such a book as this; and no good man would write it, unless it were true and he were commanded of God to do so."

101Some idea of the joy George Cannon's acceptance of the Gospel gave to a loving sister may be gained by the following excerpt of a letter from Leonora to John Taylor. The writing was dated April 14th at Montrose, Iowa Territory, North America:

"My dear husband: I went over the river yesterday, and I got a letter from you, dated 15th February. I never received a letter that gave me so much real comfort as it has done. I do rejoice and praise God for what He has done in bringing my dear brother George, and sister Ann, into the Church—the only Church with which the Lord is well pleased. I do hope that the rest of our dear scattered ones may yet be gathered into the fold, and yet live and reign with our blessed Lord and Savior.

102"Give my kindest love to all my dear friends; I hope to see many of them yet in time, and also spend a glorious eternity with them.

102"I feel my heart bowed down before the Lord, and filled with thanksgiving and praise for His providential care of you and your companions in crossing the waters, and in supplying your wants; and, above all, that He condescends to bless and crown your labors with success.

102"I do pray that his work may roll on, and that hundreds of the sincere in heart out of every church and people may be added to it, such as shall be eternally saved.

102"It will not be long before the Church of Christ will arise 'bright as the sun, fair as the moon, and terrible as an army with banners.' I saw Sisters Pratt, Kimball, Young, Woodruff, Turley, Smith, Thomson, Clark, and Hedlock; also Dr. Richards, and father John Smith. They and their families are well. . . . It is said that the Indians are breaking out and committing many outrages in Upper Missouri. Several families have left in consequence, and came here. They are calling out the militia. . . . My love to all my dear friends, as if I mentioned them by names. Believe me, as ever, your affectionate wife.

102"LEONORA TAYLOR."

102—Millennial Star, Volume I, pp. 64-65.

102Some time later, June 18th, 1840, three of the children of George Cannon were baptized.

102Elder John Taylor continued to make it his business to labor among people of all stations of life in Liverpool. He shunned no one. He made it a special duty to call upon the ministers of the city, to bear witness to them as well as to those who wore not the clerical garb. He was sometimes harshly, sometimes kindly, sometimes indifferently received.

On one occasion he held a long and interesting conversation with a Mr. Radcliff, agent for the Bible Society and superintendent of the School of Arts. True to type, this learned gentleman admitted the case of "Mormonism" up to the opening of the heavens, the restoration of divine authority, the renewal of direct revelation. Of these he said: "'Mormonism' leads to tremendous conclusions."

103Tremendous conclusions, indeed! These are the truthful claims that stir up the resentment of all unbelievers. Any statement to the effect that the Lord has spoken in this latter day is accepted by the world as a challenge, and is responsible for all opposition to this work since its inception—this, regardless of opinions that opposition has come because of polygamy and other peculiar doctrines and practices. Polygamy had not been introduced into the Church when the first missionaries went to Great Britain, but this fact did not free them from evil hatred, slander and bitter resistance. Belief in communication with the Father in heaven is the veritable bone of contention—has ever been, and ever will be until humanity accepts the truth.

103On April 6th, 1840, when Apostles Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith and Elder Reuben Hedlock landed in Liverpool from the Patrick Henry, they found John Taylor mightily engaged in his labors—overjoyed that already nearly thirty in Liverpool had been baptized and more were soon to follow.
