Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

104CHAPTER 12

104WILFORD WOODRUFF—IN THE POTTERIES

104The story of the early British Mission labors of Wilford Woodruff is a notable example of whole-hearted resignation to the will and direction of God. The bounteous success resulting from this pursuance of the Lord's work in the Lord's way is eloquent in its testimony of the wisdom of such resignation to and support of the Lord's word.

104In a previous chapter we have followed Wilford Woodruff from his New England boyhood to his early manhood in New York State, where he encountered two "Mormon" missionaries, accepted their message and moved to the body of the Church. His call and ordination to the Apostleship, his departure from his family, his journey to British shores, his arrival in Liverpool on January 11th, 1840, and his presence at the Preston consultation held in the home of Willard Richards on January 17th, have also been noted. At this last named gathering it was decided that Wilford Woodruff should take up his labors in the Potteries of Staffordshire.

He was a stranger to England and to the territory assigned. He had no friends there known to him. There was work to be done, however, and Wilford Woodruff was not one to let time slip by in inactivity. On the following day he bade adieu to Elders Fielding, Richards and Taylor in Preston, and set out for the designated field, accompanied by Elder Turley, who was bound for Birmingham. We may well suppose that parting from his brethren and from the organized body of the Church was hard on this occasion, but throughout his life Gospel interests were paramount in the actions of Wilford Woodruff.

105Elders Turley and Woodruff took their journey by way of Manchester, where they visited for a day or two. There Wilford Woodruff and William Clayton met for the first time. The formalities of introduction had scarcely passed, when Elder Clayton requested Elder Woodruff to join him in administering to a woman possessed of an evil spirit.

105They found the unfortunate lady in a rage, with three men attempting to quiet her. Many, among them both members of the Church and unbelievers, had gathered to see the devil cast out. "Had I acted upon my own judgment," wrote Wilford Woodruff, "I should have refrained from administering to her in the company of those present; but as I was a stranger there, and Brother Clayton presided over the branch, I joined with him in administering to the woman."

105The unbelief of those present had the effect of building up resistance to the workings of the Spirit of God, which seldom, in such cases, forces itself upon unwilling, unworthy company, unless there be purpose in so doing. The administration was void of effect, except to increase the writhings and sufferings of the afflicted lady.

All but the few who waited upon her were requested to leave the room. In this smaller, more receptive, more believing company the missionaries laid their hands upon her head a second time. In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by virtue of the Holy Priesthood of God, Wilford Woodruff, a latter-day Apostle, rebuked the evil spirit and commanded it to depart. The afflicted woman relaxed into a restful sleep. The next day, the Sabbath, she stood before a large audience in public service, healed, and bore witness of the blessings of the Lord in her behalf, acknowledging His hand in her deliverance from the powers of evil.

106This manifestation of the power of God greatly increased the numbers who attended gatherings of the Church in that vicinity. True, curiosity and a desire to be entertained were the motives that brought many. But at least, witness was borne to them of the Gospel restoration, and it frequently happened that those who came to scoff or to be amused, stayed to worship.

106On the Monday following, the evil power, apparently incensed at being cast out from the woman, and loath to depart from the realm of mortality, entered into her little child—a babe of but a few months. From its infant victim it was commanded to depart by the laying on of hands of the Elders. That household was no more troubled with such occurrences. During this Manchester visit of Wilford Woodruff about a score of persons suffering from sickness and disease were blessed and healed by the power of God.

106Brother Woodruff continued his journey and reached Burslem in the Potteries on January 21st, only four days after the Preston council. The region commonly known in England as the Potteries lies in North Staffordshire. It covers an area about nine miles in length by three in width, and includes Burslem, Hanley, Newcastle-under-Lyne, Stoke-upon-Trent, Tunstall, and other towns. It is the center of British earthenware manufacture. The territory had previously been visited by Latter-day Saint missionaries, but little had been done there before the arrival of Brother Woodruff.

Success attended the Pottery labors of that servant of the Lord. He ministered there nearly six weeks on his first visit—January 22nd to March 2nd. Many believed, and were baptized and confirmed members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The brethren were enabled to obtain excellent meeting places. Frequently town halls were placed at their disposal for public gatherings. The usual resistance accompanied the successful preaching of the Gospel, but nothing of a serious or unusual nature is recorded. Within the few short weeks Elder Woodruff was well established, with many friends and acquaintances, with many doors opened in welcome to him. Many praised God and rejoiced in the knowledge of truth that had lately come into their lives. The Gospel had gained fair foothold in the region round about.

107Being aware of this success, knowing that he had many appointments ahead, and that he had no thought of leaving the territory, it was, therefore, with wonder and surprise that Wilford Woodruff received an irresistible impression to leave a field so fruitful for a destination unknown to him. The occurrence is described by himself as follows:

107"March 1st, 1840, was my birthday; I was thirty-three years of age. It being Sunday, I preached twice during the day to a large assembly in the city hall, in the town of Hanley, and administered the Sacrament to the Saints. In the evening I again met with a large assembly of the Saints and strangers, and while singing the first hymn the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me and the voice of God said to me: "This is the last meeting that you will hold with this people for many days.' I was astonished at this, as I had many appointments out in that district. When I arose to speak to the people I told them that it was the last meeting I should hold with them for many days. They were as much astonished as I was. At the close of the meeting four persons came forward for baptism; we went down into the water and baptized them.

108"In the morning I went in secret before the Lord, and asked Him what was His will concerning me. The answer I received was that I should go to the south; for the Lord had a great work for me to perform there, as many souls were waiting for His word. On the 3rd of March, 1840, in fulfilment of the directions given me, I took coach and rode to Wolverhampton, twenty-six miles, spending the night there. On the morning of the 4th I again took coach, and rode through Dudley, Stourbridge, Stourport, and Worcester, then walked a number of miles to Mr. John Benbow's, Hill Farm, Castle Frome, Ledbury, Herefordshire. This was a farming country in the south of England, a region where no Elder of the Latter-day Saints had visited."—Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, p. 116.

108Blessed is he who places the word of God before the wisdom of man. The events which followed Wilford Woodruff's willingness so to be led are among the most fascinating, most colorful, most far-reaching for good in all British Mission history.
