Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

109CHAPTER 13

109WILFORD WOODRUFF AND THE UNITED BRETHREN

109Hill Farm, Castle Frome, Ledbury, Herefordshire—such is the mail address of the one-time habitation of Mr. John Benbow—God bless his memory!—to whom Wilford Woodruff was directed by the power of God in the early spring of 1840. It is not difficult for any stranger who has tried to find the old Benbow farmstead to believe that Wilford Woodruff would never have reached John Benbow or the United Brethren had not the Lord been his Guide.

109Hill Farm just does not happen to be on the road to anywhere in particular. It lies between Worcester and Ledbury by an indirect and circuitous route, about six miles from the latter town. The nearest village—virtually a road crossing, which does not lend any dignity to the term "village" for having been applied there—is Froome's Hill, roughly a mile from Hill Farm. Froome's Hill was plaintively described by one old inhabitant as a "one-'pub' village"—which would probably correspond to the "one-horse town" of America. The same old-timer harked back with pride to the days when the village boasted two public houses instead of only one.

Froome's Hill, with its surrounding acreage, is not without distinguishing history, however. It was once the center—and a most fruitful center—of intensive "Mormon" activity. No one lives there today who personally remembers Wilford Woodruff or his associates, but the country folk even yet review tradition and unwritten history concerning "Mormon" days. Many of the stories, which have been oft-whispered through three or four generations, and which have gained notably in color and peculiar twists at each whispering, have now assumed strange and distorted characteristics quite out of keeping with the original versions. But considering the remarkable nature of the actual happenings it is not surprising that this should be so, after the lapse of a near-century period. The simple and truthful story, without any borrowed elaboration, has enough of romance, enough of adventure, enough of the miraculous, enough of achievement and success, to hold the interest of the most indifferent reader.

The descendants of those who early received the latter-day message of truth in that vicinity may well give praise and thanksgiving to the God of heaven and earth. Froome's Hill and Hill Farm were then tucked away from the world except for the few who happened to live there. Even on a more recent journey there numerous inquiries proved that inhabitants of nearby towns and cities are unable to direct the traveler to Froome's Hill village—nor have many ever heard of the place. Only by a troublesome number of direct questionings at frequent points along the road is it to be reached by strangers in private conveyance. How then, in 1840, must Wilford Woodruff, who had never before been in England, who had never before heard of Froome's Hill or Castle Frome or John Benbow, who had no intention of leaving the Potteries, no intention of going south—how must he have reached John Benbow, Hill Farm, Castle Frome, Ledbury, Herefordshire? There is only one answer, and that is the right one, the one that the Lord gave him when he inquired in the town of Hanley on March 2nd, 1840: Many souls were waiting and praying for truth.

111To fulfill the divine directions received at this time Wilford Woodruff left Hanley in the Potteries by coach on March 3rd. The first day he traveled to Wolverhampton, about twenty-six miles, and spent the night. On March 4th he completed the journey by coach to Worcester, and from there proceeded afoot, about fifteen miles, to the home of John Benbow, where he was entertained, and where happenings of far-reaching nature quickly transpired.

111John Benbow proved to be a wealthy and independent farmer who lived in a rural mansion with his good wife, Jane Benbow. The couple were childless. They were members of an independent church body that had severed relations with the Wesleyan Methodists and had taken upon themselves the name "United Brethren." There were approximately six hundred in the society—truth-seekers almost without exception. Among their number were forty-five licensed preachers. At their disposal were many licensed meetingrooms. At their head stood Mr. Thomas Kington, a capable, sincere, truth-loving shepherd of a searching flock.

111The above information was imparted to Elder Woodruff on the first night of his stay at Hill Farm. Of his introduction into the worthy household of Benbow he wrote:

"I presented myself to him (John Benbow) as a missionary from America, an Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who had been sent to him by the commandment of God as a messenger of salvation, to preach the Gospel of life to him and his household and the inhabitants of the land. He and his wife received me with glad hearts and thanksgiving. It was in the evening when I arrived, having traveled forty-eight miles by coach and on foot during the day, but after receiving refreshments we sat down together, and conversed until two o'clock in the morning. Mr. Benbow and his wife rejoiced greatly at the glad tidings which I brought them."—Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 116-117.

112Upon arising on the morning after his arrival Elder Woodruff informed Mr. Benbow of his desire to begin at once upon the business that brought him there—that of bearing witness of the Gospel restoration. He had not far to go nor long to wait. In the Benbow home was a commodious room licensed by law for preaching. The use of this room the worthy Mr. Benbow proffered. He did more than that—tidings were sent from farm to farm that a missionary from America would hold forth at the Benbow home that evening. Elder Woodruff continues:

112"As the time drew nigh many of the neighbors came in, and I preached my first Gospel sermon in the house. I also preached at the same place on the following evening, and baptized six persons, including Mr. John Benbow, his wife, and four preachers of the United Brethren. I spent most of the following day in clearing out a pool of water and preparing it for baptizing, as I saw that many would receive that ordinance. I afterwards baptized six hundred persons in that pool of water."—Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, p. 117.

Mission of the TwelveHC112The punctuating points of Wilford Woodruff's ministry in the John Benbow country, and the summary of his successes, are best told in his own words:

Mission of the TwelveHC"On Sunday, the 8th, I preached at Froome's Hill in the morning, at Standley Hill in the afternoon, and at John Benbow's, Hill Farm, in the evening. The parish church that stood in the neighborhood of Brother Benbow's, presided over by the rector of the parish, was attended during the day by only fifteen persons, while I had a large congregation, estimated to number a thousand, attend my meetings through the day and evening.

Mission of the TwelveHC113"When I arose to speak at Brother Benbow's house, a man entered the door and informed me that he was a constable, and had been sent by the rector of the parish with a warrant to arrest me. I asked him: 'For what crime?' He said: 'For preaching to the people.' I told him that I, as well as the rector, had a license for preaching the Gospel to the people, and that if he would take a chair I would wait upon him after the meeting. He took my chair and sat beside me. For an hour and a quarter I preached the first principles of the everlasting Gospel. The power of God rested upon me, the Spirit filled the house, and the people were convinced.

Mission of the TwelveHC113"At the close of the meeting I opened the door for baptism, and seven offered themselves. Among the number were four preachers and the constable. The latter arose and said: 'Mr. Woodruff, I would like to be baptized.' I told him I would like to baptize him. I went down into the pool and baptized the seven. We then came together. I confirmed thirteen, administered the Sacrament, and we all rejoiced together.

Mission of the TwelveHC113"The constable went to the rector and told him if he wanted Mr. Woodruff taken for preaching the Gospel, he must go himself and serve the writ; for he had heard him preach the only true Gospel sermon he had ever listened to in his life. The rector did not know what to make of it, so he sent two clerks of the Church of England as spies, to attend our meeting, and find out what we did preach. They both were pricked in their hearts, received the word of the Lord gladly, and were baptized and confirmed members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The rector became alarmed, and did not venture to send anybody else.

Mission of the TwelveHC"The ministers and rectors of the south of England called a convention and sent a petition to the Archbishop of Canterbury to request Parliament to pass a law prohibiting 'Mormons' from preaching in the British dominions. In this petition the rectors stated that one 'Mormon' missionary had baptized fifteen hundred persons, mostly members of the English Church, during the past seven months. But the Archbishop and council, knowing well that the laws of England afforded toleration to all religions under the British flag, sent word to the petitioners that if they had the worth of souls at heart as much as they valued ground where hares, foxes and hounds ran, they would not lose so many of their flock.

Mission of the TwelveHC114"I continued to preach and baptize daily. On the 21st day of March I baptized Elder Thomas Kington. He was superintendent of both preachers and members of the United Brethren. The first thirty days after my arrival in Herefordshire, I had baptized forty-five preachers and one hundred and sixty members of the United Brethren, who put into my hands one chapel and forty-five houses, which were licensed according to law to preach in. This opened a wide field for labor, and enabled me to bring into the Church, through the blessings of God, over eighteen hundred [^1] souls during eight months, including all of the six hundred United Brethren, except one person. In this number there were also some two hundred preachers of various denominations. This field of labor embraced Herefordshire, Gloucestershire and Worcestershire, and formed the conferences of Garway, Gadfield Elm, and Froome's Hill. During this time I was visited by President Young and Dr. Richards.

Mission of the TwelveHC114"The power of God rested upon us and upon the Mission in our field of labor in Herefordshire, Worcestershire and Gloucestershire. The sick were healed, devils were cast out, and the lame made to walk."—Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 117-119.

That John Benbow was a sincere truth-seeker was proved by means more tangible and lasting than words. To begin with he, a man of position and wealth in his farming community, humbled himself and complied with the initial requirements of the Gospel of the Master. His good works did not stop there. Without obligation or condition he advanced three hundred pounds [^2] to print the first British edition of the Book of Mormon. Soon after that time he emigrated to the body of the Church in America. Before so doing he left certain properties, including the Gadfield Elm Chapel, for the disposal of the Church in Britain and for the benefit of emigrating poor. At a later date he was among those who stood bond for the Prophet Joseph Smith when evil-designing judges had set bail so high that they felt sure no one would guarantee it. John Benbow was also captain of fifty in the 1848 company of Brigham Young. Due to exposure suffered in being driven from their home in Nauvoo, his wife, Jane Benbow, was laid at rest in the winter of 1846-7 at Winter Quarters. He later married in 1851, Rosetta Wright Peacock, a widow, of South Cottonwood. Unto them was born in 1852 a daughter, Isabella Benbow Erickson. John Benbow sent his team and hired man six times across the plains, 1000 miles, to haul "Mormon" emigrants to Utah. He died in Provo, Utah, May 12, 1874, in full faith. This Church and kingdom has ever been better for the services of John Benbow.

115Wilford Woodruff labored in Herefordshire territory until early August, 1840, when he traveled to London with Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith to introduce the Gospel into the metropolis. His Herefordshire labors were broken by the general conference of the Church in Preston, April, 1840, attended by a majority of the Quorum of the Twelve, and by the general conference gathering in Manchester on July 6th, 1840. Concluding in his own words:

"The whole history of this Herefordshire mission shows the importance of listening to the still small voice of the Spirit of God, and the revelations of the Holy Ghost. The people were praying for light and truth, and the Lord sent me to them. I declared the Gospel of life and salvation, and some eighteen hundred [^3] souls received it. . . . In all these things we should ever acknowledge the hand of God and give Him honor, praise and glory, forever and ever. Amen."—Cowley's History of Wilford Woodruff, p. 120.

116"That Pool of Water" on the farm of John Benbow, spoken of by Wilford Woodruff, appeared in 1928, when the author last saw it, much the same, according to those who are in a position to know, as it was in the day of Wilford Woodruff's sojourn at Hill Farm. Nature, it would almost appear, prepared such a place with designing intent. Fed by clear water, screened by natural leafage, situated but a few score yards from the house of Hill Farm, it offers itself as an admirable baptismal font.

116The acres once tilled by John Benbow's men are little changed. Methods of agriculture and the crops, possibly, have altered much—hops are the chief product today. But the sheds, and even the farm villa itself, have changed remarkably little as to exterior. Breaks and irregularities in the barnyard wall have been left, and even the sag in the old front gate appears to be the same—except that it may tilt a degree or two more now. In fact, the outward appearance of Hill Farm has changed so little that it was by means of an old photograph, reproduced in the Juvenile Instructor some years ago in connection with an account of Brigham Young's missions by Sister Susa Young Gates, that the old farmstead was located at all. Few in the village remembered John Benbow, but the old-timers in the "pub" at Froome's Hill immediately recognized the farm by the photograph, and one of them gladly accompanied the inquirer to it.

Hill Farm was not all they recognized by the photo. The Instructor, which was freely passed around, was printed in Salt Lake City, and Brigham Young's name appeared on its pages in bold type, which name connotes much to the inhabitants of that region. Word quickly spread—as word will spread in villages, and elsewhere—that someone was inquiring for places visited by Brigham Young. An interested group—transient hop-pickers, and residents—gathered and whispered. Century-old tales were resurrected and aired. No attempt was made to conceal the fact that the stranger was a "Mormon" missionary, much to the consternation of a few who had "confidentially" related to him some shady rumors of former years, before they were aware of his identity. The farm was reached and audience sought with the master of the house. He came—a well-dressed, upstanding, tolerant, obliging young man of about thirty. The photograph mentioned before, and accompanying explanations, called forth surprise, warm interest and a pressing invitation to step in and meet the lady of the house—the gentleman's young wife. This couple—modern in every particular—had heard the village rumors concerning previous "'Mormon' goings on" in their home. They wanted facts. Facts were given them.

117In answer to earnest inquiry they were assured—as it seems every new inquirer into "Mormonism" must be assured—that polygamy is not practised among the Latter-day Saints today.

Since more pretentious living has become the vogue in farmerdom, the interior of the house has been altered much, and the arrangement that existed in the days of John Benbow cannot now be determined with any degree of certainty. Tradition has it, however, that some old "'Mormon' branch records" were hidden in a particular place in a particular wall. To satisfy a certain feminine curiosity the lady of the house decided to have that portion of the wall demolished when next it was papered, to prove or disprove the rumors. She was assured that the odds are strongly in favor of disproving them.

118An inspection tour of "that pool of water" was then conducted by the master of the house. It had been rumored, he stated seriously, that formerly the "Mormons" had actually submerged people in there as a religious rite. Was it true? It then became a "Mormon" missionary's pleasant duty to explain that baptism by immersion is still practised in the Church of Jesus Christ just as it was in Biblical times. It seems strange that people who have access to the holy scriptures should ask if baptism by immersion is really required for admittance into the Church of God!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This number is given at a lower estimate in other accounts. It is approximate only.
[^2] This number is given at a lower estimate in other accounts. It is approximate only.
[^3] 3. This number is given at a lower estimate in other accounts. It is approximate only.
