Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

119CHAPTER 14

119A MAJORITY OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES IN BRITAIN

119The British Mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as a coordinated, unified, widely-functioning institution, virtually dates back to April 14th, 15th and 16th, 1840, when a majority of the Twelve Apostles convened in Quorum capacity and in general conference at the "Cockpit", Preston, Lancashire.

119By this statement there is no intent to minimize the accomplishments of the three-year period preceding the dates given above. It is not to be forgotten that the Mission was formally opened in July, 1837. It is not to be denied that the work had taken root quickly and had spread with power and rapidity. It is not to be thought a little thing that more than thirty branches had been established, that near two thousand members had been raised up, that the increase had continued steadily.

Under any conditions such accomplishments are noteworthy, but, considering that until July, 1837, there was not a member of the Church in all of Great Britain, that there was no treasury to draw upon, that there was a loose organization only, that there was no official publication or other well-established means of general communication, that there was a veritable dearth of missionaries—considering these facts and allowing them their full weight, such accomplishments are beyond the power of mere men to explain. It soon became evident, however, that these deficiencies must be overcome for the good of the Lord's work. To do this was the chief concern of the Twelve during the meetings of April, 1840. The dispatch and foresightedness, the deliberate manner, ease and order with which the business was disposed of at this time, have stirred the wonder and admiration of many who deem themselves wise in such matters.

120There sat those men—eight of them—unschooled, untrained in business or literary pursuits, but the power of God made them mighty. They had no superior officer in Great Britain, save the Lord only; they had no one from whom to seek advice, save the Lord only; they had to account for the use of their time to none, save the Lord only. The work was there to be done. They did it, and the hours were not allowed to slip by in passing the time of day, nor in exchanging gossipy news, nor in discussing inconsequential matters of any description.

120During those three days, questions of a momentous nature to the latter-day work of the Lord in the United Kingdom were presented, considered and disposed of. Undertakings that have endured to our day, and that will reach far beyond it, were visualized, projected and organized. Prior to 1840 the work was haphazard at best. Following April, 1840, it expanded with purpose and order. During the first six months following these gatherings more were received into the Church than during the three years preceding.

The concise, matter-of-fact minutes of the general conference and of the Council meetings reveal the nature and extent of the business. They formed, in large measure, the permanent foundation upon which the work of the British Mission has since been built. They merit reprinting at this point in the British Mission story. First, however, it may be well briefly to review the movements of the Twelve shortly preceding their arrival on British shores.

121The overseas call and departure of the Twelve from the Temple site of the Lord's house at Far West, Missouri, have previously been related. The eastward journey and arrival in Liverpool of Apostles John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff have also been recounted.

121Of his own departure for the mission, with Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball has written:

121"September 14th, 1839, President Young left his home at Montrose to start on the mission to England. He was so sick that he was unable to go to the Mississippi, a distance of thirty rods, without assistance. After he had crossed the river he rode behind Israel Barlow on his horse to my house, where he continued sick until the 18th. He left his wife sick with a babe only three weeks old, and all his other children were sick and unable to wait upon each other. Not one soul of them was able to go to the well for a pail of water, and they were without a second suit to their backs, for the mob in Missouri had taken nearly all he had. On the 17th Sister Ann Young got a boy to carry her up in his wagon to my house, that she might nurse and comfort Brother Brigham to the hour of starting.

121"September 18th, Charles Hubbard sent his boy with a wagon and span of horses to my house; our trunks were put into the wagon by some brethren; I went to my bed and shook hands with my wife who was then shaking with a chill, having two children lying sick by her side; I embraced her and my children, and bade them farewell. My only well child was little Heber P., and it was with difficulty he could carry a couple of quarts of water at a time, to assist in quenching their thirst."—Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, pp. 275-276.

Parley P. Pratt, with his family, his Brother Orson, and Hiram Clark, started east by carriage a few days earlier from Nauvoo, August 29th. He made his home for a time in New York, preaching, writing and publishing the while. Apostle George A. Smith left Nauvoo in September, 1839. Elder Reuben Hedlock was also traveling eastward about the same time.

122These men performed mighty works as they traveled, and the Lord prospered their labors and cared for their wants. After many conversions, providential escapes, miraculous healings and timely providings of material needs, the party of six found themselves together in New York with means to engage steerage passages aboard the Patrick Henry, a sailing vessel on which they embarked for Liverpool, March 9th, 1840. The happenings from this point on are best told in a letter to the Church in America, sent by Brigham Young:

122"Preston, England, April 17th, 1840.

122"To the Saints in the United States of America: For the comfort of the Church in general, in that country, I attempt to address a few lines to you, to let you know where we are, and what we are doing in this country.

122"The work of the Lord is progressing here, and has been ever since Elders Orson Hyde and H. C. Kimball left this country. According to the account that the Elders give of their labors, there have been about eight or nine hundred persons baptized since they left. The Gospel is spreading, the devils are roaring. As nigh as I can learn, the priests are howling, the tares are binding up, the wheat is gathering, nations are trembling, and kingdoms tottering; men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth. The poor among men are rejoicing in the Lord, and the meek do increase their joy. The hearts of the wicked do wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

122"But I rejoice that I am counted worthy to be one of the number to carry salvation to the poor and meek of the earth. Brethren, I want to say many things, but I shall not have room on this paper, as I design giving the minutes of our conference below.

"After a long and tedious voyage of twenty-eight days on the water, we landed in Liverpool. Elders Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith and Reuben Hedlock were in the company. We soon found a room that we could have to ourselves, which made our solemn assembly glorious. We blessed each other and prepared for our labor. The next day we found Elder Taylor in the city. There had been about thirty baptized. On Wednesday went to Preston; met with the Church on Sunday, and bore testimony to the things the Lord is doing in these last days. President Joseph Fielding gave out an appointment for a conference for the Church on Wednesday, the 15th."—History of the Church, Vol. 4, pp. 114-115.

123In this same letter the following minutes of the Council and conference meetings were given:

123"At a council of the Twelve, held in Preston, England, on the 14th of April, 1840, it being the 9th day of the 1st month of the 11th year of the rise of the Church of Jesus Christ, Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor and George A. Smith being present, Elder Brigham Young was called to preside, and Elder John Taylor chosen secretary.

123"The council was opened by prayer by Elder Brigham Young. Elder Willard Richards was ordained to the office of an Apostle, and received into the Quorum of the Twelve by unanimous vote, according to previous revelation. Elder Brigham Young was unanimously chosen as the President of the Twelve.

123"Resolved, that he who acts as the secretary of the Quorum, shall prepare the minutes of the conference of the Quorum, and deposit them in the hands of the president for keeping.

123"Moved by Elder Kimball, and seconded by Elder Richards, that twenty of the Seventies be sent for, and that it be left discretionary with the President of the Twelve to send for more if he think proper. Conference adjourned. Benediction by Elder Kimball.

123GENERAL CONFERENCE MINUTES

123"At a general conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, held in the Temperance Hall, Preston, Lancashire, England, on the 15th of April, 1840, President Joseph Fielding called upon Elder Kimball to preside, and Elder William Clayton was chosen clerk, it being the 10th day of the 1st month of the 11th year of the rise of the Church.

123"The meeting was opened by singing, and prayer by Elder Kimball. Elder Kimball then called upon the Elders to represent the different branches of the Church."

124The names of the various official brethren representing the branches are here given. Reports showed that there were in the British Mission 36 Elders, 54 Priests, 36 Teachers, 11 Deacons, 1,686 members, all contained in 34 branches.

124"The meeting was then adjourned for one hour. The conference again assembled at half-past one o'clock. Meeting opened by prayer, and business commenced.

124"Elder John Moon represented the Church at Leyland Moss, consisting of six members, one Priest.

124"Elder Willard Richards, having been previously ordained into the Quorum of the Twelve, according to previous revelation, it was moved by Elder Young, and seconded by Elder Taylor, that Elder Hiram Clark be appointed as a counselor to Elder Fielding in the place of Elder Richards; carried unanimously.

124"Moved by Elder Fielding, seconded by Elder Young, that a hymn-book should be published; carried. Moved and seconded, that the publishing of the Hymn Book shall be done by the direction of the Twelve; carried.

124"Moved and seconded that a monthly periodical shall be published under the direction and superintendence of the Twelve, for the benefit and information of the Church, as soon as a sufficient number of subscribers shall be obtained; carried.

124"Moved and seconded that Brother John Blazard, of Sainsbury, be ordained to the office of a Priest; carried.

124"Elder Kimball then laid before the conference the importance and propriety of ordaining a Patriarch to bestow patriarchal blessings upon the fatherless, etc.; referred to the Twelve, whose business it is to select one, and ordain him according to the directions of the Spirit.

124"After various remarks and addresses given by the Elders, President Fielding and his counselors proceeded to ordain Brothers Blazard and Cobridge to their offices, as stated above.

124"Elder Kimball then called upon the clerk to read over the minutes of the conference, which being done, they were received by the unanimous voice of the conference.

124"Moved by Elder Young, and seconded by Elder Parley P. Pratt, that this conference be adjourned until the 6th of July next, to be held in Preston, at 10 o'clock a. m.; carried. Meeting then adjourned.

124"HEBER C. KIMBALL, President of the Conference.

124"WILLIAM CLAYTON, Clerk."

125COUNCIL MEETING OF THE TWELVE

125"The council met pursuant to adjournment, April 16th, 1840. The number of the Quorum the same as on the 14th.

125"Moved by Elder Young, seconded by Elder Taylor, that Elder Parley P. Pratt be chosen as the editor of the monthly periodical for the Church.

125"Moved by Elder Orson Pratt, and seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff, that Elders Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, and John Taylor form the committee for that purpose.

125"Moved by Elder Willard Richards, seconded by Elder George A. Smith, that the name of the paper or periodical be the Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star.

125"Moved by Elder Brigham Young, seconded by Elder Orson Pratt, that the size of the paper, its plan, and price be left at the disposal of the editor.

125"Moved by Elder Brigham Young, seconded by Elder Heber C. Kimball, that the Saints receive a recommend to the Church in America to move in small or large bodies, inasmuch as they desire to emigrate to that new country.

125"Moved by Elder Brigham Young, seconded by Parley P. Pratt, that we recommend no one to go to America that has money, without assisting the poor according to our counsel from time to time.

125"Moved by Elder John Taylor, seconded by Elder Parley P. Pratt, that the copyright of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Mormon be secured as quickly as possible.

125"Moved by Elder Woodruff, seconded by Elder Willard Richards, that Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and Parley P. Pratt be the committee to secure the copyright.

125"Moved by Elder Heber C. Kimball, and seconded by Elder Willard Richards, that Elder Peter Melling be ordained an evangelical minister (Patriarch) in Preston.

125"Moved by Elder Heber C. Kimball, that the Twelve meet here on the 6th of July next, seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff; and carried.

125"Moved by Elder Willard Richards, and seconded by Elder Wilford Woodruff, that the editor of the periodical keep an account of all the receipts and expenditures connected with the printing, general expense, etc., and the books at all times be open for the inspection of the Council.

125"The above resolutions were unanimously adopted. The conference closed by prayer.

125"JOHN TAYLOR, Clerk."

125—History of the Church, Vol. IV, pp. 118-119.

125The above minutes and letter were followed by this shorter one from Brigham Young.

126"To President Joseph Smith and Counselors:

126Dear Brethren: You no doubt will have the perusal of this letter, and minutes of our conference; this will give you an idea of what we are doing in this country. If you see anything in or about the whole affair that is not right, I ask, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would make known unto us the mind of the Lord, and His will concerning us. I believe that I am as willing to do the will of the Lord, and take counsel of my brethren, and be a servant of the Church, as ever I was in my life; but I can tell you, I would like to be with my old friends; I like new friends, but I cannot part with my old ones for them.

126"Concerning the Hymn Book—when we arrived here we found the brethren had laid by their old hymn books, and they wanted new ones; for the Bible, religion, and all is new to them. When I came to learn more about carrying books into the States, or bringing them here, I found the duties were so high that we never should want to bring books from the States.

126"I request one favor of you, that is, a letter from you that I may hear from my friends. I trust that I will remain your friend through life and in eternity. As ever,

126"BRIGHAM YOUNG."

126—History of the Church, Vol. IV, pp. 119-120.

126The greatness of these Latter-day Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ is nowhere shown more clearly than in their humility and willingness to take counsel from those in authority, even though they, admittedly, were leaders, with power and influence among their fellows.

126Many items noted in the minutes reprinted above are worthy of a treatise in themselves, and have been productive of far-reaching results in the British Mission.
