Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

127CHAPTER 15

127AN EVENTFUL THREE MONTHS

127Meetings with old friends are among life's most cherished experiences—especially when those old friends have become endeared through bonds of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

127It will be remembered that Heber C. Kimball arrived friendless on British shores in July, 1837. When he departed ten months later, after successful and eventful labors, hundreds loved him as brother and father, as spiritual and temporal adviser, and wept at his leaving. During the two-year absence that followed, those invisible bonds that draw the hearts of kindred children of God together had not slackened their hold, but, despite the many miles that separated shepherd from flock, had grown more real. These conditions made the second meeting of Heber C. Kimball with British friends a time of rejoicing and praise to God.

127Being anxious to cast doubt where there was room for doubt, enemies of the Church in Britain pretended to scoff at the idea that Heber C. Kimball would ever return to Great Britain after his first departure. This "doubt campaign" was carried on to destroy confidence in the servants of the Lord. Such rumors were not received with credence by those who knew the men of God, but they introduced depressing elements into the minds of all, which were only removed by the actual revisit, on April 9th, 1840, when Heber C. Kimball, with his traveling companions, returned to the town of Preston, two years to the day from the time of the first reluctant departure.

128With his brethren of the Twelve, Elder Kimball surveyed the conditions of the British Mission, and weighed and considered the progress of two years' labor. Having the advantage of comparison, he was able more fully to recommend at the Council meetings and general conference, April 14th to 16th, where the permanent business foundation of the British Mission was projected. During the second day of the conference Elder Kimball presided. Throughout the meetings his wisdom and experience contributed to the dispatch of the work. His recommendations are outstanding, by the records, during those days of notable accomplishment.

128Putting aside personal preference, as always when the welfare of the Lord's work was a counter consideration, immediately following the conference meetings the brethren separated and traveled to designated fields of labor—Orson Pratt to Scotland (the results of which assignment have been previously noted in the chapter on Scotland); John Taylor to continue in Liverpool; Parley P. Pratt to take up the work in Manchester; George A. Smith to visit the Potteries; Brigham Young and Willard Richards to travel with Elder Wilford Woodruff to his most fruitful field of labor—Herefordshire.

128Heber C. Kimball, rightly, was given the pleasant duty of surveying the branches formerly organized under his direction, of sounding the spiritual condition of those who had been brought to a knowledge of the truth through his preaching.

For a few days he was accompanied by Elder Richards, prior to the latter's departure for Herefordshire. The first visit was to the branch at Walkerfold, the home of the Reverend John Richards, of whom much has been said before. The worthy Reverend John Richards had struggled between spiritual and material forces for nearly three years. He admittedly recognized truth in the latter-day message, but he was old and untrained except in the ministry. His flock was his means of livelihood. Their loss meant, possibly, the loss of his daily bread. Should he accept truth fullheartedly and trust to God to provide the necessities of life? Or should he outwardly deny what he inwardly knew to be right, and cling to a comfortable living?

129John Richards is by no means the only man who has had to decide this vital question in these latter days. Tens of thousands have been called upon to make just this decision. Thousands have decided wisely for their soul's salvation and happiness. Others, among whom, unfortunately, was the Reverend John Richards, have chosen to fight a losing battle—to shun what cannot be shunned, to doubt what cannot be doubted, to deny the truth of Jesus Christ, which inwardly convicts whether men will or no. Like all who in their unwisdom have followed this course, John Richards lost happiness, peace of mind, sweetness in living, and the majority of his flock—his stock-in-trade, so to speak, from a worldly minister's point of view.

129Jennetta Richards was lying ill in the house of her father. After being administered to by her husband and Elder Kimball, she immediately began to mend, and was shortly restored to health. The Reverend John Richards, however—by this time heatedly angry—ordered Elder Kimball from his house, with which order Elder Kimball complied—much to the subsequent grief of the entire household.

Members of the branch in Walkerfold, who were only few in number, had suffered many indignities for their membership in the Church of Christ. Despite many hardships, however, they had almost without exception remained firm-rooted in the faith. There seems to be that in mankind which makes them love best that for which they endure most. The history of Christian people everywhere bears out this statement. It was so in Walkerfold. In other branches, which had been less persecuted and more prosperous, there had been some departures from the faith.

130Return visits were made to Downham and Chatburn—the villages which, prior to the first visit of Latter-day Saint missionaries, had been given up as hopeless by ministers so far as religion was concerned. Apostasy had claimed a few there. Some who had fallen away were mellowed by the return of Elder Kimball, and offered themselves for baptism again into the Church with hearts truly repentant, as their later actions proved.

130At this point in the narrative of the British Mission, Brother Peter Melling, the first Patriarch of the Church in Great Britain, is mentioned. His ordination to that office had been recommended by Heber C. Kimball at the Preston General Conference, April 15th, 1840. He was ordained and instructed in his duties. Members of the Church rejoiced at being able to receive patriarchal blessings under the hands of an "evangelist" commissioned of God to bestow them. Thereby they received much needed comfort and encouragement.

On one occasion a meeting was held in Penwortham, to which the local Saints gathered to receive their patriarchal blessings from Brother Melling. Brother Kimball was with them at the time, and gave the group in general, and Brother Melling in particular, such instructions and cautions as are ever necessary in such matters. A comment concerning the ministry of Peter Melling may well be inserted at this point. The following appears as a footnote in the History of the Church:

131"Peter Melling was the first Patriarch ordained in a foreign land, that is, a foreign land from America where the latter-day dispensation of the Gospel was opened. He was the son of Peter Melling, born in Preston, England, on the 14th day of February, 1787. He was, therefore, in his sixty-fourth year. He was evidently a man of great force of character, for he proceeded at once with great diligence and ability to fulfil the duties of his high office, all of which is evidenced by the record of the patriarchal blessings given under his hands, and now in the Historian's office."

131—History of the Church, Volume 4, p. 120.

131John Albertson was the second Patriarch to be ordained in Great Britain. His ordination occurred April 17, 1840, under the direction of Brigham Young. Since that early day of these first two commissions no Patriarch was authorized to function in his office in Great Britain until the appointment and ordination of Patriarch James H. Wallis as Traveling Patriarch for the British Mission, in which office he functioned from June 2, 1931, to July 23, 1933, during the administration of Dr. John A. Widtsoe. Elder Wallis is the only Patriarch to have been sent from the headquarters of the Church to Great Britain, or any other foreign mission, for the specific purpose of giving Patriarchal blessings.

It was disturbingly noticeable to Heber C. Kimball on his second visit to Great Britain that many who had joined the Church had been reduced in circumstances, materially and financially. Some even at that early day had lost positions because of their affiliation. It was hard for them to understand. It was hard for Elder Kimball to understand. Not an infrequent question was this: "Why do the wicked prevail and prosper?" But do they? If by "prevailing" we mean selling the eternal values of life for temporary advantage and material gain, the answer may be affirmative. But if by "prevail" is meant gaining a philosophy that carries through prosperity and adversity, with joy in living here, and a confident knowledge of happiness in the hereafter—if prospering and prevailing mean this, then only the righteous and obedient prosper and prevail. Material advantages are blessings from God, but they are only part of this earth's existence. Happiness need not depend upon them—and does not if men have the true spirit of the Gospel, and dwell in peace and love with neighbors and friends. So ran the thoughts of Heber C. Kimball, and so have run the thoughts of many British Mission sojourners who have followed in his footsteps.

132Although details are not given, there is reason to believe that Elder Kimball revisited all the branches of his former acquaintance, and put his findings to good use. A trip to Manchester in connection with the publication of the Millennial Star, the Book of Mormon and the Hymn Book, and business negotiations and arrangements with members who were emigrating, took some of Heber C. Kimball's attention. With Brigham Young he was instrumental in arranging for the emigration of the first body of Saints from Great Britain to America under Church direction on June 6th, 1840.

132This revisiting of earlier scenes, and other business duties, occupied the time of Heber C. Kimball until the next general conference of the Church in Britain, which was held in Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, on the 6th of July, 1840.

Conference times are clearance times in the latter-day Church of Christ. Reports of past labors are made; finished jobs are cleared off the board; new endeavors are projected. It was so in the early days of the British Mission—and, member for member, missionary for missionary, resource for resource, probably not as much of lasting consequence has ever been accomplished in a period of equal length in all British Mission history, as during the three-month period from April to July, 1840. Without again going into the details of the April conference recommendations and assignments, let us skim over the happenings of the short period following.

133John Taylor returned to Liverpool following the April conference. Brethren who had previously been baptized were ordained Priests and Elders, and they assisted him in his ministry. Frequent outdoor meetings were held in the parks, on the street, or wherever a few would gather. Public halls were rented. Baptisms increased—as did opposition. Meetings were often disturbed, but the disturbance usually had only the effect of better advertising the meetings. To gather crowds, street meetings were held just before the hall meetings; the listeners were then invited indoors.

133In addition to this active ministry, Elder Taylor was partly engaged in arranging the Hymn Book and reading proofs for the Book of Mormon that was in the process of being printed. By the July conference seventy members of the Church were raised up in Liverpool.

133Parley P. Pratt also spent a full three months. It is a matter of wonderment that one man could do so much in so short a time. He had been selected editor of the Millennial Star and also a member of the publishing committee. Let Parley P. Pratt account for his own time in his own words—none will say that it was not full:

134"While the residue of the committee traveled in the ministry, I repaired to Manchester and commenced preparing to fulfill my new appointments.

134"The first number of the Star was issued in May, 1840.

134"While engaged in editing and publishing the Star I also preached the Gospel continually to vast congregations in and about Manchester, and the spirit of joy, and faith and gladness was greatly increased, and the number of the Saints was multiplied. I also assisted my brethren in selecting, compiling and publishing a Hymn Book. In this work was contained near fifty of my original hymns and songs, composed expressly for the book, and most of them written during the press of duties which then crowded upon me."—Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 335-336.

134The labors of Brigham Young, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards were also intense. They went to Herefordshire, and effectively followed up the remarkable work begun by Wilford Woodruff. One experience is related below in the words of Wilford Woodruff:

134"The power of God rested upon us and upon the mission, in our field of labor in Herefordshire, Worcestershire and Gloucestershire. The sick were healed, devils were cast out, and the lame were made to walk. One case I will mention: Mary Pitt, who died later in Nauvoo, sister of William Pitt, who died years after in Salt Lake City, had not walked upon her feet for eleven years. We carried her into the water, and I baptized her. On the evening of the 18th of May, 1840, at Brother Kington's house in Dymock, Elders Brigham Young, Willard Richards, and I laid hands upon her head and confirmed her. Brigham Young being mouth, rebuked her lameness in the name of the Lord, and commanded her to arise and walk. The lameness left her, and she never afterwards used a staff or crutch. She walked through the town of Dymock next day, and created a stir among the people thereby; but the wicked did not feel to give God the glory."—Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 119-120.

During this period Brigham Young labored in the Herefordshire territory for about a month, chiefly in the neighborhood of Froome's Hill village—and village legends tell of him to this day. Among the places he visited are named Stanley Hill, Moorends Cross, Malvern, Ledbury, Marsden, Shucknell Hill, Dymock, and Lugwardine. At the last named place he wrote to the Prophet Joseph Smith, reporting his labors and asking concerning the advisability of publishing a British edition of the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants, and asking directions for emigrating Saints.

135The Malvern Hills, a low range of mountains in southwestern England, are known for their soft beauty and varied hue. They skirt the region of Worcester and Ledbury. On one of the higher peaks, known as Herefordshire Beacon, lie the ruins of an ancient fortress or military camp, supposed to have been built and occupied by the ancient Britons of Siluria, and to have fallen before the sweeping onslaught of early Roman legions. To this historic place of solitude the brethren retired on May 20th, to counsel together, and with the Lord, for the purpose revealed by the following May 20th entry in the journal of Brigham Young:

135"Brothers Woodruff, Richards and myself went on to the top of the Herefordshire Beacon, where, after prayer, we held a council and agreed, that since we had obtained 250 pounds from Brother John Benbow, and 100 pounds from Brother Kington towards publishing the Book of Mormon and Hymn Book, I should repair immediately to Manchester and join the brethren appointed with me as a committee, and publish 3,000 copies of the Hymn Book without delay. It was also voted that the same committee publish 5,000 copies of the Book of Mormon, with an index affixed. I started for Manchester (accompanied by Elder Kington a short distance) and went to Wolverhampton."—History of Brigham Young, Millennial Star, Vol. 25, p. 743.

Brigham Young reached Manchester on May 23rd, calling, en route, upon Brothers George A. Smith and Theodore Turley, who had been laboring with success in Burslem and the Potteries generally. Elder Turley had only been released from Stafford jail on May 9th, "where," quoting Joseph Smith in the History of the Church, "he had been confined since his arrest on the 16th of March last, at the instigation of John Jones, a Methodist preacher, on the pretense of a claim arising under a partnership with another man fifteen years ago, before he left England; but the real object was to stop his preaching. He was without provisions for several days, but the poor Saints in the Potteries, on learning his condition, supplied his wants, some of the sisters actually walking upwards of twenty miles to relieve him. He preached several times to the debtors, was visited by Elders Woodruff, Richards, George A. Smith, A. Cordon and others, and was dismissed from prison on his persecutors' ascertaining their conduct was about to be exposed. This rather encouraged than disheartened the Elders, as I had told them on their leaving Nauvoo, to be of good courage, for some of them would have to look through grates before their return." [^1]

136The decision of the "Beacon Council" was approved by the other brethren, as soon as they were informed of it, and arrangements were quickly made for the printing of the Book of Mormon. The work of collecting and arranging the Hymn Book also progressed rapidly.

136Meanwhile, Elders Woodruff and Richards continued their labors in the Herefordshire region. The work is summarized by Wilford Woodruff in a letter to America:

"We have held two conferences of late in the south of England where I have been laboring; the first was held at the Gadfield Elm Chapel, in Worcestershire, England, June 14th. Elder W. Richards was with me; we had an interesting time; we organized twelve churches, and transacted much business; the other was held on the 21st of June, at Stanley Hill, Herefordshire, England. Elder Richards and myself conducted the meeting, or conference, with the help of God; and I never saw more business executed in one day, than on this occasion. We organized twenty churches; ordained 4 Elders, 7 Priests and 4 Teachers; baptized 10, confirmed 20, and blessed 20 children, besides a multitude of other business, and broke bread to several hundred Saints, etc. The work had been so rapid, it was impossible to ascertain the exact number belonging to each branch, but the whole number is 33 churches, 534 members, 75 officers, viz.: 10 Elders, 52 priests, and 13 teachers, all of which had embraced the work in less time than four months in a new field which I have opened in Herefordshire, Worcestershire and Gloucestershire, and the Church now in that place numbers over six hundred; and the work was never in a more prosperous state in that place, than at the present time. I have no doubt but what the churches in that place will soon number one thousand souls."—Times and Seasons, Volume 1, p. 168.

137The July 6th conference was held, but not in Preston, as had at first been planned. Members of the Church were numerous in Manchester; the Millennial Star office was there, and that city was centrally located for the branches; and so it was decided to hold the conference there. Carpenter's Hall, which would seat approximately fifteen hundred persons, was previously hired for regular meetings at a cost of #100 a year. There the conference convened and proceeded in order. Parley P. Pratt was chosen to preside. The other Apostles, with the exception of Orson Pratt, were in attendance. Well over twenty-five hundred members, and about eighty branches, were reported. Priesthood ordinations were recommended. The work of the publishing committee was approved, and the Hymn Book was unanimously accepted.

138The call was sounded for volunteers to give their entire time to the ministry. Besides the missionaries from America, about fifteen of the local brethren offered their services, which were gladly accepted and used to advantage.

138President Joseph Fielding and his two counselors, Hiram Clark [^2] and William Clayton, were released from the duties of presidency, to enable them to give more time to the traveling ministry. Their labors in that capacity, extending over more than two years, were accepted and commended. This action left Brigham Young, as President of the Twelve, in charge of the Mission.

138On the day following, a meeting of Church officers convened in the council room of the Millennial Star office, Oldham Road, Manchester, where missionaries were assigned to Scotland, Ireland, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Sheffield, Lancaster, and other territory in which they had already labored.

138There were fruits in abundance to show for the labors of those eventful three months. The recommendations of the April conference had been fulfilled. The success enjoyed, if one may presume to analyze it, is attributable to at least three factors: First—and always—they were dependent on the Lord, and received and accepted His direction. Second, when there was work to be done, they did it, put it behind them, and tackled the next problem. Third—also important in missionary endeavor—they followed up their work.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See pp. 124, 125.
[^2] Adapted from "The Star and Its Prophesied Headquarters," by James H. Wallis, associate editor, Millennial Star, Vol. 95, No. 20.
