Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

139CHAPTER 16

139THE STORY OF THE MILLENNIAL STAR

Mission of the TwelveHC139The Millennial Star, official publication of the "Mormon" Church in England since May, 1840, has recorded the rise and progress of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints over a greater span of time than any other publication ever issued by this Church in its one-hundred and seven years of latter-day existence.

Mission of the TwelveHC139The Star has chronicled events, temporal and spiritual, under five Sovereigns of the British Empire and under all seven Presidents of the "Mormon" Church, including the Prophet Joseph Smith. When Queen Victoria was early displaying her superb British statesmanship and sagacity the Star was noting events of the Church and the world.

Mission of the TwelveHC139When Joseph Smith, the latter-day Prophet, was rounding out his work of "gathering the first harvest" and "strengthening the cause of Zion," the Star was recording the progress of events. When a murderous mob claimed the Prophet Joseph as its victim, the Star, with black borders, mourned the loss with those who loved the Prophet, and with just men everywhere.

Mission of the TwelveHC139When the first of more than fifty-two thousand Britons left home and country to take their chances with the Church of Jesus Christ in a new world and on new frontiers, the Millennial Star recorded their departure, and has continued to note the sacrifices and faithfulness of these men and women who chose principles before convenience, and truth before worldly possessions.

Mission of the TwelveHCAs nearly six thousand "Mormon" missionaries have quietly come and gone from British shores during the past century, the Millennial Star has noted their arrivals and departures, their successes and disappointments, their welcomes and persecutions, their testimonies and conversions.

Mission of the TwelveHC140When a misinformed British Press has attacked "Mormons" and "Mormonism," the Star has replied with facts. When a well-informed British Press has dealt fairly with the "Mormon" question, the Millennial Star has noted this fair treatment and has published its gratitude.

Mission of the TwelveHC140Among the editors and assistant and associate editors of the Millennial Star, oldest publication of the "Mormon" Church now in existence, have been numbered five of the seven Presidents of the Church, many of the General Authorities, and others of the Church's most worthy and brilliant writers and thinkers, including university presidents, eminent scientists, congressmen, professors, poets, lawyers, financiers and scholars.

140The beginning of the Millennial Star dates back to the year 1840-41 when Brigham Young and a majority of the Twelve Apostles conducted their affairs in England as a Quorum for the first and last time. The action which brought the Millennial Star into existence and named it, is recorded in the minutes of a General Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, held in the Temperance Hall, Preston, Lancashire, England, on the 15th of April, 1840. [^1]

Mission of the TwelveHCIn accordance with the commission from the Council of the Twelve, after the close of the conference, Elder Parley P. Pratt went to Manchester, and began preparations for the publication of the Star. Within a month he had all arrangements completed and was able to issue the first number in the latter part of May, under date of May, 1840.

141The purposes and policies of the Star, as set forth by its first editor, Apostle Parley P. Pratt, were incorporated within the "Editor's Address to His Patrons," which appeared in Volume 1, Number 1. Whether or not the aims and motives as first given have changed with the years the reader may best judge for himself by reviewing the printed address, which is here reproduced in full, unaltered as to wording or punctuation:

141"Friends and Fellow-Travellers to Eternity,

141"It is with heart-felt joy and satisfaction we have the pleasure of sending forth the first number of the Millennial Star—that luminary, which, rightly conducted, may be a means in the hand of God, of breaking the slumber and silence of midnight darkness, which, like a gloomy cloud, has long hung over the moral horizon—of dispelling the mists of error and superstition which have darkened the understanding and benumbed and blunted every great and noble faculty of the soul—and of kindling a spark of light in the hearts of thousands, which will at length blaze forth, and light up the dawn of that bright day which was seen afar off by holy men of old—the Sabbath of Creation.

141"We trust this paper will prove a welcome visitor to the palaces of the noble, the mansions of the rich, the towers of the brave, and the cottages of the poor: that the sublimity of its truths, the splendor of its light, and the easy simplicity of its style and language, may, at once, interest and edify the learned, and instruct and enlighten those in the humbler walks of life.

141"We are aware of the greatness of the undertaking, and of the solemn and awful responsibility resting upon us in conducting such a publication, as well as of the boundless field—the shoreless ocean—the fathomless deep upon which we have entered. We are truly sensible of our own weakness and inability to fill so important a station—to do justice to subjects so glorious and sublime, to themes so delightful, so divine: themes which have exhausted the eloquence of ancient prophets—the melody of inspired poets: themes, of which angels have tuned their sweetest notes—their sublimest effusions, in strains divinely new, the fulness yet untold.

"Sensible of our own inability, we shall carefully give heed to the sure word of prophecy as to a light which shines in a dark place, and seek for the inspiration of that Spirit which guides into all truth, and, which searches all things; yea, the deep things of God. In so doing, we hope to be able to hold forth the truth in a light so clear and evident, that it will commend itself to every man's conscience.

142"In our principles, we shall be obliged to come in contact with many of the opinions, doctrines, and traditions of men; and have to contend with many prejudices which now exist in the world, growing out of the present and past unhappy state of religious society. But we shall pursue a straightforward, bold, and fearless course, without turning a hair's-breadth to the right or left from the principles of truth, to court a smile or shun a frown. We shall not be careful to inquire what will be popular or unpopular—what will please or displease, but, what is truth; and when we discern that a principle is true, and will benefit mankind, we shall publish it, even if it were to come in conflict with the opinions of all Christendom.

142"If, at any time, we shall be under the necessity of answering objections, correcting misrepresentations, or of entering into the field of controversy with those who may differ from us, we shall 'contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the saints;' but at the same time, hold sacred the characters, regard the rights, and respect the feelings of those who do not see with us. 'The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle—patient towards all men.' 'In meekness instructing those who oppose themselves.'

142"In matters of doctrine, we shall contend for one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one Holy Spirit, one God and Father of all; and in short, for all the offices, ordinances, gifts, and blessings which were set in order among the ancient saints.

142"As to party names, we shall acknowledge no name as belonging to the people of God but that of Saints; a name which is older than the flood. In relation to the Church of God in this age of the world, we shall acknowledge no name but 'the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.'

142"In regard to prophecy, we shall contend for a literal application and fulfilment, according to the common usage of the language,—according to the most plain, easy, and simple meaning of words and sentences.

142"As to 'Calvinism,' 'Arminianism,' 'Trinitarianism,' 'Unitarianism,' 'Total-Depravity,' and a thousand other such-like terms, which have confused, distracted, and divided the religious world, we know of no such terms in the Bible, and therefore have nothing to do with them.

142"As to 'the powers that be,' we shall teach men to fear God, honor and respect the laws, and all who are in authority, until he (Christ) reigns, whose right it is to reign.

"As to temperance, we shall earnestly plead for men to be temperate in all things; and especially to beware of drunkenness and all its attendant evils and abominations.

143"'In our style, we shall endeavor to be plain and simple, as our principles are designed for the benefit of all classes of society. In short, we hope, by the aid and assistance of the Spirit of God, to comfort the mourner—to bind up the broken-hearted—to preach the gospel to the poor—to bring glad tidings to the meek; and 'that those who have erred in spirit may come to understanding, and those who have murmured may learn doctrine."

143(Manchester, May, 1840.) [^2]

143"The size of the page, weight of paper, and general makeup chosen at the beginning have been continued until the present. It was issued first as a monthly of twenty-four pages, with cover, and bore the imprint, 'Manchester: Printed by W. R. Thomas, Spring Gardens, 149 Oldham Road.' The next three numbers were thirty-two pages each, and the next six numbers twenty-four pages each, making the number of pages in the first volume, three hundred and twelve. The last four numbers of the first volume were printed by W. Shackleton and Son, Duncie Place, Manchester.

143"The first number (May, 1841) of the second volume, was printed by Dalton and Rigg, 61 Spring Gardens. After that the numbers bore the imprint: 'Printed and published by P. P. Pratt, 47 Oxford Street, Manchester, and for sale at the Emigration Office, 36 Chapel Street, Liverpool.' Before the volume closed, the publishing office was removed to Liverpool, 36 Chapel Street, and from that time until the removal of the European Mission Headquarters to London in March, 1933, the Star had been edited in that city.

"Volume II of the Millennial Star consisted of twelve monthly numbers, but each number contained only sixteen pages, making one hundred and ninety-two pages in the volume. Commencing with volume VI (June 15th, 1845) the Star was changed to a semi-monthly. That volume (Volume VI) only covered six months, the last number being dated December 1, 1845. Volume VII, also published semi-monthly, commenced with January, 1846, but like its predecessor, only covered six months. Volume VIII covered the balance of 1846. Volume IX commenced with January 1st, 1847, and closed with December 15th, 1847, and consisted of twenty-four numbers. Volumes X,' XI, XII and XIII were also published regularly as a semi-monthly periodical, each volume covering a calendar year. But with the beginning of 1852, commencing with January 1st of that year (Volume XIV), the paper was changed from a semi-monthly to a weekly periodical, and as such it has been continued until the present time (1937). The current volume being published is the ninety-ninth.

144"Since 1852, when the paper was changed to a weekly periodical, each volume has averaged about eight hundred forty-two pages, and altogether the ninety-nine volumes of the Millennial Star published from 1840 to 1937 inclusive, contain more than seventy-five thousand pages of printed matter, all the pages in the volumes being an average size octavo.

144"On two different occasions the very existence of the Millennial Star has been threatened through lack of patronage. The editor intended to suspend the publication at the close of Volume II, but upon the urgent appeal of the Scotch saints and others, who promised and rendered financial aid, it was continued. Early in 1843, agreeable to instructions from the headquarters of the Church in Nauvoo, Illinois, the publication of the Star was stopped temporarily, but only for two months, after which it was continued, and the back numbers issued, so that there was in effect no break in the publication. In October, 1843, the Star had one thousand six hundred subscribers, but when the periodical was changed to a weekly publication, January 1st, 1852, the circulation was increased to about twenty-two thousand, and the subscription price lowered from threepence to one penny.

"Until 1861, the Millennial Star and other Church publications were printed by various firms in England, but in the spring of 1861 arrangements were made by President George Q. Cannon, according to the wishes of President Brigham Young, for the printing and publishing of the Millennial Star, Journal of Discourses, and other Church works and periodicals at the Latter-day Saint Mission Office in Liverpool. Consequently, a printing press and the necessary machinery, type and material was purchased, and the first number of the Millennial Star was printed and published from number 42 Islington, Liverpool, commencing with number 17 of Volume 23, dated April 20th, 1861. The Star was printed from its own printing department from then until May 4, 1933, when, with the removal of mission headquarters to London, it came from the shop of Mr. James Foggo at 27 Park Lane, Liverpool, the plant having been leased to him."

145The Millennial Star, important as it is in the century story of the British Mission, is, nevertheless only one of hundreds of publications that have been issued from the presses of the Church in Great Britain, and from private printing establishments under contract to the Church. Many first editions of important contributions to Church literature have been released from British presses before their appearance elsewhere.

145Since the first British edition of the Book of Mormon in 1841, several editions of three of the four standard works of the Church—the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price—have come from British presses, in addition to an unnumbered and numberless mass of other books, pamphlets and tracts. The size and extent of some such editions shows in the record. Others are nowhere on record, and their number and extent may only be remotely estimated. President Heber J. Grant, prodigious distributor of literature, made the following report at the close of his term of Presidency over the European Mission:

"Today it is thirty-five months since I assumed the Presidency of the European Mission. The time has passed very rapidly. I have been busy and thoroughly enjoyed my labors. The mission was in splendid condition, and I have endeavored to maintain the high standard set by my predecessor. Since my arrival, nine hundred and sixteen missionaries have registered in Liverpool. In January, 1904, the property at 10 Holly Road was purchased as mission headquarters. It was a wonderful improvement over the old quarters at 42 Islington. On November 21, 1906, a splendid home at 295 Edge Lane, known as Durham House, was secured. During the eleven months ending November 30, 1907, there have been printed at the mission headquarters the following tracts and books: Rays of Living Light, 785,500; Articles of Faith and Letter, 600,000; First Principles of the Gospel, 463,000; Is Baptism Essential?, 534,000; Is Belief Alone Sufficient?, 286,000; Glad Tidings, 266,000; Only True Gospel, 162,000; Baptism: How and By Whom Administered?, 166,000; Baptism for the Remission of Sins, 144,000; Universal Apostasy, 89,000; The Only Way To Be Saved, 74,000; Restoration of the Everlasting Gospel, 60,500; Necessity of Revelation, 56,500; Why Is It?, 39,000; Character of the Latter-day Saints, 11,500; Bound Rays of Living Light, 70,000; My Reasons For Leaving the Church of England, 20,400; Was Joseph Smith Sent of God?, 5,000; Parry's, 19,000.—From President Grant's Farewell Address to the British Mission.—Millennial Star, Vol. 95, p. 350.

For a century now "Mormon" missionaries have been distributing such literature, with its message of life and salvation, to the doors of the great and the lowly, and on the streets of the cities and the by-lanes of the countryside. Most of it has been freely given. Some has been sold at cost. While the condition of the record makes accurate estimation impossible, it is probable that the century has seen the distribution in Great Britain of no less than three hundred million tracts and ten million books and pamphlets. Some of this literature has been spurned; some has been ignored; some has been foolishly and wastefully passed out. But much of it has penetrated the hearts of honest, truth-seeking men and women and has started them upon a quest for further knowledge of God's will and purposes concerning men. Whatever of "Mormon" literature has gone unheeded in the British Isles, that which has reached its mark has paid sufficient rewards in human happiness and salvation to justify all of the money, labor and materials, with an inestimable balance still on the credit side of the ledger.

Mission of the TwelveHC147But to return to the "Story of the Star."

Mission of the TwelveHC147The foreman of the Millennial Star office was, from the first or very soon after, Mr. William L. Davies, who continued in charge for about thirty years, and under whom Elder James H. Wallis received his early training. Mr. Davies was succeeded by Elder H. J. Halton, who later went to Salt Lake City, Utah, but who was with the office for more than nine years, taking his departure for America, June 7th, 1900. He was succeeded by the efficient and faithful foreman, Mr. James Foggo, who served from May 25, 1900, until December 31, 1936, at which time the printing of the Star was placed under contract with the Ludo Press, 373 Earlsfield Road, London S. W. 18. With this change, under the administration of Dr. Richard R. Lyman, the Star was given a two-color cover and began, for the first time in its history, to accept a limited and selected type of advertising. It should be noted that for thirty-seven years under James Foggo, an issue of the Star was never late—not even during the World War, when he worked in an aircraft factory by day and set the type and printed the Star by night.

Mission of the TwelveHC147There have been a number of practical printers, typographers and pressmen called on missions to Great Britain, and it is known that several of these have at times served in the publishing department of the Star. Among them may be mentioned, Joseph Bull, Sr., Walter J. Lewis, Joseph Hyrum Parry, Joseph Bull, Jr., George C. Lambert, Edwin F. Parry, James H. Anderson and J. M. Sjodahl.

Mission of the TwelveHCBrigham Young edited the Millennial Star for a time, although his name never appeared in print as its editor. Elder Thomas Ward was the first associate editor of the Star, assisting Parley P. Pratt, and upon the return of Elder Pratt to the United States in October, 1842, Brother Ward was made editor-in-chief. Elder Reuben Hedlock subsequently arrived from Nauvoo, and became the presiding Elder of the Mission, but Elder Ward still continued editor of and principal writer for the Star, as he did also after Apostle Wilford Woodruff arrived in January, 1845, to preside over the Mission. In the following June, however, Elder Woodruff became senior editor, and Elder Ward, associate. In January, 1846, Elder Woodruff, having decided to return home, Elder Ward again became the editor.

Mission of the TwelveHC148On the arrival of Apostle Orson Hyde and John Taylor in October, 1846, to assume the presidency of the British Mission, the first named became editor of the Star. Word having been received that Elder Orson Spencer was dead, his obituary was published in the Star of January 1, 1847, and in the next issue Elder Hyde announced his own departure for America, and the appointment of Elder Franklin D. Richards to the presidency of the Mission and editorship of the Star. Elder Richards tenure of office was very brief; he only remained to edit one number of the Star, and, indeed, his name was not even published as editor, but instead appeared the name of Orson Spencer, for, strange to say, he landed in England twenty-three days after his death had been announced, and enjoyed a privilege which most mortals are denied—that of reading his own obituary.

148The names of the editors and associate editors of the Millennial Star subsequent to this time and until the present, are listed in the Appendix.

149Nearly a century has passed since the publication of the Millennial Star was started, ten years after the organization of the Church, and during one of the most trying periods of its history. As set forth on the title page of the first volume, each one subsequent has contained "a great variety of useful information in regard to the doctrine, principles, rise, progress, success, opposition, persecution, etc., of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and of the great work of God in these last days, with a faithful record of the signs and judgments which are beginning to be shown forth in the heavens and in the earth."

149Each week of every year the Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star goes forth in British lands as an expounder of doctrine, as a teacher of lofty precept, a bearer of timely news, a minister of comfort and cheer, a messenger of good will, and as a herald of salvation. It has recorded prophecies and their fulfillment; it has been the first place of appearance of some of the great works of "Mormon" literature, and of some of the most enduring and best beloved "Mormon" hymns. The Star has felt the pulse of the Church and its people, and has reflected, in truth, what it felt.

149What events future issues of the Millennial Star will be called upon to record, no man knows, but that these and all other world events will be in accordance with the words and prophecies of the prophets of God, both ancient and modern, is a solemn and invariable certainty. That all such events will continue to be recorded in fact, and interpreted in the light of truth, is a sacred tradition of nearly a century's standing, from which the oldest current publication of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints may not depart.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Times and Seasons, Volume 2, p. 401.
[^2] Adapted from "The Star and Its Prophesied Headquarters," by James H. Wallis, associate editor, Millennial Star, Vol. 95, No. 20.
