Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

150CHAPTER 17

150IRELAND HEARS THE GOSPEL

150The Lord's latter-day work was well started in England and Scotland. There was work enough to keep all hands busy—and to spare—on the English side of the Irish Sea; but there were millions in Ireland still waiting in darkness, thousands of whom were prepared for the advent of truth. The privilege of carrying Gospel tidings to those who waited on the "Emerald Isle" fell to the lot of Elder John Taylor.

150The Church in Liverpool was growing rapidly. There were demands upon every available hour of Elder Taylor's time; but to say unqualifiedly that John Taylor was popular in Liverpool would be to utter an untruth. True servants of the Lord are seldom popular with great majorities. Those who did seek his ministrations, however, sought earnestly, as if their soul's salvation depended upon it—which, indeed, was the case. It is plain, however, that this wholesome popularity did not extend to the gentlemen of the clerical garb. Of them he wrote:

150"We called upon many of the leading ministers of different denominations, and delivered our testimony to them. Some received us kindly, some otherwise; but none would let us have their chapels to hold forth in. They were so good in general, and so pure, that they had no room for the Gospel. They were too holy to be righteous, too good to be pure, and had too much religion to enter into the kingdom of heaven."—Times and Seasons, Volume 2, p. 404.

Early in the month of July, 1840, Elder Taylor engaged for one year, one of the largest and finest halls in Liverpool—the Music Hall, on Bold Street, with seating accommodations for approximately fifteen hundred people. In this hall a lecture series was to be given by Elder Taylor. Following its acquisition and before the lectures were scheduled to begin, a brief week or two was available for the introduction of the Gospel into Ireland.

151James McGuffie, obviously Irish, was among those who were early baptized in Liverpool. He was well acquainted and connected in the village of Newry, County Down, Ireland. It is not at all unlikely that Newry was the village of his birth and the home of his youth, although we are not definitely told so. This Brother McGuffie and Brother William Black were the traveling companions of John Taylor on his first official visit to the "Emerald Isle" as an ambassador of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Mission of the TwelveHC151Taking leave at Liverpool from a large group of Saints who had gathered to the docks to bid them farewell, these three sailed out of the River Mersey into the Irish Sea on July 28th, 1840. Seven months earlier there had been no member of the latter-day Church of God in the world-famous port of Liverpool; now there were scores, eager to assist the work and its servants, and thankful for their own knowledge of the life-giving message.

Mission of the TwelveHCOn the day after sailing, the three reached Newry, a village among the hills of rural Ireland, some thirty odd miles in a southerly direction from Belfast. The influence of Brother McGuffie, with the help of the Lord, placed the courthouse at the disposal of the brethren. The village bell-ringer was dispatched to give notice of the pending meeting, an unusual meeting, which was to be held at seven o'clock that evening. The news spread, and had its effect. Between six and seven hundred nearby residents gathered at the appointed hour, and there Elder John Taylor preached the first public Gospel discourse in Ireland. One such discourse satisfied the curiosity of most of the congregation. The meeting that was announced for the following evening was attended by a few only, and the time was largely spent in friendly and informal discussion.

Mission of the TwelveHC152Following the second night's meeting in Newry, it was decided that other places should be visited. Accordingly, the next morning Brothers McGuffie and Black, with a Mr. Thomas Tate, a Liverpool acquaintance, accompanied Brother Taylor in a jaunting-car on a trip through rural Ireland. The first evening they reached the region known as the four towns of Bellimacrat, and preached in the barn of an obliging farmer, Mr. Willie, by name.

Mission of the TwelveHC152The next day they proceeded on foot in the direction of Lisburn, still accompanied by Mr. Tate, who, as John Taylor had previously prophesied, was to be the first person baptized in Ireland. As they walked along country lanes on that fresh summer morning, the spirit of truth and understanding was their companion. John Taylor expounded the eternal purposes of God for the welfare of man. All doubt departed from Mr. Tate, and, as they topped a hill, at the foot of which lay Loch Brickland, a sudden conviction of truth led him to exclaim: "See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?"—Acts 8:36.

Mission of the TwelveHC152Nothing hindered. The party drew near the lake shore. With John Taylor, Thomas Tate entered the water and was baptized—the first fruits of the Gospel in Ireland.

Further activities were carried on in the town of Lisburn. There Elder Taylor preached several times in the market place to audiences of gratifying numbers. Interest in the latter-day work was manifest throughout County Down. Nor had the efforts in Newry been futile. Before Elder Taylor left Lisburn, word came that Brother McGuffie, who had returned to the village, had begun to baptize.

153John Taylor intended to begin activities in the city of Belfast, but appointments previously made called him soon to Scotland and back to Liverpool. He took boat from Belfast to Glasgow on August 6th, 1840, having labored in Ireland only ten days. But the work begun in that brief period has endured and prospered even until now.

153Following a hurried trip, during which he preached on several occasions, Elder Taylor broke away from the Scottish Saints, under protest, to return to Liverpool and deliver his lectures, which were conducted as arranged, and which were attended by appreciative audiences. Two reverend gentlemen of our previous acquaintance—Mr. Robert Aitken and Mr. Timothy R. Matthews, and their disciples—were the chief disturbers of order at the gatherings. They used all the methods known to the unscrupulous in attempting to break up the meetings and discredit the missionaries—but the work has outlived them and their memory in the world.

Elder Theodore Curtis, who had formerly labored in New York, arrived in Britain during the summer of 1840, and was assigned to take up the work in Ireland. At the October 6th conference, 1840, he represented the Hillsborough Branch of five members—the first branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Ireland. A few months later Elder Taylor reported by letter to the Prophet Joseph Smith that Elder Curtis had taken up the work in Belfast, and that the Church in Ireland numbered nearly thirty. [^1]

154Since that first thirty were brought out of the world, many thousands from the "Emerald Isle" have joined the Church of Jesus Christ, of whom thousands have emigrated.

154From out of Ireland, as a lad, with a widowed mother, came Charles A. Callis, of the Council of the Twelve. Born at Dublin, Ireland, May 4, 1865, he was baptized in Liverpool at the age of eight years, and later, at the age of ten, emigrated with his mother to Utah in October, 1875, where he qualified himself for a legal career. All other pursuits he gave up in response to a call to serve the Church as a missionary, to which exalted pursuit he has devoted the best years of his mature life, and his example typifies the loyalty that the Irish Saints have given to the Church of Jesus Christ. One such mission carried him back to Ireland to preach the Gospel in his native land.

154Despite this ancient land's turbulent religious and political history, the purposeful step of "Mormon" missionaries has sounded in the cities and across the shamrock countryside, bringing stalwart, courageous men and women into the Church, whose memories are honored by a worthy and loyal posterity, who are proud of their Irish lineage and grateful for their Gospel heritage.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Life of John Taylor, by B. H. Roberts, p. 82.
