Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

155CHAPTER 18

155GOSPEL TIDINGS TO THE ISLE OF MAN

155The stir occasioned by the Gospel introduction to the Isle of Man may well be said to have been inversely proportional to the size of that land dot in the Irish Sea. The Isle, which measures only thirty odd miles in length by about twelve in width, as early as 1840 boasted a population of more than 47,000 inhabitants, many of whom were searching and waiting for truth.

155The visit of Gospel messengers there was neither unpremeditated nor hastily planned. In all probability it was in John Taylor's mind to go there at the outset of his mission. He expressed his intention at least as early as the spring of the year 1840, nearly six months before the undertaking was under way, during a conversation with Mr. Radcliff, agent for the Bible Society and Superintendent of the School of Arts in Liverpool. On that occasion a Miss Brannan from the Isle of Man had been present and had expressed her displeasure at Elder Taylor's views of the outside religious world. Before parting, that worthy missionary told Miss Brannan that he proposed a visit to the Isle, and should be pleased to call on her household; to which she replied that she would be pleased to see him, but not as a religious teacher, unless his views were as those of other preachers of her acquaintance.

This provoked a firm but gentlemanly rebuke from John Taylor to the effect that he would visit the Isle of Man with or without her approval; that others would accept his message whether she did or not, and that her request that he be like other ministers, put him in mind of the Prophet Micah, who, when he was advised to speak as the other prophets of king Ahab, replied: "As the Lord liveth, even what my God saith, that will I speak." [^1] It is not likely that John Taylor, outstanding as a gentleman, used just these words in just this abrupt manner, but it was not characteristic of him to leave any room for doubt in the minds of his auditors as to the import of his message.

156Admittedly, John Taylor had at least two good reasons for paying the long contemplated visit to Manx land. They may be classed under the general heads—sentimental and altruistic. To be entered under the first head is the fact that the Isle of Man was the place of birth and scene of the girlhood of Leonora Cannon, beloved wife of John Taylor. There the Cannon manor had held place for many generations. But a more important consideration is to be placed under the second head—the proclamation of the Gospel was John Taylor's sole purpose for being in Great Britain, and surely the beautiful Manx Isle with its thousands of upright men and women was worthy the message of life. At least so felt John Taylor in the late summer of 1840—and it is now a matter of historical certainty that he was led aright.

156The actual departure for the Isle occurred on September 16th, from Liverpool. On that day, accompanied by Elder Hiram Clark and Brother William Mitchell, an early convert in Liverpool, John Taylor sailed for Douglas and arrived in that principal Isle of Man city on the following day. The fresh scenes that presented themselves, and the fond memories they recalled, stirred the poet soul of Elder Taylor as he first viewed the place of Leonora's girlhood; his language flowed with fervor and eloquence:

157"Thou hast passed through trials, Nora, but thou shalt rejoice! Thou hast been driven from thy home for the truth's sake, but thou and thy children shall have a home in the kingdom of God! Thou hast suffered the bereavement of thy husband—the tender association has been severed—that others may be made partakers of endless life; but thou and thy husband shall yet reign together in the celestial kingdom of God. A few more struggles and the battle will be fought, the victory will be ours, and with the redeemed out of every nation we will sing: 'Glory and honor, and power, and might, and majesty, and dominion be ascribed to Him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb, forever and forever'."—Life of John Taylor, by B. H. Roberts, p. 90.

157So much for sentimental considerations.

157Within a day or two after their arrival, it was decided that Brothers Clark and Mitchell should take up their labors in Ramsey, the northern city of the Isle, and that Elder Taylor should remain in the town of Douglas. Before the company of three parted for service, they retired to a secluded field a short distance on the road from Douglas to Ramsey, and united in petitioning the Giver of all good gifts for the success of the work in hand. At the foot of a tree on which Elder Taylor carved their initials, they each placed a stone in remembrance of their covenants with the Lord, and devotion to His work. Brother William Mitchell was here ordained a Deacon. Elders Taylor and Clark blessed each other in turn. The Spirit of the Lord attended them, and approved; for they spoke in tongues and prophesied and sang songs of praise, and parted company rejoicing.

Returning the short distance to Douglas, John Taylor began at once to make his mission and message known. Visits to associates of his wife's youth, in addition to the many friends that his own attractive personality quickly won, soon lengthened the list of homes in which he was welcomed. After preliminary activities had aroused sufficient interest to justify the action, he rented the Wellington Rooms, the largest and finest hall in Douglas, with seating accommodations for a thousand persons. This distinctly bold stroke had the effect of a gauntlet thrown down, upon the pseudo-religionists of the Isle; and from then on the Manx activities of John Taylor took on a controversial aspect—in printed pamphlet, in private correspondence, in the public press and in public debate. Of this "controversial period" John Taylor wrote as follows, in a letter to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

158"I hired a large room capable of containing one thousand persons and commenced delivering lectures; great excitement prevailed, and a persecuting spirit soon manifested itself. I held a discussion with one man, a preacher, which had a tendency to enlighten the eyes of the public. Another wrote in the papers, and I answered him; another published pamphlets, and I answered them; another delivered lectures, and I answered them; and I finally challenged any of them to meet me before the public and prove the Book of Mormon and my doctrine false if they could, but this they were afraid to do, and gave up the contest. I see, sir, more clearly every day the impossibility of overturning the principles of truth by any of the foolish dogmas or lame reasoning of this present generation, and how should they? for God has revealed it, and His arm supports it."—Times and Seasons, Vol. 2, p. 401.

But John Taylor was not without friends during this period of intense feeling. Many volunteered themselves as his champions; they arose in his behalf at public gatherings; his replies to the press were accorded place with the attacks of his opponents; audiences at public gatherings were sympathetic, and his activities were well reported. Excerpts from the story of one public encounter as it appeared in the Manx Liberal of October 4th, 1840, is a notable example of the treatment he received from the press:

159"On Friday evening last, while Mr. Taylor, who professes to be a missionary from the Latter-day Saints, was lecturing in the Wellington Market Hall, in this town, he was interrupted in a very indecorous manner by a party of Primitive Methodist preachers, and a young man of the name of Gill, who is both an itinerant bookseller and a Wesleyan Methodist local preacher, who ever and anon kept annoying him, until at last they so far confused the meeting as to stop the lecturer. There and then, in the fury of their zeal, they appeared ready for combat, but certain individuals possessing more discretion than religious intolerance, quelled the rage of the 'disorderlies' and showed the impropriety of such a proceeding, by stating that the room was Mr. Taylor's—that they had met for the purpose of religious worship, and ought not to be disturbed—but if they conceived that the speaker had advanced anything contrary to the word of God, they had no doubt but that Mr. Taylor would meet them if they appointed a time and place for public discussion.

159"To this the lecturer consented, but at the same time gave them to understand that he was not favorable to disputation. Next day Mr. Taylor received a letter from Mr. Hamilton, charging him with having "misquoted the word of God; with having mutilated it, added to it, and taken from it; with having uttered blasphemy; and with endeavoring to decoy souls to perdition;" all of which Mr. H. declared himself ready to prove if Mr. T. would meet him at seven o'clock on Monday evening, in the Wellington Market Hall. Mr. Taylor accepted of the challenge on condition that each party should be allowed to choose his own chairman—that Mr. Hamilton should speak first—and be allowed one hour, and that he (Mr. T.) should have one hour to repudiate the supposed charges, and that each should have an additional half-hour to reply.

159"Mr. Hamilton having approved of the conditions, on Sunday Mr. Taylor announced the intended discussion to his congregation, and on Monday evening, at the time appointed, the large room was completely filled with persons anxious to witness the coming conflict betwixt the two champions.

"All preliminaries being over and chairmen chosen, Mr. H. was called to defend his charges. He instantly arose and commenced his harangue by showing what a clever fellow he had been, what he had done, and by inference, what he was still able to do. He said that he once took part in a similar discussion, and so effectual were the weapons of his oratory that his antagonist died within three days, and that on a subsequent occasion he was equally successful. This, as might be expected, raised some excitement in the meeting, and created some alarm for the safety of his opponent, who seemed doomed to fall beneath the fatal influence of his death-striking logic. But as he proceeded, it soon became apparent that he was a mere braggadocio, possessing no qualifications save ignorance and presumption. His countenance void of every trace of intelligence—his common-place expressions abounding with tautology—the stiffness of his attitude—the inaccuracy of his language and the monotony of his tone—all indicated his utter inability to effect his purpose, so that the missionary had nothing to fear from the inoffensive weapons of the harmless Hamilton. However, he managed to occupy his hour in the delivery of one of his favorite sermons on the origin, nature, and design of the Gospel, but made not even the most distant allusion in reference to the gross and unfounded charges he had pledged himself to prove.

160"Mr. T. being called, arose, and expressed his surprise that no proof of the charges laid against him had been attempted; but as he was allowed an hour, he would have to imitate the example of his friend, and preach too. His opponent had said much about the Gospel, he too believed it to be the 'power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth;' but it was the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and not a part, but the whole of the Gospel. Mention had been made of different sections of the Church; he did not believe that the Church of Christ was divided into sections. The Holy Spirit did not inspire one party with one opinion and another party with another opinion; God was not the author of confusion; there was one God, one faith, and one baptism. All the different sections of the Church, as they were called, originated in the observance of the opinions of men rather than the Word of Eternal Truth. As the Gospel was unchangeable, and its Author no respecter of persons, the Church at the present day ought to be the same, with regard to its offices, gifts, and privileges, as in the apostolic age. Mr. T. having strenuously defended the above sentiments, then turned to Mr. H. and contended that the section to which he (Mr. H.) belonged was not established on apostolic principles, and that its ministers were not called according to the ordinance of God."

160* * * * *

"The time agreed to for the discussion having expired, the following motion was about to be put to the meeting—"Resolved: That as Mr. Hamilton has neither proved, nor attempted to prove, any of the charges made by him against Mr. Taylor, this meeting believes that they are utterly false, and consequently indefensible." This motion, had it been put, would have been carried by an overwhelming majority. But this was not permitted, for at that moment Mr. Gill, the chairman for Mr. H., sprang on his feet, and dancing mad, "half sung, half screamed," to the following effect: "As I have been implicated as one of the offenders on Friday evening last, I have a right to vindicate my conduct. We met here to discuss certain topics, but precious little has been said. It was I who wrote the letter charging him with having mutilated the word of God, with having added to and taken from it, with having uttered blasphemy, and with having labored to decoy souls to perdition, and I can prove it! and I can prove it! and I can prove it!" Here his voice was drowned by cries from all parts of the room of "shame, shame"—"put him down"—"put him out," mingled with hisses and groans. The tumult having subsided, he made an attempt to give out the doxology, when "no! no!" from a hundred voices assailed his ears. Then Mr. Taylor, who had conducted himself during the meeting both as a gentleman and a Christian, gave out the doxology, and concluded with prayer, after which the meeting quietly dispersed."—Millennial Star, Vol. 1, pp. 178-180.

161Following is a sample of the newspaper correspondence that John Taylor was called upon to meet. It appeared in the Manx Liberal of October 14th, ten days later than the one reprinted above:

161"Sir, I feel rather surprised and chagrined that the modern delusion, viz., 'Mormonism,' should have made such rapid strides in this town, hitherto considered exempt from the many systems of irreligious creeds which abound in England, America, and elsewhere. I had thought that the powerful and argumentative addresses of the dissenting ministers would have checked such a gross piece of imposition in its infancy, and thus prevented the great mass of our town's people from becoming dupes of designing knaves, 'and being led away by every wind of doctrine.' Above all, I imagined that the two pamphlets issued by that holy, religious and devout man of God, Mr. Hays, Wesleyan minister (to which connection I have the happiness and honor to belong) would have been quite sufficient to prove the fallacy of such a system, and prevent its further spread. But, sir, alas! the case is quite the reverse; numbers continually flock to the Wellington Rooms, and listen with eagerness to the principles there advocated. The members of our society (Methodists) seem to be most conspicuous in sanctioning and promoting this vile and abominable doctrine.

161"Oh, sir, the result to our connection will be dreadful; the havoc tremendous. Just think of the majority of our leading and intelligent men aiding and abetting a cause of this description! Oh, sir, lamentable and heart-rending to witness the beaming countenances, and smiles of approbation displayed recently at Taylor's meeting! I could enumerate a host of our members who regularly attend those anti-Christian meetings." * * *

Just who were the first persons to be baptized in the Isle, and the exact date of baptism, are details that are not given in any readily available accounts; but suffice it to say that many were baptized, and in a small measure at least, John Taylor was permitted to see the fruits of his labors before he left these shores. In February, John Taylor wrote to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

162"I went to a country place on the Island and sat down in the chimney corner, and talked to a few neighbors who came in, and baptized eight and confirmed them the same night, before I left them, nor would they wait until the morning."—Times and Seasons, Vol. 2, p. 402.

162Elder Taylor spent between two and three months on the Isle. His labors were followed, beginning November 16th, by those of Elder J. Blakesley, who arrived from America early in the month. He and Elder Hiram Clark labored together for a time. On Christmas day, 1840, the two met in Douglas with the brethren who had been baptized, and formally organized the Isle of Man Branch, with John Barnes as presiding Elder, and John Mills, a Teacher, as branch clerk. The meeting was held at the home of Brother John Cowells with whom the missionaries lodged in Douglas. At this time the membership of the branch was reported at about forty. Two months later it had grown to seventy.

162Elder Clark remained until January 8th; Brother Blakesley until February 16th, 1841. One of the local brethren from Liverpool carried on missionary activities for a time after that date—possibly Brother William Mitchell.

162Some stalwart stock of the latter-day Church of Christ was cradled on that picturesque Isle of the Irish Sea, which for many generations had been the home of the Cannons, the Quayles and the Cowleys, and of other stalwart truth-seekers who had the courage of their convictions.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, p. 122.
