Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

163CHAPTER 19

163THE GOSPEL GOES TO LONDON

163"The far-flung British Empire has but one heart—London!"

163In the autumn of 1840, when three Latter-day Saint missionaries undertook to introduce the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its midst, the great metropolis was scarcely a shadow of the city that has now relentlessly enveloped so many of its neighboring towns and villages. In that year it had less than two million inhabitants. In this year it boasts more than eight millions. And yet, its substantial attractiveness and its peculiar advantages were probably greater by contrast and comparison with the rest of the world then than now.

163There comes to mind the question: Why was not London chosen to be the British starting point of the Lord's latter-day work in 1837? Was it not the world's largest city and virtually the world's capital—the logical place for Church headquarters in its hemisphere? Was it not the most likely place to which men, bearing a message for all people, left to their own devices, would first direct their footsteps and begin their work? Were there not more people there to be reached with minimum travel and time expenditure? Was it not everything that is usually accounted desirable in such circumstances?

Undoubtedly London was all this and had all these advantages, and more. And, had the work been directed solely by the judgment of men, London would probably have been the starting point of the Lord's latter-day work in Great Britain. But unfortunately, or perhaps fortunately, it frequently happens that men's ways are not the Lord's. The work began in Preston, Lancashire, took root, gained strength and numbers for more than three years, before it spread to London. It is now a matter of history that this procedure was desirable and successful.

164The London visit had been projected long before it was undertaken. At the 1840 April conference it was broached. At the July 6th conference it was planned and authorized. By then, branches of the Church were flourishing in many parts of England, and in Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and on the Isle of Man.

164It was well that three seasoned missionaries—Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff—were chosen for this task of many difficulties and many possibilities, of many discouragements and accomplishments. Such obstacles and indifference as they faced would have checked men of less faith and experience. Without the help of God, even such men would have been powerless to accomplish so great a task.

164Following the British general conference of the Church in July, 1840, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith left quickly for the Herefordshire region, where they labored and preached, sometimes together, sometimes independently, for nearly a month. In early August they were joined by Heber C. Kimball. On the 11th of that month they began slowly to move London-ward. By the 17th they had reached Leigh, having baptized and organized en route. Leigh to Cheltenham by coach on the 17th, a night at Cheltenham, forty miles through Oxfordshire by coach, and a railroad journey from Farmington Station to the Great Western Terminus, brought them to the British metropolis at about four p. m. on August 18th, 1840—the first Latter-day Saint missionaries to visit London in official capacity.

165They traveled to the center of the city by omnibus, and from there directed their steps to No. 19 King Street, Borough, the home of Mr. William Allgood, whose wife was a sister-in-law to Elder Theodore Turley. Mrs. Allgood cordially welcomed them, fed them, and directed them to the King's Arms, King Street, Borough, where they were comfortably lodged.

165The next few days were days of orientation. The brethren saw much that was see-worthy in London. They called on preachers. They made friends and acquaintances. They directed many inquiries and surveyed the ground, always with an eye single to the great cause that brought them there.

165Superficially, London must have changed much, but the real London—the punctuating points, the landmarks, the admirable, indescribable features that distinguish London from the world—seem almost to have changed little or not at all. A twentieth century reader can readily follow and feel the descriptions written by those worthy London missionaries of 1840, as they saw what was to be seen, and what is still to be seen in London:

165London Bridge, the Thames, the Houses of Parliament, Buckingham Palace, Westminster Abbey and the British Museum, each drew its share of comment. St. Paul's impressed them. Regent Street received deserved attention. Chancery Lane was paid a visit. All Soul's Church was noted. Piccadilly, Leicester Square and Oxford Street were included in the London itinerary, and the city was viewed from the top of Christopher Wren's monument, built as a reminder of the great fire of 1666, which they were charged sixpence to ascend. No, that indescribable personality of London could not have changed much.

Defending the practice of "seeing what there is to see"—if, indeed, it needs defense—a letter written to Brothers Robinson and Smith of the Times and Seasons, dated London, October 28th, and signed by Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff, opened with the following paragraph:

166"As we consider it perfectly consistent with our calling, with reason and revelation, that we should form a knowledge of kingdoms and countries, whether it be at home or abroad, whether it be ancient or modern, or whether it be of things past, present, or to come, whether it be in heaven, earth or hell, air or seas; or whether we obtain this knowledge by being local or traveling, by study or faith, by dreams or by visions, by revelation or by prophecy, it mattereth not unto us; if we can but obtain a correct principle and knowledge of things as they are, in their true light, past, present, and to come. It is under such a view of things that we are endeavoring to avail ourselves of every opportunity in our travels among the nations of the earth, to record an account of things as they pass under our observation; extracts of which we may forward to you from time to time, which may not be uninteresting to your readers."—Times and Seasons, Vol. II, p. 261.

166In all their goings and comings the brethren were interpreting their experiences in terms of their work—seeking opportunities to present their message publicly or privately. They called upon Reverend J. E. Smith, of Lincoln-in-Fields. They attended meetings at Zion's Chapel and heard Reverend Robert Aitken of the Aitkenites preach. Of him Wilford Woodruff wrote: "He delivered a powerful warning to the Gentiles, and presented some of the most sublime truths I ever heard from a sectarian priest; but he was building without the foundation." [^1] Mr. Aitken was a brilliant and living illustration of the profound truth that eloquence alone neither converts nor saves.

On August 24th the brethren moved their lodgings to Mr. Robert Merryfield's, No. 15 Gloucester Row, Grange Road. Having settled in more permanent and satisfactory quarters, from then on their work was more consistent and deliberate.

167Following a practice that proved so successful in many other cities, on the 25th the three attended a meeting of the Temperance Society, whose hall was located on St. George's Road, near the Elephant and Castle. They introduced themselves as missionaries from America. Responding to an invitation, George A. Smith addressed the gathering. His remarks, appropriately, were chiefly upon temperance and the Word of Wisdom, which, though brief and informal, may be accounted the first Gospel discourse publicly delivered in the British metropolis.

167The brethren sought and obtained permission to rent the hall for a public meeting. September 7th was settled upon as the first available or suitable date.

167In the meantime, the brethren, not quite satisfied with the one appointment they had obtained, continued diligent search for other openings. Baptist ministers and Methodist meetings were favored with calls—whether the recipients deemed such calls favors or not. Many religionists and many church bodies and proprietors of halls had—and exercised—the opportunity of refusing sought-for privileges to the Latter-day Saint missionaries of London. Two days after the first visit to the Temperance Hall, the brethren called again and by request Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith spoke briefly in turn, and announced their meeting in that place for the 7th of the coming month.

Mission of the TwelveHCEncouragement was conspicuous by its absence. London, the center of so much that goes on in the world, was obdurate, indifferent, unresponsive. The dwellers there seemed to be caught in the worldly whirl that slackens not its pace for the things of eternal worth. London was stubborn! But finally the hoped for opening came, and is recorded thus in the History of the Church:

Mission of the TwelveHC168"Elders Kimball, Woodruff and George A. Smith, after having spent ten days visiting the clergymen and preachers and others of the several denominations, asking the privilege of preaching in their chapels, and being continually refused by them in a contemptuous manner, they determined to preach in the open air, Jonah-like; and accordingly went to Smithfield Market—to the spot where John Rogers was burned at the stake—for the purpose of preaching at 10 a. m., where they were notified by the police that the Lord Mayor had issued orders prohibiting street preaching in the city. A Mr. Connor stepped up and said: 'I will show you a place outside his jurisdiction,' and guided them to Tabernacle Square, where they found an assembly of about four hundred people listening to a preacher who was standing on a chair. When he got through another preacher arose to speak. Elder Kimball stated to the first clergyman: 'There is a man present from America who would like to preach;' which was granted; when Elder George A. Smith delivered a discourse of about twenty minutes, on the first principles of the Gospel, taking for his text Mark 16:16, after which Elder Kimball asked the preacher to give out another appointment at the same place for the American Elder to preach; when he jumped up and said: 'I have just learned that the gentleman who has addressed you is a Latter-day Saint; I know them; they are a very bad people; they have split up many churches, and have done a great deal of hurt.' He spoke all manner of evil, and gave the Latter-day Saints a very bad character, and commanded the people not to hear the Elders, 'as we have got the Gospel, and can save people without infidelity, socialism, or Latter-day Saints.'

Mission of the TwelveHC168"Elder Kimball asked the privilege of standing on the chair to give out an appointment himself. The preacher said: 'You shall not do it; you have no right to preach here;' jerked the chair away from him, and ran away with it. Several of the crowd said: 'You have as much right to preach here as he has, and give out your appointment;' whereupon Elder Kimball gave out an appointment for three o'clock p. m., at which time a large congregation was gathered.

Mission of the TwelveHC"After opening the meeting by singing and prayer, Elder Woodruff spoke about thirty minutes, from Galatians 1:8, 9, upon the first principles of the Gospel. Elder Kimball followed upon the same subjects. The people gave good attention, and seemed much interested in what they had heard. The inhabitants who lived around the square opened their windows to four stories high; the most of them were crowded with anxious listeners, which is an uncommon occurrence. The meeting was dismissed in the midst of good feeling.

Mission of the TwelveHC169"Mr. Henry Connor invited the Elders to his house. Soon after they arrived here, Elder Kimball felt impressed to return to the place of preaching. When he got there he found a large company talking about the things which they had heard in the afternoon, and they wished him to speak to them again. He did so, when several persons invited him home with them. While Elder Kimball was preaching, several persons came to Brothers Woodruff and Smith to converse on doctrine, when Mr. Connor offered himself for baptism.

Mission of the TwelveHC169"Monday, August 31st, Elder Kimball baptized Henry Connor, watchmaker, 52 Ironmonger's Row, London, in Peerless Pool, being the first baptized in that place, and confirmed him the same evening."—History of the Church, Vol. IV, pp. 182-184.

Mission of the TwelveHC169These were the first open-air meetings in London—the predecessors of unnumbered thousands that have since been conducted there by Latter-day Saint missionaries, of which many thrilling and colorful tales could be told, and from which many additions to the Latter-day Church of Christ have come.

169Tabernacle Square, Hyde Park, and other London open-air stands, for nearly a century have seen "Mormon" missionaries raising their voices in testimony to the passing and lingering millions who live in the world metropolis.

169Henry Connor, the first of a large London harvest, was soon followed by others of his family and by many not of his kin.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Vol. IV, p. 218.
