Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

170CHAPTER 20

170FURTHER LONDON LABORS

170Following the first London baptism Elders Kimball and Smith paid a visit to the township of Deptford. During their absence a Mr. Panther, of 17 Wharf City Road, Basin, director of a Methodist Chapel, extended to Elder Wilford Woodruff the use of a schoolhouse at Bowl Court, 137 Shoreditch, for the next Sunday. On the appointed day, September 6, 1840, the three brethren repaired to the schoolhouse and held morning services, each speaking in turn. By evening, after the brethren had held an afternoon open-air meeting in Tabernacle Square, they returned to the schoolhouse to continue with appointed meetings and found that Methodist ministers had protested their use of the schoolhouse and refused its further occupation by "Mormon" missionaries. The action of those reverend gentlemen, hasty as it was, did not come soon enough to prevent four people receiving a testimony of the truth in that place, each of whom applied for baptism.

170The evening of the next day, the 7th, had been set apart for the Temperance Hall meeting. Numerically speaking, the meeting scarcely justified itself. Only about thirty attended. Wilford Woodruff addressed the small gathering for about an hour, and was followed by Heber C. Kimball. The use of the hall for the one meeting cost the missionaries seven shillings and sixpence—a considerable sum for that hall, for that day, and for those men.

170The time soon drew near for the brethren to leave London temporarily to attend the general conference in Manchester. Wilford Woodruff writes:

171"On September 9th I paid my bills, called upon friends in company with Brothers Kimball and Smith, and on the day following I parted from the brethren and friends in London to return to Herefordshire. We had spent twenty-three days in the great Babylon of modern times and had found it harder to establish the Church there than in any other place we had ever been. We had baptized one man, and ordained him a Priest; six others had given in their names to be baptized on the following Sunday; and at this time there was some little prospect of the Reverend Robert Aitken receiving the work. I therefore left London, feeling that our mission and labors had not been altogether in vain."—Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, p. 126.

171Elders Kimball and Smith visited the Reverend Robert Aitken. He was much disturbed at this time by "Mormon" doctrine, admitted that it was reasonable and scriptural, but had so long tampered with contrary doctrines that his mind was in a state of confusion, and he feared to be deceived further. Not long after his early meeting with "Mormon" missionaries he returned to the clerical garb of the orthodox Church of England, from which order he had broken away.

171Brothers Kimball and Smith tarried in London some days longer. Brother Kimball was suddenly stricken with a most severe case of cholera that threatened his life, but by the blessings of the Lord he recovered overnight and the next morning, Sunday, September 13th, he baptized four persons, according to previous appointment. On the 29th of the month the two brethren left for Manchester. The London Branch, as it was designated, was represented at the general conference, Carpenter's Hall, Manchester, October 6th, by Heber C. Kimball, and it was there reported as having a membership of eleven—the result of nearly a month's toil of three spiritual giants in the world's largest city.

Six of the Twelve were present at the October conference, and increases in the membership of the Church of Jesus Christ were reported from every field represented.

172On October 8th a meeting of the Council of the Twelve convened at the home of Willard Richards, No. 1 Chapman Street, Manchester, with Brigham Young presiding. Among other items of business it was "voted that our publishing office be removed to London as soon as circumstances will permit." [^1]

172By this recommendation it appears that as early as 1840 the Twelve realized that London was the logical place in which to locate the publishing office, which office was then British Mission headquarters, and later became European Mission headquarters. The subsequent story of the British Mission tells us that this recommendation was not carried out until British and European Mission headquarters were moved to London early in 1933, under the direction of Dr. John A. Widtsoe, with the approval of the First Presidency.

172Soon after the October, 1840, conference the publishing office and the general mission office were moved to Liverpool, where they remained until 1929, when the British Mission Office was separated from the European office and moved to Birmingham. Later, in 1933, both British and European headquarters moved to London. There seems to be little doubt that one major consideration favored the establishment of the office in Liverpool in the 1840 decade. That city then held undisputed first place among European shipping towns, both as a port of entry and embarkation for goods and passengers, and the emigration business of the Church attained tremendous proportions in the few decades following 1840.

173But that day has passed. Emigration is no longer a consideration, and the years have taken from Liverpool much of her passenger traffic. Always much of the Mission business has of necessity been transacted in London, and many of the early publications bear the imprint of London presses.

173So much for the 1840 recommendation of removal to London.

173The following comment on London labors is extracted from a letter dated October 12th at Manchester, signed by the first London trio, Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff:

173"We have baptized eleven only, in the city of London, but through faith and the mercy of God we ere long expect a harvest of souls in that place; but we are willing to acknowledge, that in our travels, either in America or Europe, we have never before found a people from whose minds we have had to remove a greater multiplicity of objections or combinations of obstacles, in order to excite an interest in the subject and prepare the heart for the reception of the word of God, than in the city of London.

173"While conversing with the common people concerning the Gospel we found their highest attainments to be: 'Why, I go to church or chapel and get my children christened; what more is necessary?' When we conversed with the learned, we found them too wise to be taught, and too much established in the traditions of their fathers to expect any change in the last days. While conversing with the ministers of the various orders of the day upon the principles of the Gospel, they would inform us that the ancient order of things was done away, and not longer needed; and some of them had preached forty years the good old religion, and God was with them, and they needed no more revelation, or healing the sick, or anything as manifest in the days of the Apostles, for we can get along without them in this day of refinement, light and knowledge.

"When we arose to preach unto the people repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, the cry of 'Baptist! Baptist!' would be rung in our ears. If we spoke of the Church and body of Christ being composed of Prophets and Apostles as well as other members: 'Irvingites! Irvingites!' would immediately dash into the mind. If in the midst of our remarks we even for once suffered the saying to drop from our lips: 'The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.' 'O, you belong to Johanna Southcote,' would be heard from several places at once. If we spoke of the second coming of Christ, the cry would be 'Aitkenites!' If we made mention of the Priesthood they would call us 'Catholics.' If we testified of the ministering of angels, the people would reply: 'The Irvingites have their angels, and even the Duke of Normandy is ready to swear that he has the administering of angels every night.'

174"These salutations, in connection with a multitude of others of similar nature, continued to salute our ears from day to day, until we were about ready to conclude that London had been such a perfect depot of the systems of the nineteenth century that it contained six hundred three score and six different gods, gospels, redeemers, plans of salvation, religions, churches, commandments (essential and non-essential), orders of preaching, roads to heaven and to hell; and that this order of things had so affected the minds of the people that it almost required a horn to be blown from the highest heavens, in order to awaken the attention of the people, and prepare their minds to candidly hear and receive the doctrine of one Gospel, one faith, one baptism, one Holy Ghost, one God, and one plan of salvation, and that, such as Christ and the Apostles preached. But notwithstanding this, we do not feel discouraged concerning the work being perfected in London, but firmly believe that many souls will embrace the fulness of the Gospel there, though it will be through faith, diligence, perseverance and prayer."—History of the Church, Vol. IV, pp. 222-223.

On October 10th, George A. Smith returned to his labors in the metropolis. Wilford Woodruff joined him in the course of a week, and the two took up their lodgings at No. 40 Ironmongers Row, St. Lukes. "Everything was costly," remarks Wilford Woodruff, "and we found that with the greatest economy we could not do with much less than a pound per week each. What few Saints there were in London were very poor, and unable to assist us. Most of the means used in my labors in London were supplied by my converts in Herefordshire." [^2]

175The extreme exertion occasioned by much vigorous open-air preaching on the streets and in the squares and parks of London caused frequent bleeding of the lungs to George A. Smith and seriously impaired his health and his work. He was counseled by his brethren to retire to less strenuous labors in Staffordshire for a time. He departed November 10th and left Wilford Woodruff to carry on alone. Elder William Pitt from Dymock joined Brother Woodruff, but soon left for Ipswich, the county seat of Suffolk, where he introduced the Gospel.

175There seems to be no accounting for the variety of men to whom the Gospel appeals and whom it holds. Among the London friends of the missionaries were numbered tradesmen, professional men, seamen, and others of many classes—all caught and held by the spirit of the message of life. Dr. William Copeland, connected with the College of Surgeons, Brother William Hulme, captain of a small river vessel, ministers, and men and women in flourishing and in poor circumstances were among those who first were friendly and later were baptized.

Late in November Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were welcome intruders on the solitary labors of Wilford Woodruff. They arrived in London on November 30th—Brigham Young's first visit to the British metropolis. Brothers Kimball and Woodruff undertook the pleasant task of "showing him London." He was swung around the usual circuit and made acquainted with things worthwhile. In his private journal Brigham Young describes those brief days with a practical enthusiasm and humanness so characteristic of him. The high points of London were his when he left. On December 1st at Barratt's Academy Brigham Young preached his first Gospel sermon in London. Ten days later he departed for Cheltenham, and left London in the capable hands of Brothers Kimball and Woodruff.

176During the second week in December four persons were baptized—Mr. and Mrs. Morgan, with whom the missionaries lodged, Christopher Smith, their apprentice, and Henry Connor, Jr. This now commonplace occurrence—the Gospel acceptance by people with whom the missionaries live—has been repeated countless hundreds of times in the history of Latter-day Saint missionary activity. That such was the case, spoke eloquently then, as it does today, for the gentlemanly conduct and circumspect lives of the missionaries. Those with whom they have shared roof and board and to whom daily habits have been revealed, have known that their lives are in keeping with their precepts, that their doctrine applied makes manly men—in short, that they are what they profess to be—servants of the living God. Having been so touched by intimate knowledge, many have accepted truth, and, almost without exception, all have become firm friends.

Mission of the TwelveHCA minister of the Independent Order, Reverend James Albion by name, encountered the missionaries, attended some of their meetings, and invited the brethren to his home, which invitation they accepted on more than one occasion. Having heard the Gospel of the Master from their lips, the Reverend Albion offered the use of his chapel, which would seat about one thousand persons. On the first Sabbath after this unusual offer the brethren accompanied the Reverend Albion to his morning service and were introduced to the church committee. Reverend Albion announced to his congregation that the missionaries from America would occupy his pulpit on the following Sabbath. Brothers Kimball and Woodruff then returned to their afternoon and evening meetings with the growing body of London Saints. Following the evening meeting the Reverend Albion sought them at their lodge and told them that he had announced their appointment for the next Sabbath at his further meetings that day, and that he had told his congregation that he was a Latter-day Saint, that he intended to be baptized at the hands of the missionaries, and that he would henceforth not be considered one of their number unless they were baptized into the true Church of Christ with him. Reverend Albion not only had conviction of truth, but also had what so many of his rank and office have lacked when they were faced with loss of livelihood—the courage of his convictions. The results of his astounding profession of faith were divided opinions and a divided congregation.

Mission of the TwelveHC177Despite opposition, the appointment on the following Sunday at the Church presided over by Reverend Albion was filled by the missionaries. At the evening services of that day, the final Sabbath of the year 1840, the brethren addressed the largest London congregation that they had had the privilege of standing before indoors since their arrival. A mixed audience, including ministers and lay members of many sects, heard them. Wilford Woodruff spoke about an hour. A Wesleyan minister arose, in bad taste and temper, and ungracefully opposed him. Both congregation and church committee detected the minister's spirit, and the latter refused him permission to speak again in their place of worship.

Three days more brought the close of the year 1840, and another, the opening of 1841. The brethren believed absolutely in starting the New Year right—they baptized two persons on New Year's Day and raised the number of the London congregation to twenty-one. Among those baptized later in the month of January were Dr. William Copeland, the Reverend James Albion and members of his family, a Mr. Hender, three more members of the Morgan family with whom the missionaries lodged, and four persons from Woolwich, who had applied for baptism after once hearing Heber C. Kimball preach, and who had that night wandered up and down the Thames embankment until after nine o'clock seeking a suitable place for baptism, but the ice and mud on the river bank prevented. The next day Heber C. Kimball took them to the public baths in Tabernacle Square, to which they seem to have had ready access, and performed the ordinance.

178A package containing twenty completed copies of the first British edition of the Book of Mormon and two dozen copies of the Hymn Book reached the London missionaries on February 8th, 1841. Immediately they went to Stationer's Hall and in the name of Joseph Smith, Jr., secured the first British copyright to the Book of Mormon, leaving in consideration three shillings in money and five copies of the book.

At about this time in our narrative of early London labors another leading character makes his appearance—Lorenzo Snow, later to become President of the Church, but then only a humble traveling Elder. He received his mission call at his home in Illinois in the early spring of 1840. Means to travel were not his, but by exhausting every available resource, borrowing at heavy interest and trusting the Lord for the rest, he procured the wherewithal to start upon his mission, and after many colorful experiences, not the least of which was a forty-two day deck passage on turbulent seas, he landed in Liverpool, visited the branch there, and a few days later traveled to headquarters in Manchester, where he arrived October 21st, 1840.

179Of his stormy voyage Elder Snow wrote:

179"I did not feel surprised that men, women and children who had not learned to trust in God wrung their hands in an agony of fear and wept. My trust was in Him who created the seas and defined their bounds. I was on His errand—I knew that I was sent on this mission by the authority He recognizes, and, although the elements raged and the ship swayed and trembled amid the heaving billows, He was at the helm, and my life was safe in His keeping."—Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, p. 49.

179From October to February Elder Snow's time and strength were divided chiefly among Manchester, Birmingham, Greet's Green and Wolverhampton. He arrived in London on February 11th, 1841. Elder William Pitt arrived the following day. On February 14th, Valentine's day, 1841, the first London conference was held and an organization effected. The following extract of minutes is given by Wilford Woodruff:

179"I give here the minutes of the first London conference, held at the Academy, 57 King's Square, Goswell Road, February 14, 1841:

"There were present of officers of the Church, Elders H. C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, and William Pitt, besides four priests. The meeting was called to order by Elder H. C. Kimball, at 2 o'clock p.m., Sunday, the 14th of February, 1841, when it was moved by Elder Kimball and seconded by Elder Pitt that Wilford Woodruff be the president of the conference. Moved by Elder Kimball and seconded by Elder Woodruff, that Dr. William Copeland be the clerk. Carried unanimously. The meeting was then opened by singing, and prayer by Elder Kimball. The president then called for the representation of the branches of the London conference. The Church at Bedford was represented by Priest Robert Williams, containing forty-two members and one priest; seven removed and two dead. The Church at Ipswich, represented by Elder William Pitt, consisted of twelve members, one elder, one priest, and one teacher. The Church at Woolwich, represented by Priest John Griffith, consisted of six members and one priest. The Church at London, represented by H. C. Kimball, consisted of forty-six members, one elder and two priests; excellent prospect of continued increase. Moved and seconded by Elders Kimball and Woodruff, that James Albion be ordained an Elder; moved and seconded by Elders Kimball and Snow, that Thomas Barnes be ordained a teacher; moved and seconded by Elders Kimball and Pitt, that Robert Williams be ordained an elder to oversee the Church at Bedford; moved and seconded by Elders Robert Williams and William Pitt, that William Smith, at Bedford, be ordained a priest; moved and seconded by Elders Kimball and Pitt that Richard Bates be ordained a priest in the Woolwich branch; moved and seconded by Elders Robt. Williams and Wm. Pitt that John Sheffield be ordained a teacher at Bedford; moved and seconded by Elder Kimball and Brother Griffith that Brother A. Painter be ordained a teacher at Woolwich. These motions were carried unanimously, and those present were ordained under the hands of Elders Kimball, Woodruff and Snow. Afterward, Elder Kimball moved and Elder Woodruff seconded, that Elder Lorenzo Snow be appointed president of this conference, and to take the superintendency of the Church in London. Much valuable instruction was given by Elders Kimball and Woodruff in relation to the duties of official members, after which it was moved by Elder Kimball and seconded by Elder Snow that this conference be adjourned till Sunday, the 16th day of May, 1841; after which the conference closed. Wilford Woodruff, president; Dr. William Copeland, clerk.

180"During this conference meeting, we also broke bread with the Saints, and confirmed four new members. At half-past six in the evening we met again, and had the largest congregation which had assembled at our preaching place. One person came forward for baptism. This was a day which we had desired long to see; for we had labored exceedingly hard to establish a Church in London, and at times it seemed as though we would have to give it up; but by holding on to the work of our Divine Master and claiming the promises of God, we were now to leave an established London conference with a prosperous Church planted in the metropolis, under the care of our beloved brother, Lorenzo Snow."—Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 136-137.

From the time of its formal organization the activity of the Church in London was forward-moving. Soon after the conference both Heber C. Kimball and Wilford Woodruff left London and traveled northward by different routes, to make preparation for their coming departure for America. Lorenzo Snow spent most of his time there until his departure early in 1843. At the April, 1841, conference in Manchester he reported a membership of one hundred thirty-seven in the district. A London conference, attended by Elder Lorenzo Snow and Apostle Orson Hyde, was held on May 16th, 1841, and the London Branch alone was then reported as having seventy-four members and "good prospect for increase." By the general conference of April, 1842, a membership of four hundred was reported in the London District.

181Since that day there have come into the Church from out of London's myriad streets and dwellings, thousands of loyal Britons. Records show that the London District at one time numbered as many as 2,647, and those who have emigrated from there make up a considerable portion of the great army of men and women who have left England to live their lives in the valleys of the western mountains. Within the corporate confines of greater London have been organized many branches of the Church, and "Deseret," the spacious "Mormon" center located at High Road, South Tottenham, London, England, was for years, until its disposition in 1927, a gathering place and clearing house for the Saints and traveling Elders, from the United Kingdom and the Continent.

181As the Thames has slipped its slow way under London Bridge, as the Tower of London has silently looked on and noted the progress of events, as Big Ben has relentlessly ticked away a century of time, so "Mormonism"—the Gospel of Jesus Christ—has taken firm root in the world's great and time-honored metropolis.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See pp. 23-24.
[^2] Cowley's Life of Wilford Woodruff, p. 130.
