Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

182CHAPTER 21

Publication Efforts in EnglandMission of the TwelveHC182QUEEN VICTORIA ACCEPTS A BOOK OF MORMON

182In the story of the British Mission, Queen Victoria holds a place of particular significance and genuine affection. It is worthy of more than passing note that she had ascended the throne but three weeks before the first "Mormon" missionaries set foot upon the shores of England. And the day on which these men arrived in Preston, where first they preached their message, (July 22, 1837) was the day of a general Parliamentary election, called for by the Queen at the beginning of her reign, and an election banner," "Truth Will Prevail," was accepted by these first "Mormon" missionaries as a favorable omen. [^1]

Publication Efforts in EnglandMission of the TwelveHC182Nearly four years later, after the work of the Church had taken firm root in British soil, Brigham Young, who had directed the publication of the first British edition of the Book of Mormon, arranged, before his departure from England in April, 1841, for copies of it to be richly bound for presentation to Her Majesty Queen Victoria and the Prince Consort.

Publication Efforts in EnglandMission of the TwelveHC182It fell to Lorenzo Snow's lot to make the presentation, which he did before leaving London in 1842. The presentation was made to Her Majesty Queen Victoria and His Royal Highness Prince Albert, through the politeness of Sir Henry Wheatley. Tullidge records:

Publication Efforts in EnglandMission of the TwelveHC"It is said that her Majesty condescended to be pleased with the gift. Whether she ever read the Book of Mormon is not known, although if the presentation did not altogether fade from her memory, 'Mormonism' became sensational enough to provoke even a monarch to read the book, if for nothing better than curiosity."—Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 103 of "Biographies."

Publication Efforts in EnglandMission of the TwelveHC183In an album of Lorenzo Snow's, now a prized possession of his descendants, is an autograph of Queen Victoria's. Whether or not it was a souvenir of this occasion is not now known.

Publication Efforts in EnglandMission of the TwelveHC183The circumstances surrounding this presentation brought forth from the pen of Eliza R. Snow, Lorenzo Snow's sister, and a highly gifted "Mormon" poetess of the past century, a poem of twelve four-line stanzas written to Queen Victoria, which was widely published in that day, after appearing first in the Times and Seasons.

Publication Efforts in EnglandMission of the TwelveHC183Queen Victoria has been greatly honored and spoken of with respectful affection by the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, both in America and abroad, as have been all of the five British Monarchs of the century under whose benevolent protection the Church has been so graciously treated and so notably successful throughout the British Empire. Queen Victoria, King Edward VII, King George V, King Edward VIII and King George VI have ruled Britain's world-wide dominions during the ten decades in which "Mormonism" has grown and prospered under the British flag, Victoria ascending the throne but three weeks before "the Gospel came to Britain," and George VI being crowned but a few weeks before the century turns to begin a second cycle of years of "Mormon" activity in this Empire of righteous purpose and prophetic destiny.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] p. 601, Vol. VI, History of the Church.
