Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

184CHAPTER 22

184THE RESTORATION PROCLAIMED IN WALES

184To the south and west of England lies the traditional homeland of a proud and ancient Celtic people, whose language and customs and traditions as a race and nation are time-worn and honored. In this old and fair land of the ancient Druids, in this kind and charming land of music and minstrelsy, has been nurtured a sterling and hardy race of men and women in whose hearts there is melody and in whose souls there is courage and high regard for honest and useful toil.

184Gradually being absorbed in language and in territory by England, there persists nevertheless in the Welsh race something which sets them apart from all other British subjects and something which causes them yet to remain peculiarly patrons of Saint David.

184To this hardy land of an honest people the message of the Gospel restoration found its way during the very early years of the history of the British Mission. Because in the minds of the uninitiated there is no very sharp dividing line between England and Wales, the facts concerning the earliest proclamation of the Gospel in the latter place have been somewhat beclouded, but latest research has brought to light the following:

The first converts to "Mormonism" in Wales were made through the preaching of Elders from America and local missionaries, who labored in Liverpool and vicinity, and who, in 1840, crossed over the River Mersey into Cheshire and thence into North Wales. Among these were Elders James Burnham and Henry Royle, who arrived in Liverpool for mission labors in the spring of 1840. These labors led to the organization of the Overton Branch in Flintshire, North Wales, in the fall of 1840, which branch consisted of 32 members when first reported. Later, Elder James Burnham on December 13, 1840, writing from Wrexham, North Wales, said: "The brethren at Overton have baptized 56 converts, and some more are ready."—Journal History of Welsh Mission.

185It is a matter of record also that John Needham, a local Priest, was sent in 1840, to labor in Monmouthshire, South Wales, where he baptized several Welsh people in the winter of 1840-41.

185At a general conference of the British Mission held in Manchester, England, Oct. 6, 1840, Elder Henry Royle and Priest Frederick Cook were appointed to labor in Cly, Flintshire, Wales. We find nothing recorded regarding their labors in this district, and therefore the Overton Branch stands as the first organized in Wales, so far as our record is concerned. At a general conference of the British Mission held at Manchester, England, April, 1841, it was resolved that the branches of the Church in Liverpool, Isle of Man and Wales (Overton, Harding and Elsmere) be organized into one district, to be called the Liverpool Conference.

185At this same conference, Elder James Burnham reported 117 members of the Church in Wales, mostly in the Overton Branch.

185The work continued to spread toward South Wales, and William Henshaw and others began active missionary operations there. The Pen-y-darren Branch, a village near Merthyr Tydfil, was organized March 25, 1843.

The labors of Elder Henshaw and those with him resulted in the organization of other branches; namely, Beaufort, Rhymney, Tredagar, Merthyr Tydfil, and Aberdare, which branches originally belonged to the Birmingham District, but which were organized as the Merthyr Tydfil District, April 6, 1844, at a general conference of the British Mission held at Liverpool on that date. This district later became the Glamorganshire District.

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC186So colorful and dynamic and personally zealous a figure was Captain Dan Jones, that there has been a misconception in some quarters concerning the part he played in the opening of the work in Wales. While Captain Jones was one of the greatest and most effective Gospel messengers ever to cross the borders of that land, and while he did much to organize the work of the Church there and to place it on a permanent basis, the facts remain that several "Mormon" missionaries had preached in Wales, and a considerable Church membership raised up, before the advent of Dan Jones.

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC186Captain Dan Jones was born August 4, 1811, in Flintshire, Wales, the son of Thomas and Ruth Jones. Unusual for his day, he received a college education. He emigrated to the United States about 1840 and found his way to what were then the Western States, and finally settled in Nauvoo.

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC186In his early thirties we find Dan Jones as the owner and captain of a small river steamer, the Maid of Iowa, on which he transported many emigrating Saints who were then moving up the Mississippi River to Nauvoo. Frequent meetings and dealings with the "Mormons" impressed him. In April, 1843, he carried from St. Louis to Nauvoo a company of English converts who were traveling under the direction of Parley P. Pratt and Levi Richards. The circumstances surrounding this voyage led to the first meeting of Dan Jones and the Prophet Joseph Smith, on which occasion it was that the Prophet stepped up to him and said: "God bless this little man."

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC187On May 11, 1843, about a month after Dan Jones had joined the Church, he was invited to attend a meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve held in Nauvoo. Present on this occasion were Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde, George A. Smith, John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff. At this meeting, Captain Jones, who had been previously designated by the Prophet for this purpose, was told to prepare himself for a mission to Wales. He was then in his thirty-second year.

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC187Shortly after their first meeting, the Prophet had purchased from Captain Jones a half interest in the Maid of Iowa, and Captain Jones began running the boat as a ferry between Nauvoo and Montrose. When the Prophet Joseph was arrested at Dixon the following June, Captain Jones with a force of armed men navigated the river for the purpose of intercepting steamboats operated by those who might be intent upon kidnaping the Prophet to take him into Missouri. In May, 1844, the Prophet bought out the entire interest in the Maid of Iowa and then Captain Jones was ready for his mission to Wales. However, the most tragic and bitter circumstance in Church history delayed his departure—the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, the Patriarch.

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHCWhen the Prophet started for Carthage June 24, 1844, Dan Jones was one of the brethren who accompanied him. During the evening of June 26, 1844, in Carthage jail, the night before Joseph and Hyrum were murdered, Hyrum Smith read and commented upon extracts from the Book of Mormon pertaining to the imprisonments and deliverances of the servants of God for the Gospel's sake. Brother Joseph bore a soulpenetrating testimony to the guards concerning the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the Gospel, the administration of angels, and the establishment of the kingdom of God upon the earth, for the sake of which he was then incarcerated in that prison, and not because he had violated any law of God or man.

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC188The brethren retired late. Joseph and Hyrum occupied the only bedstead in the room, while their friends lay side by side on mattresses on the floor. Willard Richards sat up writing until his last candle left him in darkness. The report of a gun fired close by caused Joseph to rise, leave the bed, and lay himself on the floor, with Dan Jones on his left, and John S. Fullmer on his right. Joseph laid out his right arm, and said to John S. Fullmer: "Lay your head on my arm for a pillow, Brother John;" and when all was quiet they conversed in low tones concerning the prospects for their deliverance.

188The Prophet gave expression to several presentiments that he had to die, and said: "I would like to see my family again," and "I would to God that I could preach to the Saints in Nauvoo once more." [^1] Brother Fullmer tried to rally his spirits, saying that he thought the Prophet would often have that privilege, and Joseph thanked him for those assuring remarks.

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC188Soon after, Willard Richards retired to the bed which Joseph had left, and when all were apparently fast asleep, Joseph whispered to Dan Jones: "Are you afraid to die?"

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC188Captain Jones said: "Has that time come, think you? Engaged in such a cause I do not think that death would have many terrors."

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC188Joseph replied: "You will yet see Wales, and fulfill the mission appointed you before you die." [^2]

Other Early European Missionary EffortsHC189It was the following year, however, before Captain Jones left Nauvoo on his mission to Great Britain, because of delay caused by the unsettled conditions among the Saints after the martyrdom. He left Nauvoo with his wife, in company with Wilford Woodruff and his wife Phoebe, Hiram Clark and his wife, Elder Leonard W. Hardy, and others.

189"At a special General Conference held in Manchester, England, shortly after his arrival, President Wilford Woodruff rose to remark that inasmuch as Brother Dan Jones had been sent on a special mission to Wales by the Prophet Joseph when he was still living, he, Wilford Woodruff, wished to see that appointment acknowledged by that conference; as he considered it a just and highly important appointment, because Brother Jones was 'the only person we had in this country who could speak, read, write, and publish in the Welsh language.' He therefore proposed that he receive the sanction of the meeting in his appointment and that he preside over the Church in Wales."—Millennial Star, Vol. 7, p. 7.

189Thus the wishes of the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning Captain Dan Jones and his mission to Wales were carried out after the Prophet's martyrdom, and this native Welshman, with his fiery zeal and irrepressible energy, found himself journeying back to his native land for a different and more cherished purpose than had carried him away from the shores of his fathers.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] p. 601, Vol. VI, History of the Church.
[^2] Ibid.
