Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

197CHAPTER 24

197BRIGHAM YOUNG AND THE TWELVE DEPART

197The Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ in 1840-41 were not men who were wont to stay in one place longer than was needful—no more than have they been before or since. Their mission was to bear special witness to the world, and when the business at hand was reasonably well taken care of in any particular part of the world, it was their practice to leave the work in charge of capable, truth-loving men, and move on to organize the work of the Lord in other fields.

197And so, having gone to Great Britain in obedience to the word of the Lord and in furtherance of the world-wide mission of the Church, and having there accomplished their purpose by organizing and permanently establishing the work of the Gospel restoration in Great Britain, it was decided that these men should depart, even as they came, further to pursue the business of the Master. Their families in America needed them; but what was more important was the fact that their work as a Quorum was done in Great Britain, and the Church—their Prophet and their people—needed them sorely at home.

To the casual reader or listener mention of the name Brigham Young calls to mind the Pioneer movement, Utah, "Mormonism" and associated ideas. By few people is this great prophet-leader thought of in connection with England. Comparatively few, indeed, in Great Britain, are aware that he spent an active year of his eventful life in England—a year of organization and notable achievement, and a year of deep import to the British Mission and to the Church as a whole. And it is not to be lost sight of that his abilities as an executive and organizer—the same abilities which made him the West's greatest colonizer—were of inestimable value in laying the permanent foundations for the century's work in the British Mission.

198Four British Mission' conferences were held while Brigham Young and a majority of the Twelve were in England. Much business was transacted at these times, and resident brethren who volunteered their entire time for the work of the Lord were sent throughout England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales with the few missionaries that came over from America.

198Early in April, 1841, nine of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (Willard Richards had been ordained, and Apostle Orson Hyde had previously arrived) met together in Quorum capacity in the city of Manchester. Arrangements were made for seven of the nine to return to America. Parley P. Pratt was left in charge of the Mission, and Orson Hyde was bound for Jerusalem. A Mission conference convened on April 6th, 1841, to which hundreds came and at which thousands of Church members were represented. On the twentieth day of April, 1841, Brigham Young, with six other Apostles and one hundred thirty Saints, went aboard the sailing vessel Rochester. As a Quorum they had been in England but one year and fourteen days. Brigham Young's report of the labors and progress of that period follows:

"It was with a heart full of thanksgiving and gratitude to God, my Heavenly Father, that I reflected upon His dealings with me and my brethren of the Twelve during the past year of my life, which was spent in England. It truly seemed a miracle to look upon the contrast between our landing and departing from Liverpool. We landed in the spring of 1840, as strangers in a strange land and penniless, but through the mercy of God we have gained many friends, established Churches in almost every noted town and city in the Kingdom of Great Britain, baptized between seven and eight thousand, printed five thousand Books of Mormon, three thousand Hymn Books, two thousand five hundred volumes of the Millennial Star, and fifty thousand tracts, and emigrated to Zion one thousand souls, established a permanent shipping agency which will be a great blessing to the Saints, and have left sown in the hearts of many thousands the seeds of eternal truth, which will bring forth fruit to the honor and glory of God, and yet we have lacked nothing to eat, drink or wear: in all these things I acknowledge the hand of God."—Millennial Star, Vol. 26, p. 7.

199Parley P. Pratt remained in the mission at this time until October 20, 1842, and under his direction the work continued to grow and prosper. When he left to return to America he notified the Church in Britain through the pages of the Millennial Star that their presiding officer would be Thomas Ward, with Elders Lorenzo Snow and Hiram Clark to assist him as counselors in "the office of the General Presidency of the Church in Europe." For his successors he hoped that "the officers and members in the several conferences will uphold and support these men in their high and holy calling, by the prayer of faith and by a willing, submissive and teachable spirit," and that the officers in turn, "will conduct and counsel in all things according to the mind of the spirit and according to the counsel which will be given them from Nauvoo from time to time, by the Quorum of the Twelve or the First Presidency." [^1]

Bearing his testimony of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon and of the reality of the Gospel restoration, Parley P. Pratt further recommended in his farewell message "that the first principles of the Gospel be fully and constantly taught, and the spirit of discussion and contention avoided as far as possible; for he that hath the spirit of contention is not of God, but is of the devil." [^2]

200With the departure of Parley P. Pratt, the last of the Apostles had left Great Britain who, in 1840, went there to meet and conduct business as a Quorum. With this departure ends the eventful introductory period of the Gospel to Great Britain. The work was only fairly started and nearly a century has intervened. Since that day the message of the Gospel restoration proclaimed by "Mormon" missionaries has been felt in one way or another in virtually every city, town and village of Great Britain. In like manner the stories and details of the subsequent periods and of the taking of the Gospel to Leeds, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Norwich, Hull, Bristol, Nottingham, Sheffield, Woolwich and Cornwall and all the regions round about will some day be collected and printed, but in this volume there remains space only for the broadest summary of what has transpired since 1842.

200Brigham Young and his associates, by using their God-given faculties, by trusting in the Lord, and by working with all diligence, placed the British Mission on a permanent basis. Since the first "Mormon" missionaries went to Great Britain, more than one hundred and twenty-six thousand persons in that land have embraced the Gospel and cherished it in their hearts, and many of them and their children and their children's children have returned and are returning to their kindred and countrymen in the United Kingdom to bear witness of the restoration of the Gospel and of the joy that this truth brings to the souls of men.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See page 159.
[^2] London Times, August 12, 1879.
