Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

201CHAPTER 25

201A CENTURY WITH THE BRITISH PRESS

201Reaching out from the Strand, London, in a more or less indefinite direction, but, for all that, in the same direction in which it has reached out these many and uncounted generations, is Fleet Street, a narrow artery through which pulses the life-blood of the world's newspaper industry. While modern structures devoted to the time-honored business of news dissemination punctuate Fleet Street here and there today, its essential character could not have altered much during the century since "Mormon" missionaries first set foot upon British shores.

201For some apparently unknown reason Fleet Street, with its immediate crossroads and bylanes, has enfolded unto itself these multi-many years immortal "pliers-of-the-pen" and "printers-of-the-printers'-ink." Milton, Samuel Johnson, Oliver Goldsmith, Samuel Pepys, Richard Lovelace, Dickens—and even Ben Jonson and William Shakespeare—are all names, with many more unmentioned, that are inseparably connected, in one way or another, with this great "home of the British press," in which have been guarded the highest ethics of the writing and publishing professions. And the ethics and practices which are cherished in London's Fleet Street are transmitted and reflected in all the British provinces.

British fair-play and honest appraisal are notable characteristics of the British press, and during their century's sojourn in the United Kingdom, "Mormon" missionaries and members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have not long or often been without spokesmen and champions in their time of need. Some of the world's greatest newspapers—British newspapers—have cried against obvious unfairness, have answered attacks with counter attacks, have replied to falsehood with facts.

202On the other hand, for the sake of the record's accuracy, it must not be left unsaid that the British press, being an institution of man's devising and of human operation, has, both in isolated cases and for general and protracted periods, acceeded to misinformed public opinion, or bowed to the will of opposing factional interests, whose accusations have at times been in the nature of willfully dishonest and grossly untrue fabrications.

202In short, the British press has been a fair and ethical institution, subject to those human frailties and failings which sometimes cause great newspapers to serve selfish interests, sometimes to reflect public opinion, and sometimes to proclaim boldly and fearlessly what they know to be truth, "let the chips fall where they may."

202There may have been earlier instances of British press comment which do not, however, appear in any readily available record, but the first British newspaper recorded in the Millennial Star to have come to the defense of the "Mormon" cause was the Manx Liberal, which, in its issue of October 4, 1840, protested the interruption of a public meeting that was being conducted by John Taylor, and further reported the proceedings of the evening with trenchant irony and biting logic. [^1] This same Manx Liberal on October 17th, 1840, published a reply by John Taylor in answer to an attack that had been made on the principles of "Mormonism" in an earlier issue by a contributor who signed himself "J. Curran."

203The Millennial Star first got around to the business of noting a direct attack in a British newspaper in its issue of November, 1840, when it quoted the following:

203THE LONDON DISPATCH AND THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

203(From the London Dispatch of November 8th.)

203"A new religious sect, from the United States, calling themselves Latter-day Saints, or 'Mormonites,' have just pitched their tents in Gloucestershire, for the purpose of plundering the ignorant people in the neighborhood of the palaces and cathedral of the Bishop of that diocese. These "Mormonites" are twelve in number, like the Apostles. They have a new Bible of their own, in which it is declared that they are the apostles and prophets of the Church of Latter Days, the only true and living church on the face of the earth; and as such, they tell the flocks of the learned clergy of the diocese of Gloucester and Bristol, that God has not revealed in the Bible all that is sufficient to salvation, and that they are commissioned to declare to them a new revelation, wherein is the fullness of the Gospel. This tale has been eagerly swallowed by the ignorant multitude.

203"Captain D. L. St. Clair, a gentleman of the neighborhood, who has for some time been performing the work which ought to be done by the clergy, and attempting to reclaim them from the most degraded condition of human beings, gives this account of the success of the 'Mormonites': 'From my own knowledge,' says he, in a little tract addressed to these deluded people, 'they have plundered three families in Herefordshire, and left them in a state of the most abject poverty; one, a respectable farmer, has paid to them two hundred pounds; and two families in the parish of Basley have given them every shilling they possessed, and will probably be obliged to go into the union house, having nothing left but the clothes on their backs.' In corroboration of this statement, have they not obtained money from you? and what becomes of the money, sometimes amounting to 10 pounds a night, collected at their gatherings? We thought the followers of Southcote, and Irving, and mad Thom of Canterbury, were the most deluded of human beings; but, it appears, they are surpassed in ignorance and folly by the men of Gloucester, who believe in this new Bible, who give away their property to these false apostles, who are baptized anew in the hope that they shall live with Christ on the banks of the Mississippi, in glory and happiness for a thousand years!'

"We learn, in addition, that so late as the 29th of last month, ten poor persons were baptized in the parish of Boddington; and that upwards of 500 in the neighboring parishes have joined these humbug saints, and this, too, within from two to eight miles of the cathedral of Gloucester, whose Bishop has now two palaces to reside in, besides a prebendal house at Westminster, in Pear's Yard, and two rectorages, in all about 9,000 pounds a year. Has this Bishop, so well paid for attending to the flock, done anything to abate this ignorance? Is it not the fact that there are not fewer than eighty non-resident clergymen under him—that there are eighty-six in the commission of the peace—that, until lately, the Chairman of the Quarter Sessions was a reverend doctor—that at the Quarter Sessions there are frequently more clergy than laity at the dinner table; and that ignorance is so great, that not one adult in fifty of the rural population can read? Can we wonder that these unfortunate creatures are led away by 'every wind of doctrine,' and that the gaols and madhouses are filled with the victims of ignorance and superstition? The 'Mormonites' were wise in their generation in squatting upon this diocese, and in all probability their next remove will be to the diocese of Canterbury—the land of mad Thomites—celebrated for the number of its clergy, the vast income of its prelate, and the ignorance of its Christian population."—Millennial Star, Vol. 1, pp. 188-189.

204In reply to this direct attack the editors of the Star printed in the same issue:

204"We have published the foregoing entire, in order to give our readers a specimen of the wickedness, ignorance and folly of the editor of the London Dispatch.

204"Can any man in his senses believe that in Gloucestershire there are twelve men living in tents, who have come all the way from America for the sake of 200 pounds from one man, and a few shillings from two or three others!

204Their passage-money will cost___________________ 60 pounds

204Their time as day-laborers for six months exclusive of board would be worth_________________________________________288 pounds

204Their clothing on such a mission___________________120 pounds

204Total ______________________________________ 468 pounds

204"All this, besides the toils, fatigues, self-denial, and hardships of such a journey, and the trouble and expense of returning again to America; and all this for the paltry sum of 200 or 300 pounds, and this plundered from poor people!

204"Query. Why do not the laws put a stop to these twelve men's wicked proceedings? Is there no law against plundering in England?

"Again, 'these twelve men have a new Bible!' I have been a member of the Church of Latter-day Saints for upwards of ten years, and never before learned of their having a new Bible. The only Bible I have ever seen or heard of in use among them is the translation commonly called King James'. * * *

205"As to this sect being a new one just started in England, commencing first in the region of Gloucester, it is utterly false.

205"The Latter-day Saints have more than 200 native preachers, and perhaps nearer 500, in England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales.

205"They have been established in many parts of England for years. * * *

205"As to money which Mr. St. Clair charges them of plundering or even of receiving in that region, it is utterly false, and could only have grown out of misrepresentation in regard to some funds which were obtained there from men who had it to loan without distressing themselves in the least. And this by a fair business transaction to raise a printing fund for the purpose of printing hymn books and other religious works. The greater part of this sum has been paid back, and the residue will be punctually paid according to agreement. * * *

205"As to the Latter-day Saints preaching a new doctrine, it is a false charge. Everybody that has heard them knows that they preach faith in Christ, repentance towards God, and obedience to all the commandments of the Gospel. * * *

205"But again to this plundering business. The Bishop with two or three palaces and 9,000 pounds a year, is a humble shepherd of the true fold, is he not? His scores of non-resident clergy and others, all supported by a salary, are not plunderers, are they? The Methodists, with an extra fund of between two and three hundred thousand pounds raised at the centennary of Methodism, are no robbers or plunderers, are they? No,—no,—it is this two or three hundred pounds, divided to twelve penurious missionaries (and this is a falsehood) that is the only plundering known in England, is it not?

205"Now for education: Perhaps if the people of Gloucester and the neighborhood were taught a few lessons in reading and arithmetic they could be made to believe that the bishop and priests who are alluded to by the Dispatch, are going in the old way of Christ and His apostles; and that they should not suffer themselves to be led away from such true folds and such faithful shepherds, to follow after these men who are so extravagant as to live in tents, and require 200 pounds to support them after a journey of 5,000 miles. But after all, the people of that region are not so universally ignorant, for we circulate several thousand tracts, and four or five hundred of our periodicals among them. And besides this, we hold to a system of universal education among all classes and we intend to bring it into operation among the saints as soon as possible; and when properly taught, and enabled to read the Bible, if the editor of the Dispatch and Captain St. Clair can reclaim them back to the 9,000 pounds a year system, and make them think it is the Church of Christ, they are at liberty to do so.

206"But I am inclined to think after all, that it is the captain and the editor who are led away and plundered by a set of false apostles and deceivers. I believe the people of the said parishes have too much common sense to be deluded by wolves in sheep's clothing.

206"I must now close, after giving the story of Alexander the Great and the pirate.

206"After Alexander had conquered the world, and robbed the treasury of all nations, a pirate was brought before him to be judged. Alexander enquired by what right he infested the seas?—By the same right, replied he, that Alexander conquers the world,—I am styled a robber because I command a small vessel, and you are styled a conqueror, because you command great fleets and armies. The monarch, struck with the justness of the comparison, dismissed his prisoner without further ceremony. This would be like the case of the hireling priests and the Latter-day Saints, if the charge of their plundering the 200 pounds were true, but it happens to be false. May God judge between us and our accusers."—Millennial Star, Vol. 1, pp. 189-190.

206And so the British press, in its various moods, and "Mormonism," variously represented, were early introduced to each other, and since that day the relationship has continued without interruption with many attacks being countered and with many courtesies being exchanged.

At critical times, when the Church and its representatives were most in need of friends, great British journals have, in the name of justice and reason, befriended the cause. This was true during the time of the "Evarts' fiasco" when, on August 10, 1879, the United States Government, by its Secretary of State, William M. Evarts, issued a proclamation, approved by the Cabinet, to its Ministers in England, Germany, Norway, Sweden and Denmark, protesting against further "Mormon" emigration to America. The proclamation declared that bigamy in any part of the United States was a crime, and that the "Mormons" destined for Utah went there with the avowed purpose of violating the law. The proclamation recited the laws on the subject, with convictions thereunder, and declared the government's intention to prosecute everyone in Utah against whom evidence was obtainable of violating any law in this respect.

207The proclamation further instructed the Ministers to lay a copy before the governments to whom they were severally accredited, and to represent, in the most friendly manner, that it would be an act of justice to their subjects—especially the female portion—to endeavor to dissuade them from yielding to the inducements presented by "Mormon" missionaries to settle in Utah, and that, as these "Mormons" come to the United States with criminal intent, the United States Government would deem it friendly on the part of those governments to regard the movement in this light, and act conformably. The Ministers were, moreover, to instruct the United States Consuls to aid them in procuring information for transmission to Washington as to the manner in which the "Mormon" Church is recruited from abroad. This letter was believed to be preliminary to Government action forbidding vessels from landing "Mormons" in its ports, in pursuance of its obligation to prevent the immigration of lawless people.

207The document created quite an international breeze for a short time, and many appeared to think that emigration would really be checked. The Saints were undisturbed, however, and the tide of emigration continued to flow as uninterruptedly to Utah as if Mr. Evarts and his circular had never existed.

The press everywhere ridiculed the proclamation, and criticized the proposed method of procedure. The London Times, known as "The Thunderer," because of its fearlessness, denounced the idea of curtailing those "who have contravened no law," [^2] and the London Examiner severely took Evarts to task in a scathing editorial entitled "The Mormon Embargo," from which we extract the following:

208"Finding themselves powerless to cope with the "Mormon" pest, the U. S. authorities have issued a plaintive appeal to the Governments of England, Germany, Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, begging aid in their troubles. The morality of this circular is admirable; the logic is lamentable. It would be a gross infringement of the liberty of man or woman were he or she to be prevented going to any country simply because there might be a suspicion against him or her in the direction of bigamy. Such an interpretation of any law would speedily put it in the power of a despotic Government to prevent its subjects leaving their native country at all. Mr. Evarts must be perfectly aware that no "Mormon" is forced to commit bigamy—any more than he is compelled to marry his deceased wife's sister—and that in reality numbers of the most respectable inhabitants of Utah content themselves with one wife. Utah is an extensive territory, not one-half peopled; immigration is required, and it is surely a remarkable act of interference on the part of the Federal Government to prevent in any way that portion of the United States attracting its proper complement of settlers. It is the duty of the Government to punish offenders against the marriage laws, but not the office of any foreign nation to prevent men with a suspected propensity for much marrying from leaving the land in which they were born, but probably cannot live. The truth, however, is that the United States, after many years of unavailing effort, find themselves utterly unable to crush the 'Mormons.'

208"These folks have made the desert bloom like the rose, have planted incorporated towns where thirty years ago there were only Indian 'teepes;' by aid of irrigation, they have reared wheat instead of sage brush, and by the universal consensus of all visitors preserved order and public morality in a manner strange to other Western towns. In a word, the inscription over their principal place of business expresses the leading idea in their life—'Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution: Holiness to the Lord.' Even yet, notwithstanding the influx of 'Gentiles' into the territory, the 'Mormons' are as seven to one, while the ingenious expedient of granting female suffrage has rendered their voting power overwhelming. In only one district, where the miners predominate, was there a non-'Mormon' candidate returned at last election. Though the country has a population legally entitling it to be admitted as a State, Congress has hitherto been deaf to all petitions to that effect, the Federal Government being anxious to keep in its own hands the appointment of the Governor, the judges, and the other chief territorial officials.

209"It is not in the power of the United States, with any regard for the law, the Constitution, and the rights of man, to prevent 'Mormons' entering the country merely because they are suspected of polygamous views. In England there are several thousand 'Mormons,' and in Scandinavia quite as many. They hold their meetings publicly, and try to make proselytes. So long as they do not transgress the law of the land, there is not injustice enough in England to punish them."—London Examiner, August 16, 1879.

209Contrasted with the foregoing is the experience of President Heber J. Grant as related before the Institute of Human Relations, Estes Park, Colorado, in early August, 1936, in which he speaks of his dealings with the British press during his presidency over the European and British Missions during the three years from 1904 to 1906, inclusive:

209"Recently I was reading from Phil Robinson's book, Sinners and Saints, which reminded me that during the three years that I was in England as President of the European and British Missions, I never succeeded in getting into the newspapers one line in refutation of lying and wicked things that were published regarding us, some of them too filthy to be mentioned.

209"I went to London with a letter of introduction from a shipping firm with whom we had done business for fifty years, vouching for my honesty and integrity, and for the honesty and integrity of every man who had presided over the European Mission of the Church during the previous fifty years, and the assistant editor of the paper refused to publish anything. When I was told that the editor was not in, but the assistant editor, Mr. Robinson, would receive me, I had a thought, which I later used.

209"After he dismissed me I went to the door, and took my 'two-story stovepipe hat off,' turned around, and pretended to have an idea, which idea I had when I was told that Mr. Robinson, the assistant editor, would receive me.

209"I said, 'By the way; my letter was not to you; you are only the assistant editor, and I think the boy said your name is Robinson.'

209"He said, 'That is my name.'

209"I said, 'Do you know Phil Robinson?'

209"'Do I know Phil Robinson? Everybody knows Phil Robinson.'

209"'Was he the correspondent of the London Daily Telegraph during the Boer War, one of the two greatest newspapers—and I emphasized greatest, because his was not one of the greatest—in all London?'

209"'He was.'

210"'Would you believe anything he said?'

210"'Anything on earth.'

210"'Buy his book, Sinners and Saints, and you will find that everything you have published in your paper is a dirty lie.'

210"In Phil Robinson's book, Sinners and Saints, he says that he is at the defiance of any man to find a single book, with one exception, written on the 'Mormon' question that is not absolutely untrue, because practically all the books on that subject were written by enemies of our people, and are unfair.

210"In the book to which I refer, Mr. Robinson gives the 'Mormons' a fine certificate of character, and among other things says that he nearly choked to death for 'a drink' among the 'Mormons' while traveling three hundred and fifty miles to the south and a hundred-odd miles to the north, until after inquiring for a 'backslider' he was successful in finding a demijohn. After that he got along very well. He said he had always supposed water was for the cleansing of the body until he arrived in Utah, and there he found it was used for drinking purposes."—Improvement Era, Vol. 40, No. 7.

210Perhaps the opposition during the period referred to above by President Grant, and immediately preceding and following it, may be accounted for by the fact that the missionary activities of the Church, numerically speaking, were more intense during this period than ever before or since. During the decade 1900 to 1910 the Church sent more missionaries from America to Great Britain than in any other decade of the century. [^3] The resultant progress invited a mounting opposition which scarcely could help but be reflected in the press.

210Of the years immediately following this period another account states:

210"Later, during the administration of President Rudger Clawson, in an effort to stem the progress of 'Mormonism,' an anti-'Mormon' crusade was launched for the purpose of checking the missionary work of the Church. An anti-'Mormon' demonstration was held in the Holborn Hall, London, April 28, 1911, another in the Hope Hall, Liverpool, and a number of minor ones in various English cities.

"Scenes of violence and mobocracy were enacted at Birkenhead, Bootle, Heywood, Sunderland, Seaton Hurst, Nuneaton, Birmingham, Bristol, London, and Ipswich. The Elders in most of these places were subjected to gross insults and in some instances to personal assaults, from which they suffered more or less personal injury. Indeed, Elder Albert Smith, a traveling Elder in the Birmingham conference, on leaving a meeting of the Nuneaton branch in May, 1912, was literally covered with tar and feathers. President Clawson himself was mobbed in Bristol on November 17, 1912.

211"Speaking at an anti-'Mormon' meeting, Bishop Welldon, Dean of Manchester (Episcopal Church), said: 'I think the 'Mormon' propaganda ought to be put down in England. If the law is not strong enough to put it down, it ought to be reinforced.'

211"Rev. Father Bernard Vaughan from his pulpit declared: 'The 'Mormons' should be taken by the scuff of the neck, rushed across our island, and dropped into the sea.'

211"In this crisis, Mr. W. T. Stead, editor of the Review of Reviews (England), came to the defense of the missionaries and wrote as follows to the London Daily Express, which communication was published:

211"The whole so-called crusade is an outbreak of sectarian savagery worked up by journalists, who in their zest for sensation appear to be quite indifferent to the fact that the only permanent result of their exploit will be to advertise and to spread the 'Mormon' faith among the masses, who love fair play, and who hate religious persecution none the less because it is based upon a lie."

211"At this time in compliance with demands made by leading clergymen and other influentials the British Home Secretary, Winston Churchill, directed that a nationwide survey of the activities of the 'Mormon' missionaries be made. However, when pressed as to what action the British government intended to take against the 'Mormon' missionaries, he replied: 'I have not so far discovered any grounds for legislation in the matter.'"—Improvement Era, Vol. 40, p. 153.

While the years since that day, more than a quarter of a century ago, have not been without intermittent attacks of anti-"Mormon" feeling in the British press, the trend has definitely been toward something more nearly approaching an accord, until today and during the years immediately past, the "Mormon"-press relationship in the British Isles is the best it has been during the century.

212In 1932 the East Ham (London) Echo said:

212"Probably no section of the human race is more unfairly criticized, more libelled and slandered or more misunderstood by the ignorant, than the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or, as they are more popularly known—the 'Mormons.'

212"Sensational fiction and crude films have created among the uninformed in England, many queer impressions, and it was with much interest that I approached Salt Lake City to learn for myself something of the true nature of these people."—By Charles Eade, Reprinted in the Millennial Star, Vol. 94, p. 342.

212In 1933 the Birmingham Weekly Post said:

212"Everywhere in Salt Lake City I found the 'Mormon' and non-'Mormon' population working amiably together, the friendliest of feelings existing between them. Indeed, that is the amazing fact that strikes the visitor—the impossibility of recognizing one from the other. As you wander about the city . . . you begin to appreciate the sterling qualities of this once despised sect."—Harold J. Shepstone, F. R. G. S., Birmingham Weekly Post, May 20, 1933.

212In 1935 appeared these typical comments, reprinted from the Improvement Era, Vol. 40, No. 7:

212". . . the 'Mormons' regard the Bible as one of their standard works. In addition to the Book of Mormon, they read an inspired work called, The Pearl of Great Price. . . . There are still lots and lots of people waiting to be converted in England."—London Star.

212"No 'Mormon' smokes, drinks, or tastes tea or coffee."—Yorkshire Post.

212"Let us hope that readers will no longer look upon the 'Mormons' as decadent ministers, luring women to a shameful life in Salt Lake City. They are a clean-living band of young men, anxious to convert Gentiles into God-fearing members of a pioneer church. And they do it without reward of any sort."—Liverpool Evening Express.

212"The 'Mormons' are now regarded as honest, God-fearing people who live according to clean, healthy tenets."—Birmingham Gazette.

213In 1936 have come these typical comments:

213"Asking for no collections, infesting all their meetings with a spirit of cheerfulness, 17 young men—16 American and one Irish, are spending a month in Preston engaged in missionary work. . . . The Church has at present about 2,000 missionaries in various parts of the world. Mostly young men, they volunteer for two years' service abroad, and then return to take up their former occupations."—The Lancashire Daily Post, August 25, 1936.

213Fifteen young missionaries of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are at present staying in Northern Ireland. They are known as the Millennial Chorus, and tonight at 8:15 they are to broadcast some songs in the B. B. C. Northern Ireland programme. The chorus which possesses some very fine voices, will be under their conductor, Bertram Willis. Their visit to Northern Ireland is part of a two-year tour of the British Isles.—The Northern Whig and Belfast Post, November 6, 1936.

213In 1937 have come such statements as this:

213"Theirs is a Gospel of physical fitness as well as religion. No true 'Mormon' smokes, drinks alcohol, tea or coffee, eats meat, makes a habit of the cinema, or neglects his physical exercise. * * * These Latter-day Saints are expected to give a tenth of their income to the central fund."—The London Star, March 3, 1937.

213And so the passing of the years and the decades has made a century which affords sufficient perspective to justify the conclusion that the present favorable relationship with the British press has been brought about by a long process of arriving at a mutual understanding. Being intensely British, Fleet Street and the provinces may have looked with some suspicion upon a movement which seemed at first glance to have its interests outside the British Empire, but with such fears having been allayed, there has come at least a partial realization that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has only one motive, and that, to bring all men, let them live under whatsoever flag they may, to a knowledge and understanding of the ancient faith restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, which is the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Appendix for list of names.
[^2] See Appendix for list of names.
[^3] See Appendix for list of names.
