Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

214CHAPTER 26

214THE MEN WHO HAVE GONE TO BRITAIN

214Seated in a conference of "Mormon" missionaries back in mid-January, 1928, at the then headquarters of the British and European Missions, 295 Edge Lane, Liverpool, the author, who was then serving as associate editor of the Millennial Star, critically observed the men who were there gathered at the invitation of Dr. John A. Widtsoe. These observations, jotted down on that occasion, were later published in the Millennial Star:

214"As I write, seated before me are more than a score of men, the youngest of whom has barely reached his majority, the oldest of whom is grey-haired and well past the half century mark. By previous inquiry I learned that they or their parents or grandparents came from more than half the countries of Northern Europe.

214"Judged by some standards, it would be difficult to find a more widely differing group of individuals gathered together. There are young men and old; married men and single; they have come from varied pursuits of life. Among their number are farmers, mechanics, business men, college students, engineers, stock-raisers, and professional men. From four to thirty months ago they were all engaged in those occupations.

214"Each of these men is from six to seven thousand miles away from home; they left voluntarily; without exception they have received no monetary wage or other material compensation for their services, and, what is more strange, they have paid their own living expenses and have devoted their time and talents to labors ofttimes arduous.

214"Another thing about them—as I look into their faces I see clear and steady eyes. I have heard them speak—they are happy and enthusiastic; they express good thoughts well. I have clasped the hand of each—they have firm, strong grips.

214"Who are they? What brought them together? What is their work? Why do they pursue it?

215"These men are 'Mormon' missionaries, so-called. The Gospel of Jesus Christ brought them together; some were the first of their families to join the Church of Jesus Christ; others represent two, three and four generations in the Church. Their work is to proclaim repentance to all the world, to proclaim the restored Gospel of the Master, the plan of life and salvation. They pursue their work diligently because they have burning testimonies within them of the truth of the message they bear—because the Spirit of the Lord is with them.

215"As I look upon these men and reflect upon these things I am led silently to exclaim with reverent exultation: Thank God for such men! Thank God for the might of His latter-day work!"—Millennial Star, Vol. 90, pp. 58-59.

215Essentially the same could be said for every gathering of "Mormon" missionaries in Great Britain since the beginning a century ago. And this great army of nearly six thousand—for such has been the number of "Mormon" missionaries who have gone to British shores—have an unprecedented record. Quiet, clean, earnest, sincere and law-abiding, they have won the respect of the servants of the Crown wherever they have gone, and this despite the perennial and persistent efforts, in times past, of certain class interests and misdirected individuals to penetrate every act of their lives and bring discredit to their names.

215So far as the "hand of the law" is concerned, the worst that may be said of "Mormon" missionaries as a class is that they have at intermittent times and in diverse places, during the past century, been forced to seek police protection from mob violence. And to the credit of the British "Bobbie"—than whom there is no finer class of law enforcement officer in all the world—and in appreciation of his impartial devotion to duty, let it not remain unsaid that such protection has always been given when the need for it was known and the circumstances permitted.

216The British Government, too, has exercised, as concerning "Mormon" missionaries and "Mormon" activities, those great fundamental principles of tolerance and justice which have contributed to the building of the world's greatest Empire. "Mormon" missionaries as a class have been accorded the privileges, courtesies and protection which the governments of great nations accord to the law-abiding citizens of other nations.

216For a century now the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has sent a generous sampling of the flower of its manhood to the British Isles. From 1837 until 1850, when the Scandinavian Mission was first opened, the entire foreign missionary force of the Church was directed to Great Britain. With the spreading of the work to continental Europe there was a diversion of man power to other fields, but the British Isles have continued to receive, proportionately, a large share of the messengers of the restoration.

216During the century thirty-three missionaries have laid down their lives in, or traveling to or from, the British Mission while serving in the Cause of the Master. [^1] It has been the conviction of these men, and of those who have been bereaved by their passing, that no greater benediction could come at the close of life than to be found in the service of our Lord and Savior. And to Latter-day Saints there comes the comforting assurance that death is but an incident in an endless eternity of individual existence from which point all good things continue or resume in the Lord's own time.

Numerically speaking, the period of greatest missionary activity in Great Britain was during the decade from 1900 to 1909 inclusive, corresponding to the administrations of Platte D. Lyman, Francis M. Lyman, Heber J. Grant, and Charles W. Penrose, during which decade the Church sent 1376 missionaries from America to Great Britain. The two most lean years so far as "imported" missionaries are concerned were 1917-1918, the closing years of the World War, during the administration of George F. Richards. Only one missionary arrived during those two years.

217This trying war period, and the immediate post-war period, when necessary government restrictions on foreign missionary activity were sharply felt, was ably administered by Apostles Hyrum M. Smith, George F. Richards and George Albert Smith, whose experiences on this phase of British Mission history alone could well become the subject of a published volume.

217Elder Hyrum M. Smith was presiding over the European Mission when the war broke out in 1914. Overnight, almost, all of the missionaries in the Swiss and German Mission, as well as France and Belgium, were advised to leave those countries. In Holland, Denmark, Norway and Sweden most of the missionaries were gone, and only a few were left to look after the property belonging to the Church. The missionary work was left to local people. Ship after ship carried the Elders home to the United States, where they were placed in the different missions in the states. With the departure of the traveling missionaries and with the great scarcity of British man power, President George F. Richards called upon a faithful and able corps of three hundred seventy-five British women to pursue the work. They conducted most of the missionary activities and rendered their reports to Mission headquarters, with the result that the years 1916 to 1919 saw virtually a doubling of tithes and very little decrease in baptisms. [^2]

Bringing order out of the war chaos in the affairs of the Church in Great Britain and Europe, largely characterized the administration of Elder George Albert Smith. His was a task of making friends with statesmen and diplomats, of restoring confidence and rehabilitating a broken down machine, with virtually no missionary man power, and in a most marvelous manner did the Lord manifest His power in several very trying and delicate situations.

218The presidency of Elder Orson F. Whitney, cut short by illness, was followed by the administration of President David O. McKay, whose presidency was preceded by a world-wide survey and good will tour for the Church. President McKay's administration was one of friend-making and vigorous proselyting. His kindly nature, impressive personality and tireless energy warmed the hearts of missionaries, members, and even enemies, and the year 1923 set a record for baptisms which has not been equalled since 1914.

218The notable achievements of the administrations of Dr. James E. Talmage, of Dr. John A. Widtsoe and of Dr. Joseph F. Merrill, whose enviable ratings in the scientific and academic world, and whose scholarly attainments and personal abilities did so much for Mission organization and toward allaying the prejudices of press and people, invite detailed comment. Likewise, the present administration of Dr. Richard R. Lyman, and of the recent British Mission presidents as distinguished from the European presidents, beckon the way toward elaboration of statement. But at this stage of our British Mission story we must largely shun the specific in favor of the general.

The century's work in the British Mission has been generaled down through the decades principally by forty-three different men, many of them men of international eminence in the fields of science, industry, education, finance, and religion. [^3] Most of these have been General Authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and all of them have been capable, sincere men of God. Of the seven Presidents of the Church to date, six—excepting only the Prophet Joseph Smith—have labored in or presided over the British Mission. Many others of the General Authorities of the Church have also presided over the Mission, some of them for two, three, and even four terms. There have been fifty-three regularly appointed British and European Mission administrations, and six periods of temporary direction, during the century. [^4] Some of these men have served with one or two counselors, but most of them have served alone. The record for the longest aggregate service as a British or European Mission president belongs to Albert Carrington, who, on four different missions, beginning in 1868 and ending in 1882, served a few weeks less than eight years. The longest continuous term was that of Dr. John A. Widtsoe, who served five years and nine months from January 1, 1928 to October 1, 1933. The shortest regularly appointed term was the first of the four administrations of Elder Franklin D. Richards, when he served sixteen days from January 15, 1847, to February 1, 1847. [^5]

219Of the men who have presided over the European and British Missions, since July, 1837, twelve are still living, as follows, in the order of their mission service: Rulon S. Wells, Heber J. Grant, Rudger Clawson, George F. Richards, George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, John A. Widtsoe, A. William Lund, [^6] James H. Douglas, [^7] Joseph F. Merrill, [^8] Joseph J. Cannon, [^9] Richard R. Lyman, [^10] Hugh B. Brown. [^11]

220Until the expansion of Church activity into continental fields, the responsibility of these men was limited to British Mission activity. With the opening of other European missions, beginning with the Scandinavian Mission in 1850, the responsibility of general supervision over the continental missions and mission presidents devolved upon the president of the British Mission, who then became president of the European Mission, in addition to the detailed responsibility for the progress of the work in the British Isles. Thus the president of the British Mission was also president of the European Mission comprising all ecclesiastical divisions in continental and insular Europe, and subsequently including Asia-Minor and South Africa. This practice of dual responsibility continued from 1850 until 1928, when, laboring under the crushing responsibility of directing the affairs of ten missions, Dr. John A. Widtsoe, the President of the British and European Missions, recommended to the First Presidency of the Church the appointment of a separate British Mission president, which recommendation was accepted, thereby giving separate identities to the British and European Mission presidents, which now leaves the presiding European representative of the General Authorities free to travel and confer in all Europe when and where the need is greatest. Thus, on December 11, 1928, Elder A. Wm. Lund arrived in England to become President of the British Mission, leaving Dr. Widtsoe and his successors up to the present time, Dr. Joseph F. Merrill and Dr. Richard R. Lyman, to serve solely as presidents of the European Mission.

Under the direction of these mighty men of God—the century's British and European Mission presidents—have labored the great and ever-changing army of almost six thousand "Mormon" missionaries who have gone to Great Britain, and the uncounted host of local missionaries who have volunteered their services in their native land. A comparatively few have been women. Both schooled and unlettered, few have been wise in the ways of the clergy or trained in the traditional manner of the cloth, but all have been armed with the tradition of truth and with the Priesthood of God, which has enabled them to prevail against many more worldly-wise than they, and to reach, from every walk of life, the honest in heart.

221Two by two, down cobbled city streets and over turfed country lanes, through poverty row and to the mansions of the great, in the market place, and at the family fireside, in season and out, they have passed their tracts, preached their sermons and voiced their testimonies, calling out the seekers after life eternal, tens of thousands of whom have responded.

221Tolerant and respectful of the good works and sacred beliefs of all men and all religious organizations, these "Mormon" missionaries have nevertheless been solemnly obligated to proclaim that the Lord has established one divinely appointed way whereby men may attain salvation, and one lineage of Priesthood, whereby men may perform the essential rites and ordinances of the Church of Jesus Christ. And if there has been opposition to their message, it has been opposition born of refusal or unwillingness to believe that the Lord has spoken! That He has restored to earth His Church and Holy Priesthood; that He has reaffirmed the first principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as they were given in other dispensations; that He has sent out divinely commissioned servants to proclaim these principles. Such has been the message of the "Mormon" missionaries who have gone to Great Britain during the past century and such must ever be the message of every Latter-day Saint.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The reader will find delightful entertainment of the true Dickens' variety by a reading of the complete "Mormon" episode from The Uncommercial Traveler. The chapter title is "Bound for the Great Salt Lake."
[^2] See Appendix table of emigration by years.
[^3] See Appendix table of British-born General Authorities.
[^4] 4. See Appendix for list of names.
[^5] 5. George F. Richards, April, 1932, Conference Discourses.
[^6] 6. See Appendix table of British and European Mission presidents. British only.
[^7] 7. See Appendix table of British and European Mission presidents. British only.
[^8] 8. See Appendix table of British and European Mission presidents. European only.
[^9] 9. See Appendix table of British and European Mission presidents. British only.
[^10] 10. See Appendix table of British and European Mission presidents. European only.
[^11] 11. Appointment announced May 1, 1937.
