Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

222CHAPTER 27

222THE MEN WHO HAVE COME FROM BRITAIN

222It was no less a personage than Charles Dickens who, reconnoitering at the London docks on the banks of the cargo-laden Thames, to see what he could see of the world as it came and went in the salt-sprayed black hulls of white-topped sailing ships, found himself among "Mormon" emigrants leaving home and country for a "strange" faith—a faith that had found its way to their inmost hearts, even so completely that all else the world had to offer seemed but a trifle to exchange for the certain conviction that brought peace to them, despite all else it brought of sacrifice and hardship.

222And, seeing their deeds, but not understanding their motives, Charles Dickens, who frankly came to discredit, or ridicule or "expose" or to do whatever his findings demanded, wrote thus of what there met his eyes: [^1]

222"Behold me on my way to an Emigrant Ship, on a hot morning early in June. . . Gigantic in the basin just beyond the church, looms my Emigrant Ship: her name, the Amazon. . .

"I go aboard my Emigrant Ship. I go first to the great cabin, and find it in the usual condition of a Cabin at that pass. Perspiring landsmen, with loose papers, and with pens and inkstands, pervade it; and the general appearance of things is as if the late Mr. Amazon's trustees found the affairs in great disorder, and were looking high and low for the will. . . But nobody is in an ill-temper, nobody is the worse for drink, nobody swears an oath or uses a coarse word, nobody appears depressed, nobody is weeping, and down upon the deck in every corner where it is possible to find a few square feet to kneel, crouch, or lie in, people in every unsuitable attitude for writing, are writing letters.

223"Now, I have seen emigrant ships before this day in June. And these people are so strikingly different from all other people in like circumstances whom I have ever seen, that I wonder aloud, 'What would a stranger suppose these emigrants to be!'

223"The vigilant bright face of the weather-browned captain of the Amazon is at my shoulder, and he says, 'What, indeed! The most of these came aboard yesterday evening. They came from various parts of England in small parties that had never seen one another before. Yet they had not been a couple of hours on board, when they established their own police, made their own regulations, and set their own watches at all the hatchways. Before nine o'clock, the ship was as orderly and as quiet as a man-of-war."

223"I looked about me again, and saw the letter-writing going on with the most curious composure. Perfectly abstracted in the midst of the crowd; . . . Later in the day, when this self-same boat was filled with a choir who sang glees and catches for a long time, one of the singers, a girl, sang her part mechanically all the while, and wrote a letter in the bottom of the boat while doing so.

223"'A stranger would be puzzled to guess the right name for these people, Mr. Uncommercial,' says the captain.

223"'Indeed he would.'

223"'If you hadn't known, could you ever have supposed—?'

223"'How could I? I should have said they were in their degree, the pick and flower of England.'

223"'So should I,' says the captain.

223"'How many are they?'

223"'Eight hundred in round numbers.'

223* * *

223"Eight hundred what? 'Geese, villain?' Eight Hundred 'Mormons.' I, Uncommercial Traveller for the firm of Human Interest Brothers, had come aboard this Emigrant Ship to see what eight hundred Latter-day Saints were like, and I found them (to the rout and overthrow of all my expectations) like what I now describe with scrupulous exactness.

"The 'Mormon' Agent who had been active in getting them together, and in making the contract with my friends, the owners of the ship, to take them as far as New York on their way to the Great Salt Lake, was pointed out to me. A compactly-made handsome man in black, rather short, with rich-brown hair and beard, and clear bright eyes. From his speech, I should set him down as American. Probably, a man who had 'knocked about the world' pretty much. A man with a frank, open manner, and unshrinking look; withal a man of great quickness. I believe he was wholly ignorant of my Uncommercial individuality, and consequently of my immense Uncommercial importance.

224"Uncommercial. These are a very fine set of people you have brought together here.

224"Mormon Agent. Yes, sir, they are a very fine set of people.

224"Uncommercial (looking about). Indeed, I think it would be difficult to find eight hundred people together anywhere else, and find so much beauty and so much strength and capacity for work among them.

224"Mormon Agent (not looking about, but looking steadily at Uncommercial). I think.—We sent out about a thousand more yes'day, from Liverpool.

224"Uncommercial. You are not going with these emigrants?

224"Mormon Agent. No, sir. I remain.

224"Uncommercial. But you have been in the Mormon Territory?

224"Mormon Agent. Yes; I left Utah about three years ago.

224"Uncommercial. It is surprising to me that these people are all so cheery, and make so little of the immense distance before them.

224"Mormon Agent. Well, you see; many of 'em have friends out in Utah, and many of 'em look forward to meeting friends on the way.

224"Uncommercial. On the way?

"Mormon Agent. This way 'tis. This ship lands 'em in New York City. Then they go on by rail right away beyond St. Louis, to that part of the Banks of the Missouri where they strike the Plains. There, wagons from the settlement meet 'em to bear 'em company on their journey 'cross—twelve hundred miles about. Industrious people who come out to the settlement soon get wagons of their own, and so the friends of some of these will come down in their own wagons to meet 'em. They look forward to that, greatly. . .

225"After a noontide pause for dinner, during which my emigrants were nearly all between-decks, and the Amazon looked deserted, a general muster took place. The muster was for the ceremony of passing the Government Inspection and the Doctor. . .

225"By what successful means a special aptitude for organization had been infused into these people, I am, of course, unable to report. But I know that, even now, there was no disorder, hurry, or difficulty.

225"I should say (I had no means of ascertaining the fact) that most familiar kinds of handicraft trades were represented here. Farm-laborers, shepherds, and the like, had their full share of representation, but I doubt if they preponderated. . . . Among all the fine handsome children, I observed but two with marks upon their necks that were probably scrofulous. Out of the whole number of emigrants, but one old woman was temporarily set aside by the doctor, on suspicion of fever; but even she afterwards obtained a clean bill of health.

225"When all had 'passed,' and the afternoon began to wear on, a black box became visible on deck, which box was in charge of certain personages also in black, of whom only one had the conventional air of an itinerant preacher. This box contained a supply of hymn-books, neatly printed and got up, published at Liverpool, and also in London at the 'Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 30, Florence street.' . . .

"I afterwards learned that a dispatch was sent home by the captain before he struck out into the wide Atlantic, highly extolling the behavior of these emigrants, and the perfect order and propriety of all their social arrangements. What is in store for the poor people on the shores of the Great Salt Lake, what happy delusions they are laboring under now, on what miserable blindness their eyes may be opened then, I do not pretend to say. But I went on board their ship to bear testimony against them if they deserved it, as I fully believed they would; to my great astonishment they did not deserve it; and my predispositions and tendencies must not affect me as an honest witness. I went over the Amazon's side, feeling it impossible to deny that, so far, some remarkable influence had produced a remarkable result, which better known influences have often missed.—From The Uncommercial Traveller, by Charles Dickens.

226That this was not an ordinary emigration venture and that these were not ordinary men and women, the distinguished Mr. Dickens seemed to sense, but what perhaps he did not understand were the factors that made this differ from any one of hundreds of colonizing projects—what set these men and women apart from tens of thousands of emigrants who were continuously leaving for new frontiers. Mr. Dickens perhaps had not read, or, perchance, having read, had not perhaps comprehended the instructions given of the Lord, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, in 1830 and following, wherein He said:

226"And, verily, verily, I say unto you, that this Church have I established and called forth out of the wilderness.

226"And even so will I gather mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, even as many as will believe in me, and hearken unto my voice.

226"Yea, verily, verily, I say unto you, that the field is white already to harvest; wherefore, thrust in your sickles, and reap with all your might, mind and strength."—Doctrine and Covenants, Section 33:5, 6 and 7.

226"And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy."—Doctrine and Covenants, Section 45:71.

226In accordance with these and other revelations, the Church began to gather unto itself truth-seeking men and women from an ever-widening circle, as its missionaries penetrated farther and farther on their world-wide mission of bearing witness of the Gospel restoration. And as testimonies of truth came to the humble and the honest in heart, so there fell upon them also the "spirit of gathering," the urge to comply with which made no sacrifice seem too great and no hindrance great enough.

227When the first missionaries went to Britain, however, they were counseled not to preach immediately concerning gathering. The Church was undergoing troublous times at home, and a great influx of dependent people from foreign lands at that time would only have added to their burdens. And so, the beginning of "Mormon" emigration from Great Britain was delayed nearly three years, until it could be properly organized under the direction of Brigham Young and the Twelve when they met and conducted the affairs of the Church as a Quorum in England.

227Accordingly, the first, "Mormon" emigration from Great Britain occurred June 6, 1840—the year after Nauvoo was settled. This first company, consisting of forty souls, had been organized six days before, June 1, 1840, by Brigham Young, which date, it may be noted in passing, was the thirty-ninth anniversary of his birth. Of this occurrence the following paragraph appears in the History of the Church:

227"Saturday, June 6—Elder John Moon and a company of forty Saints, to-wit: Hugh Moon, his mother and seven others of her family, Henry Moon (Uncle of John Moon), Henry Moon, Francis Moon, William Sutton, William Sitgraves, Richard Eaves, Thomas Moss, Henry Moore, Navey Ashworth, Richard Ainscough, and families, sailed in the ship Britannia from Liverpool for New York, being the first Saints that have sailed from England for Zion."—Vol. 4:134.

227Of the arrival of this first company in New York. the Millennial Star of September, 1840, comments as follows:

227"While thousands and tens of thousands are emigrating from this land to America, New Holland, etc., hoping by their industry to get a morsel of bread cheaper, and easier than they now do, and thus escape the miseries of hunger which some are already enduring, we rejoice that a few poor Saints find it in their hearts and can get the means to do likewise.

"Elder John Moon and others who sailed from Liverpool on the 6th of June, arrived in New York on the 20th of July (forty- four days on the water) in tolerable health and good spirits, as we learn by Brother Moon's letter of the 22nd of July."

228The Moon family and their connections, it will be remembered, were brought into the Church under unusual circumstances by Heber C. Kimball on his first mission to Great Britain.

228The second emigrant vessel was the North America, leaving Liverpool for New York September 7, 1840, with two hundred souls on board. The third and last vessel to sail that year was the Isaac Newton, October 15, 1840, with fifty Scotch Saints. This vessel did not go to New York, but to New Orleans, a more direct route to Nauvoo, and at considerable less expense.

228From that time, and as long as the emigration to Nauvoo continued, the main route of travel was direct from Liverpool to New Orleans, and from there up the Mississippi River to Nauvoo. President Brigham Young, and his brethren of the Twelve who were with him at the time, directed the emigration until April, 1841, during which time one thousand twenty Saints emigrated to Nauvoo.

228Once "the gathering" had started, the desire of the British Saints to emigrate became a pressing and major consideration. Since the Church was not in a favorable financial condition either in Great Britain or America, the utmost cooperation and management of resources were required. There was the problem not only of transporting great numbers of people, but also the problem of caring for them and usefully absorbing them in harassed and persecuted communities when they arrived at the headquarters of the Church in America. It required the utmost wisdom and caution to keep such a situation from becoming completely out of control.

Relative to these matters, and before emigration was organized at its best, the Twelve wrote an epistle "To the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in the various Branches and Conferences in Europe" some months after they had left British shores to return to America. From this lengthy epistle, which speaks of economic conditions in a manner strongly savoring of the language of our own day, the following excerpts are quoted:

229"Beloved Brethren,—We feel it our privilege, and a duty we owe to the great and glorious cause in which we have enlisted, to communicate to you at this time some principles, which, if carried into effect, will greatly facilitate the gathering of the Saints, and tend to ameliorate the condition of those who are struggling with poverty and distress, in this day when the usual means of support seem to be cut short, to the laboring classes, through the depression that everywhere prevails in the general business mart of the civilized world.

"Now comes the concert of action; if the church will arise unitedly—if the brethren will individually feel that the great work of the Lord is depending on themselves as instruments, to assist in carrying it forward, and will unite all their means, faith, and energy, in one grand mass, all that you desire can speedily be accomplished. A short time only will elapse before you yourselves will be astonished at the result, and you will feel that your desires are more than realized. While the Saints are united, no power on the earth, or under the earth, can prevail against them; but while each one acts for himself, many, very many, are in danger of being overthrown.

230"God has promised all things to those who love him and keep his commandments; then why be afraid that one should get a little more than another, or that one should gain, for a little moment, what another might lose, when Jesus has promised that the faithful shall be one with him, as he is one with the Father, and shall possess all things in the due time of the Lord; not by stealth, not by force, not by the sword, but by the gift of the Father, through faithfulness to his commands. . . .

230"Had we means, we would not ask your aid. We would gladly send the ships of Tarshish to bear you across the great waters; we would bring you to our homes—to our firesides; we would provide you habitations, lands, and food, when you arrive among us. Our hearts are large enough to do all this, and a great deal more; but we have not the means. We have to labor for our own subsistence, as well as attend to those things which are laid upon us of the Lord, and which concern the whole Church as much as ourselves. It is not the will of heaven that any one should be put in possession of all things, without striving for them. . . ."—Millennial Star, Vol. III, pp. 17-20.

230In the November 20, 1846, issue of the Millennial Star appears a lengthy "Memorial to the Queen, for the relief, by immigration, of a portion of her poor subjects," which asked for land grants and privileges in "Oregon territory."

230The February 15, 1847, issue of the Star reports:

"The Memorial, measuring 168 feet in length and containing nearly 13,000 names has been forwarded to Her Majesty (Queen Victoria), together with a copy to each member of Parliament and also to other distinguished individuals. Tens of thousands await the issue with prayerful solicitude and hope. May He who holds the hearts of sovereigns and the destinies of nations in His hands, graciously incline Her Majesty to favor the Memorial."

231"In most schemes by emigration [says Elder Orson Hyde] hitherto approved and aided by government, great difficulty has been found to induce the people of this country, to leave their native isle; but we are prepared, and shall guarantee, to send twenty thousand people of all trades, and from most districts in Scotland, England and Wales, at once, or as soon as vessels can be found to convey them."

231The Star printed an acknowledgment of the receipt of the Memorial from Lord John Russell, Prime Minister, in behalf of the Queen, and letters from members of Parliament, but we find no further reference to any action having been taken by the Parliament.

231The establishment of the headquarters of the Church in Great Salt Lake Valley automatically made the "Great Basin" the gathering place for the Latter-day Saints. But the securing of funds to transport so many members of the Church, drawn mostly from the poorer classes, and scattered over the United States and in foreign lands, was a question of grave importance. So in September, 1849, the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company was organized under the direction of President Brigham Young. Donations of money, oxen, wagons, foodstuffs and equipment were widely solicited to constitute a fund whereby the poor might be gathered to "Zion." The money advanced to individuals for transportation was considered as a loan to be repaid as soon as possible after the arrival of the immigrants in the "Valley." In the greater number of cases this obligation was honorably discharged. Years later many Utah born children of those who had been beneficiaries of the Perpetual Emigrating Fund, gladly made liberal donations to the fund, in order that their relatives abroad might enjoy the blessings that awaited them in Zion.

The Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company was legally incorporated by the Territorial Legislature of Utah on October 4, 1851, and at all times during its existence, functioned under careful supervision. It continued to operate as an emigration agency, collecting and disbursing funds, chartering ships, establishing purchasing agencies, and arranging for transportation of emigrants across the seas and the plains, in organized companies, and later by rail until 1887, when the company was dissolved by passage of the Edmunds-Tucker law, an act of Congress which, among other things, dissolved the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company, the property of which escheated to the government. This act became a law without the signature of the President of the United States.

232The British House of Commons took note of the "Mormon" emigration system in 1854, and, according to the Edinburgh Review of January, 1862, reported as follows:

232"The select committee of the House of Commons on emigrant ships for 1854 summoned the 'Mormon' agent and passenger broker before it and came to the conclusion that no ships under the provisions of the Passenger's Act could be depended upon for comfort and security in the same degree as those under his administration. The 'Mormon' ship is a family under strong and accepted discipline, with every provision for comfort, decorum, and internal peace."

232Such notices as the following were issued by the Church emigration office in Liverpool, usually from sixty to ninety days prior to sailing date:

232"NOTICE TO INTENDING EMIGRANTS—We beg to inform the Saints intending to emigrate, that we are now prepared to receive their applications for berths. Every application should be accompanied by the name, age, occupation, country where born, and one pound deposit for each one named. Passengers must furnish their own beds and bedding, their cooking utensils, provision boxes. . . ." Millennial Star, Vol. 98, pp. 789-790.

The procedure from this point was essentially as that described by the "'Mormon' Agent" to Mr. Dickens, the "Uncommercial Traveller." The following is typical of the frontier agent's instructions to these people:

233"My assent will not be given to any Saint to leave the Missouri River unless organized in a company of at least fifty effectual well-armed men, and that, too, under the command of a man appointed by me. I will furnish at this point of outfit, for such as desire it, wagons, oxen, cows, guns, flour, bacon, etc. . . . One wagon, two yoke of oxen, and two cows will be sufficient for a family of eight or ten persons with addition of a tent for every two or three families."—Millennial Star, Vol. 98, pp. 789-790.

233On the plains rigid regulations were needed for the welfare, protection and dispatch of a company so widely diversified and so strange to the mode of life they were undertaking. From the countries of northern Europe, from all the trades and professions and from homes of poverty and plenty came these men, women and children, taking with them such few cherished possessions as they could carry, but largely confining themselves to stern necessities—and oftimes not even those. Organized into companies of tens, fifties and hundreds, with horses, cattle, wagons and implements, they led a resolute life of self-discipline and community discipline. One company's instructions read:

233"Resolved—First the horn shall be blown at four o'clock in the morning, when the people shall rise, and after the necessary preparations for starting, the horn will be blown again for the people to come together for prayers, and at half-past eight at night the horn will be blown again for evening prayers, which each family will attend in their wagons."—Millennial Star, Vol. 98, pp. 789-790.

On February 3, 1852, the first company of Perpetual Emigrating Fund emigrants arrived in Salt Lake City, Utah, from Europe, with thirty-one wagons; Abraham O. Smoot, captain. It was met by President Brigham Young and his counselors and by Captain Wm. Pitt's band, and a large company of Utah's leading citizens. This company brought across the plains the remains of Elders Lorenzo D. Barnes and William Burton, who had died while on missions in Great Britain.

234In the fall of 1855, the financial strain of the season's emigration program made it evident that the old plan could not continue. Having already written a general circular of information to the membership abroad, Brigham Young, as president of the Emigrating Company, wrote to Franklin D. Richards, presiding in England, Sept. 30, 1855, in part, as follows:

234"I have been thinking how we should operate another year. We cannot afford to purchase wagons and teams as in times past, I am consequently thrown back upon my old plan—to make handcarts and let the emigration foot it with the necessary supplies, and having a cow or two for every ten. They can come just as quick, if not quicker, and much cheaper—can start earlier and escape the prevailing sickness which annually lays so many of our brethren in the dust. A great majority of them walk now even with the teams which are provided, and have a great deal more care and perplexity than they would have if they came without them. They will only need 90 days' rations from the time of their leaving the Missouri River, and as the settlements extend up the Platte, not that much. The carts can be made without a particle of iron, with wheels hooped, made strong and light, and one, or if the family be large, two of them will bring all that they will need upon the plains.

234"If it is once tried you will find that it will become the favorite mode of crossing the plains; they will have nothing to do but come along, and I should not be surprised if a company of this kind should make the trip in sixty or seventy days. I do know that they can beat any ox train crossing the plains. I want to see it fairly tried and tested, at all events, and I think we might as well begin another year as any time and save this enormous expense of purchasing wagons and teams—indeed we will be obliged to pursue this course or suspend operations, for aught that I can see at the present."—Millennial Star, Vol. 17, p. 813.

234The suggestion of President Young was given support by his associates, and in view of the enthusiasm and impatience among the converts in Europe to come to Utah under almost any conditions, the plan was announced in a letter dated October 29. It follows in part:

"Let all the Saints who can, gather up to Zion, and come while the way is open before them; let the poor also come, whether they receive aid or not from the Perpetual Emigrating Fund; let them come on foot, with handcarts, or wheelbarrows; let them gird up their loins and walk through and nothing shall hinder or stay them.

235* * *

235"We propose sending men of faith and experience with some suitable instructions to some proper outfitting point, to carry into effect the above suggestions; let the Saints therefore, who intend to emigrate the ensuing year, understand that they are expected to walk, and draw their luggage across the plains, and that they will be assisted by the Fund in no other way."—Millennial Star, Vol. 18, p. 54.

235Acting upon the instructions of the general officers of the emigrating company relative to the season's emigration, the Millennial Star for February 23, 1856, announced that Iowa City had been selected as the outfitting post for that year and that the emigrants would be forwarded from the port of landing to that point via the Chicago and Rock Island Railroad. The cost of transportation under the new plan for that year, was placed at nine pounds ($45.00) for each adult.

235The disaster that befell two handcart companies late in 1856, many of whose number perished in Wyoming snows, was tragic, but the movement as a whole and the four thousand who walked the plains, must not be lost sight of. The experiment was not entirely without success and would likely have continued over a longer period, had not the westward extension of the railroad and the supplementary use of Church teams entered to lessen its operations and bring the handcart episode to a close in 1860.

Neither the dissolution of the Perpetual Emigrating Fund in 1887, nor any previous or subsequent difficulty until the United States immigration restrictions of recent times, halted the influx of British Saints to the headquarters of the Church. More than fifty-two thousand [^2] of them have come during the years of the near-century since the inception of this unprecedented modern migration gration. And they have brought to the Church loyal man power, and fine, clean British blood. They have brought, too, from every walk of life those skilled in the arts and the trades and the professions, and fine British capacity for adapting themselves to the vastly different environmental conditions of frontier life.

236To membership in the presiding councils of the Church Great Britain has directly contributed eleven men, among them some of the most brilliant, capable and devoted champions and defenders of the faith that the century has produced. [^3]

236But besides this British contribution to the official leadership of the Church have come the great unrecordable contributions of the hosts of men and women throughout the decades. Uncounted scores of the most useful men and women this Church has had on its membership rolls were British-born, including the first designer and builder of the Tabernacle organ, one Tabernacle organist and five Tabernacle choir conductors.

236A brief check-up of the current official Latter-day Saint Hymn Book reveals that the words of more than half of the 421 hymns it contains were written by British-born members of the Church, and of more than three-fourths of these hymns, the music was written by British-born members of the Church.

236And so specific details of British contributions could be multiplied virtually without limit. These alone would more than justify the century's existence of the British Mission, and the cost in time, personal sacrifice and money that have been put into it.

But these tangible and material things, that may be listed and multiplied and evaluated in ordinary terms, are not the reason for the existence of the British or any other mission of the Church. The only justifiable reason is the salvation of human souls—the bringing of a conviction of truth to the hearts of men, and to their lives a transforming knowledge of the divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ and His plan for the joy and exaltation of men. And for this cause have they come—from the coal mines of Wales, from the heather-covered hills of Scotland, from the midland mill towns, from the shamrock countryside of Ireland, from the labyrinths of Londontown, and from the sea-swept shores of all the Island Empire.

237Some have come from material poverty to rise to material riches; some have left comparative ease to find penury and deprivation; some have remained as they were and as they are, to make their way still on British shores; some tossed on the seas; some walked the plains; some died before the journey was through—but all have found whatever price was asked and whatever cost was paid to be the greatest exchange of values this world has to offer, and that is why these men and women of a century's harvest in Great Britain have closely cherished the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

237Such has been the spirit of the men and women who have come from Great Britain. And those same traditional British qualities of character, that have meant so much to the Church of Jesus Christ in frontier lands, will go far toward building a strong and permanent Church organization in the British Isles, now that emigration is no longer encouraged.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Appendix table on baptisms by years.
[^2] See Appendix statistical tables on number of missionaries and number of baptisms by years.
[^3] See Appendix table of British-born General Authorities.
