Richard L. Evans, Century of Mormonism in Great Britain ( 1937)

238CHAPTER 28

238CHALLENGING CONCLUSIONS

238The latter-day restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, with the authority of the Priesthood wherewith its ordinances are administered, has been operative in Great Britain almost as long as it has in America—one hundred years out of one hundred and seven years. While speculation upon things that may never be known is an idle thing, nevertheless it is intriguing to think that but for the "spirit of gathering" and its attendant "mass" emigration of British converts, the "Mormon" Church in the British Isles might already have become numerically great even as it has in America. It is not difficult to believe this when one remembers that more than fifty-two thousand members of the Church have sailed from British shores in decades past, and they with their influence, and with their friends, and with their faithful posterity, would have made a mighty concourse in the United Kingdom.

When Heber C. Kimball and his immediate successors preached in British lands, the "field was white, already to harvest," and these noblemen of God thrust in their sickles and reaped gloriously. Since then there have been seasons of lean and seasons of abundance, with cycles that rise and fall. There have been as few as one hundred forty-seven converts reported in a year as compared with thousands at other times. [^1] During periods of low yield there has been a feeling in some quarters that the British harvest was over. Unofficial talk concerning the closing of the British Mission has been heard in former years. But the writer knows of no law, natural or ecclesiastical, which would justify the conclusion that one harvest may not be followed by another.

239Salvation, after all, is an individual matter, and Wilford Woodruff's testimony to John Benbow and the United Brethren back in 1840, has little actually to do with the testimony of today's missionary to the confused twentieth century seeker-after-truth. Until the Lord speaks otherwise, bearing witness to all the world is the everlasting obligation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and "all the world" must certainly include the present generation in Great Britain.

239These and other challenging conclusions were reached in part as a result of a comparison of certain figures from the British Mission statistical report for a recent year, with certain current vital statistics of Great Britain, as follows:

239There were approximately a quarter of a million people residing in the British Isles to every "Mormon" missionary. There were approximately 7,000 people residing in the British Isles to every member of the Church living in Great Britain.

239But forgetting the existing forty-odd millions of population, and confining ourselves for the moment to a consideration only of annual births—the newcomers to the scene of life, so to speak—and the following astounding results appear:

239There were approximately 2 persons born in Great Britain in a recent year to every door that was opened to a "Mormon" missionary; there were approximately 6 persons born to every Gospel conversation engaged in by a "Mormon" missionary; 9 born to every Gospel pamphlet distributed; 30 born to every family of investigators visited; 230 born to every Book of Mormon distributed; and approximately 3,000 born to every baptism into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

240Challenging!

240Who yearns for opportunity? Here it is in staggering abundance! In the oldest mission of the Church on the eve of a centennial celebration, our man power and facilities do not reach even the newcomers to the world-scene, to say nothing of the existing population.

240How this problem is to be solved, no man knows. The presiding authorities in the British field have made notable strides in adapting missionary methods to modern conditions. The press, radio, sports, recreational activities, and group efforts are supplementing the "tried and true" methods of the early British missionaries, but nothing will ever be effectively substituted for their heroic faith, and their diligence and unquestioning trust in the Lord. The year 1936 saw a "Mormon" missionary chorus, the Millennial Chorus, engaged to sing on radio stations of the British Broadcasting Corporation, and in British theatres. Numerous recent British press notices are available praising "Mormon" baseball, basketball, and other recreational activities, all of which are helpful to the cause, and indicative of the diligence, initiative and resourcefulness of the twentieth century missionary. But the missionary of today is confronted with the task of harmonizing "streamlined" methods with the ancient faith and the preaching of fundamentals, without which no man may serve the Lord effectively.

240Another challenging situation is this: The record of a century seems to indicate that there is little or no relationship between the number of "imported" missionaries and the number of baptisms. [^2] What are the other elements affecting conversions and to what extent may they be controlled or modified are questions that may well bear looking into.

241But the future of the Church in Great Britain does not depend wholly upon the activities and continuance of its "imported" missionaries. As indicated in the opening sentences of this concluding chapter, it is idle speculation to contemplate what might have been the destiny of the Church in Britain had there been no widespread emigration to America, but it is not idle speculation to contemplate what might yet be the destiny of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles, growing out of the united efforts of its present membership of more than six thousand souls.

241Whether the traveling "Mormon" missionaries from America are called out of Great Britain tomorrow, or whether they remain there for the next hundred years, changes the fundamental situation not the least. The fact remains that unsettled world conditions and immigration restrictions mean that the Church must be built to flourish as a permanent institution in Great Britain. And every Latter-day Saint in the British Isles must strive toward that day when the Church of God shall be mighty in Britain, and when the spires of a Temple of the Lord shall pierce British skies, for "Zion is the pure in heart."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Note—These figures represent traveling missionaries sent to Great Britain from other countries. They do not include the unnumbered thousands of British-born missionaries who have served while still being citizens and residents of their native land.
[^2] Not included in this figure are an unrecorded and inestimable number who have left Great Britain individually or in small groups without their departure having been noted in any of the Church records or publications.
