Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

Preface

In the summer of 1984 the Brigham Young University Women's Conference moved from its home in the associated students' women's office to sponsorship by the university president, Jeffrey R. Holland. President Holland's original charter to the interdisciplinary planning committee expressed his hope that the conference be "a rich experience for women—young and old, married and single, mothers and daughters— . . . [in] a conference content full of intellectual stimulation, cultural enrichment, and spiritual affirmation." The committee has sought to fulfill that charge and has constantly struggled to address issues of vital concern to all of us—women and men—in a manner that unites the best scholarship and rigorous thinking with faith, spiritual insight, and, as appropriate, comfort and healing.

That perspective makes the BYU Women's Conference unique among women's conferences, university or otherwise, and offers us manifold advantages in devising solutions that are truly transforming because they strike at the roots of problems facing women, not just at symptoms. Solutions, we submit, can best be found by bringing to bear both scholarship and faith, a synergistic union that enhances each. Indeed, the gospel, intelligently understood, provides the answer. As Professor A. D. Sorensen of the BYU political science department says in his essay from the 1987 conference, "The only way we can finally escape the sins of inequality [between men and women] is to embrace the order of life required by divine love—to become a Zion society. The kingdom can be built up in no other way."

The second major principle behind our planning is the belief that women's issues are in reality human issues, issues of relationships, which can be solved only with all of us—women and men—working side by side. Certainly, we as Latter-day Saints know that we must learn to truly understand each other, to become one as husbands and wives, since exaltation can only be achieved jointly. That same understanding must be extended to all our sisters and brothers. We must see each other with new eyes and learn new patterns of interaction based on our enhanced vision of divine potential. Thus, we have invited and encouraged men to participate in the conferences as both attenders and presenters. We simply cannot solve the problems facing women without involving the other half of the human race.

And, as men and women need each other, so do women need their sisters. Each of us will experience over our lifetime physical pain, emotional anguish, heartache, grief, even betrayal in one form or another. If we attempt to deny the problem or to cover it with a facade of forced sweetness and light, we imperil both ourselves and each other—ourselves because we deny the healing that can result from the love, strength, and insights of true friends, and each other because people then assume we are our facades and feel even more isolated with their problems. We must be honest with each other—about our hurts, fears, even doubts, as well as our hopes and joys—and we must be strengths and safe harbors to each other in pain and happiness as we offer not judgment but love.

In this collection of essays from the 1985, 1986, and 1987 conferences, we have assembled presentations that address some common themes and that exemplify intellectual rigor expressed with love and support. Many of these papers require us to think deeply and even to rethink certain assumptions, to see issues in a fresher light, to examine how well our behavior expresses our ideals; others offer sustenance, renewal, and comfort in our trials. Readers should not, however, expect to find dictatorial prescriptions for what someone believes constitutes "the perfect Mormon woman." The essays, we trust, will not leave us with more burdens—with prescribed ways of thinking and feeling and yet more lists of things we "should" be doing and about which we will feel guilty but which may not be what the Lord wants us individually to be doing after all. The conferences, and these essays, never intended to provide the "ultimate handout" that promises to fix our lives and fill them with unending bliss if we will just follow its ten easy steps. We cannot reduce life to such simplistic formulas, nor do these authors attempt to do so. But they do offer personal insights and honest testimony from which we can derive perspective and understanding of our own experiences.

The first section of this volume, "Strengthening Faith," discusses the nature of faith and faithfulness and the meaning of both in our lives. In the keynote address from the 1986 women's conference, Marjorie P. Hinckley describes, with loving supportiveness, the diversity in the lives of faithful Latter-day Saint women and challenges us to offer each other true sisterhood despite that diversity. Elder Neal A. Maxwell explicates some of the "strategic challenges" to developing faith and discusses opportunities for building it, while reminding us that we are the creators of current history in the kingdom and, thus, we must make of our history "days never to be forgotten."

Essays in the second section, "Building Relationships with Self, Others, and God," address the nature of our identities as daughters and sons of God and how our understanding who God is and who we are should transform all our attitudes and actions toward each other. Elder Marion D. Hanks stresses the importance of realizing God's "equality of esteem" for all His children and of coming to know God and Christ through prayer, the scriptures, and the temple. A. D. Sorensen agrees that divine love, which is the order of the celestial kingdom, is no respecter of persons and that the earthly kingdom must reflect that same heavenly order. He reminds us that we cannot "continue living as the world does." Donna Lee Bowen Barnes elucidates the universal search for order and argues that it is only by conforming to the divine order that we gain both temporal and divine happiness. In an exegesis of the scriptures discussing Adam and Eve, Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist shows how negative misreadings have influenced relations of equality between men and women and how deeper readings of the texts contravene such notions. We cannot, however, offer only intellectual assent. Eugene England asserts that eternal marriages can be built on no foundation other than the acceptance of female and male equality before God and then describes many of the challenges entailed in becoming truly one as husbands and wives. Janath R. Cannon and Jill Mulvay Derr expand the vision from marital union to unity with our diverse and individual sisters and brothers in the kingdom and offer case studies from the history of Relief Society on resolving differences. Finally, Ann N. Madsen offers suggestions, personal experiences, and insight from her extensive knowledge of the scriptures on how to grow closer to God.

The third section, "Struggling with Adversity," opens with a profound and deeply sensitive essay by Carlfred Broderick on possible reasons why we suffer and how we can endure in faith and hope without becoming embittered by tragedy. Personal essays by Shari E. Pack and Signe Hale Gillum movingly share their own trials and struggles and their endurance and coping in faith and love.

The essays in the final section, "Understanding Our World," offer the perspective of both research and experience in illuminating vital aspects of personal, family, and community dynamics. Ida Smith challenges us to broaden our definition of home to include the community so that we become influences for righteousness there. Summarizing the sociological research on the effects of family structure on family dynamics, Stephen J. Bahr explodes some persistent myths and discusses the implications of empirical research for how we structure our own families. The final essay by Kay P. Edwards explains how our values affect our attitudes toward money and offers practical suggestions for reducing family conflict over allocating monetary resources by reaching mutually beneficial compromises.

We would like to thank our associates in the Women's Research Institute: Jeri Lyn Gill, who cheerfully spent hours in the library checking quotations and citations as well as proofing copy, and Diane Nielsen, whose superb computer skills facilitated the production of the manuscript.

This volume is another in a series of collected talks on a variety of subjects from the BYU Women's Conferences. We hope that these essays will offer enhanced visions of our identity and of the meaning of the gospel as well as comfort, hope, insight, testimony, inspiration, and strength in our quests to follow the Master.

Mary E. Stovall and

Carol Cornwall Madsen
