Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

Building Relationships with Self, Others, and God

Resolving differences does not necessarily mean dissolving them. It is possible to move forward . . . without perfect harmony if we steer by what we have in common rather than by our differences. . . . True unity can be achieved only through patience and understanding. —Janath R. Cannon and Jill Mulvay Derr

Equality of Esteem

Elder Marion D. Hanks [^1]

I will say to you as I begin that I remember no assignment that has seemed more important to me or has been given more sincere attention. In preparation, I have had the great blessing of reading talks given at previous BYU Women's Conferences and much of scripture and Church history relating to women.

We here have much about which to smile. I am highly conscious that behind our smiles there are deep and diverse and often complex and painful realities. Human life is like that, and we learn sooner or later that jolly greetings and a pat on the cheek will not resolve much that must be individually confronted, worked out, and, with such assistance as one may discover, either lived with or resolved in the best way we can. Yet all of us have much about which to rejoice and be glad in this free and fruitful land.

I sat with Elder Richard L. Evans once long ago and heard him repeat the story of the lad who had come home from school with a report card that was worrisome to his father. He was no longer first in the class; he was second. "Second," said the father; "who is first?" "Mary Smith," said the sad boy. "Mary Smith! You mean a mere girl is first, and you are second?" He said, "Dad, girls aren't so mere any more."

Women are getting a lot of media attention lately. News stories in the recent past have included something about the woman mayor of a major city in Florida and of seventy-five courageous Soviet women striking in the cause of Jewish emigration from Russia. There was also a story of a woman judge who was robbed on the streets of Philadelphia, attracting little attention from some who might have defended her but, interestingly, wide attention from those who thought it an act of appropriate retribution for her to suffer this affliction since she is a judge and thus, in their feeble minds, responsible for the troubles of those with whom she had had to deal as an instrument of justice. Then recently we have seen pictures and read stories about the Reagan ladies, whose squabble over a family book briefly simplified their husband's and father's life by pushing him off the front page.

Another news item may be more instructive than any mentioned thus far. A professor addressing a Women's Week meeting at the University of Utah saluted the gains made in recent years for women and minorities in equality of rights and opportunity, though, she said, the largest results have yet to be accomplished. Then she spoke of an "equality of esteem, which is an unwritten moral equality . . . and still beyond the grasp of most women and minorities." [^2]

Equality of Esteem

Whatever our reaction to the events of the last few years, the testing and contesting, the shouting and pouting, the insistence to take sides on the question of equality, all of us can very likely respond with sympathy and appreciation to that interesting phrase, "equality of esteem." That is surely an appropriate way to characterize the attitude of Almighty God to all of His children. In His loving Father's heart there is truly "equality of esteem." Indeed, He specifically declared, "Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one." (1 Nephi 17:35.)

There is added to that statement through the prophet the declaration, "He [or she] that is righteous is favored of God." That some are favored doesn't, of course, reflect on His love for all of us or on our value in His eyes and heart, but it does express the expanded opportunities that are the natural consequence of learning and obeying the law and thus enjoying the blessings that are predicated on that law. Through His prophet, the Lord said, "If it so be that the children of men keep the commandments of God he doth nourish them, and strengthen them, and provide means whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has commanded them." (1 Nephi 17:3.)

As the youngest child in a large, one-parent family in my growing-up years, I understand perhaps as well as most what some of the problems associated with sustaining life on a low level of subsistence are. Some of the feminist furor of recent years has been understandable to me from that base of experience. Necessity and our mother's character and faith and her determination to remain independent as a family after our father died motivated all of us to work and contribute. Earlier, during a long period of financial stress, she had employed her special domestic skills to make jellies and jams, which our father had sold from door to door. She sewed and served others and provided a haven for many needful people who came to our home seeking counsel and comfort.

One of my earliest philosophical meanderings began as I pulled my little red wagon with the Relief Society president's distribution of welfare goods. That was the welfare program in those days for the Church, to deliver commodities to the home of the Relief Society president, who then distributed them. As I did that, being the delivery agent, I on occasion was caused to muse, "If we are not poor, who is?" But we never tasted the food. It was for the poor. And all of us worked almost from childhood, all of us together attempting to survive and to do it with the good cheer that constantly reflected Mother's view of life.

Not long ago I spoke at the funeral of a great lady who had known me literally from the day of my birth. I said at that service that it seemed strange to me that anyone should ever question whether women of Sister Anderson's quality were equal to men. She, with Sister Reynolds and Sister Neal and my mother and others like them, were a real presence in my life. Most were widowed, with families, none lacking anything on the score of knowledge and intelligence, all able and kind and gracious and good and representative of everything wholesome and holy, in my mind. Circumstances were difficult for my mother, but everything I experienced with her and my three sweet sisters strengthened my admiration for women. My own wife and four choice daughters have enhanced my capacity for respect for special daughters of God, as did my wife's mother and other choice individuals who have influenced my life and added to my gratitude for the refining and uplifting quality of wonderful women.

Of course, woman differs from woman, as man differs from man. Our experiences in living in Europe and Asia and traveling continually across the world have emphasized for us the great varieties of circumstances, cultures, language, families, education, sophistication, political situation, economics, talents, and opportunities for growth and development. There is much similarity among this great group here today, but there is also significant diversity. I assume that a large number of you are married and in traditional families. Some are divorced or widowed; some are the heads of single-parent families; others not yet married.

In recognition of that diversity, let me read a few paragraphs from something I wrote that was published a time ago, dealing particularly with single women. Some of the special problems for the single woman who is a faithful believer in the gospel of Jesus Christ are reflected in these brief extracts from choice Latter-day Saint women of various circumstances:

" 'Being 32 and not married has some aspects of pain known only to the single Mormon woman. As I begin to write this I am crying. My dreams seem so unattainable. But the dreams are not unusual or grandiose. They seem so simple in my mind. I hunger to be happily married. Where do I go with these dreams? . . .

" 'Maybe it is this need to "be lovable" that becomes the pain inside us. In the mind of society there must be a reason when one is not married. What is the flaw in me?' "

A widow writes:

" 'It is better for us, I think, than for the divorced or never married. We have loved and been loved, and though we become desperately lonely for the one who has gone, yet we feel married still, and still loved as we continue to love.' "

A divorced woman writes:

" 'Divorced Mormons often become alienated from the Church entirely. For those who cling vigorously to the source of blessings rather than cutting themselves off, there is yet the sometimes present problem of uneasy fellow members who regard divorced people as having something wrong with them, perhaps something contagious, like a disease, and who do not know how to act with such a one who may be innocent of any wrongdoing, even victimized.' "

To these sobering comments is added one from what to me was an unexpected source: a lovely, faithful Latter-day Saint who married out of the Church and who had hopes for a future she no longer feels will come to pass. She writes about a particular kind of singleness:

" 'I have always been a member of the Church and was active (did not miss a meeting, held three jobs at a time, etc.) up to the very day of my marriage. I married a Catholic. (Go ahead and wince. I am still kind of shocked at myself at such an incredible, complete flip!) With this in mind, I thought I would mention that one version of the single woman in the Church is the woman who married a nonmember. You know—the woman who really believed that all those faith-promoting stories on conversion would happen to her. They have not. They may not. She is no longer the unattached sister. Her hard-core non-believer is very real and loving, but not Golden Question material after all. She is alone. Sitting. Sensitive. Weeping (inside). Never wanting to give up hope; never seeing it either. It can be psychologically devastating to realize that you are now numbered among the inactive. You are still somebody's ward project. You are downing the percentages in all the books. Still, you have a testimony. You certainly think about the Church all the time. If you have ever practiced love, charity, humility, and studied the gospel in your home, it has been these married years—alone.' "

And two sentences from another sum up these candid statements:

" 'The Church is not only family-oriented, but it is also couple-oriented. One who lives the life of the gospel, being a single adult, must be content with these feelings and battle to be happy in spite of them.' " [^3]

Offspring of God

The traditional, anticipated role of woman in the Church is as a partner in marriage, as wife, mother, homemaker, the heart of a family. This will forever be so. The Church will continue to emphasize the importance of home and family and of the role of parents in that setting. Motherhood will always be regarded as the highest blessing and privilege of the daughters of God. Emphasis will be given to the important nature of the home and the vital meaning of the family in preserving and building a constructive and worthwhile society. Temple marriage will continue to be a lofty objective for members of the Church. Preparation for that kind of marriage will be strongly counseled. Instructions and encouragement will be provided to help qualify people for that holy experience. But all of this must not and will not be done insensitively and without tender consciousness that there are many wonderful women (and men) in the society and in the Church, like those from whom we have quoted, who have not experienced or do not now enjoy the blessings of marriage and family in the traditional way. They are "fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God" (Ephesians 2:19), entitled to every blessing and every opportunity in the kingdom on the same basis as everyone else—that is, individual desire, willingness, capacity, and worthiness.

From an unidentified author come these four lines relating to a bullfight, which are perhaps applicable to the circumstances of those to whom we have referred:

The experts ranked in serried rows Fill the enormous plaza full. But only one is there who knows And he's the one who fights the bull.

Every woman is special, a somebody of intrinsic worth who has been a somebody for a very long time, indeed, forever. Every daughter of God, born of divine heritage in the spirit before this world was formed, enters mortality already a special, eternal person. Each has proved herself in demanding periods of trial, has chosen the right course and pursued it with faith and courage, and comes here with credentials earned in action elsewhere. Every girl, every woman, is a somebody apart and aside from anyone else, husband or family or otherwise. If she is privileged to enjoy fruitful family association in this world, happy marriage, motherhood, then she is favored indeed and through obedience to the laws of God qualifies for eternal creative union and all the other choice blessings promised for every faithful child of God who desires them and is willing to receive them.

If the anticipated timetable for establishing a base for those blessings is delayed in this world, or disrupted, the promises still pertain. "All that God hath" can be hers if she desires it and lives for it.

On a plaque on the wall of my office is this choice statement: "To believe in God is to know that all the rules will be fair and that there will be wonderful surprises."

Eternal life—life with God, life of divine quality, creative progressive life, the life of exaltation—is a loving life shared with dear ones. The ultimate enjoyment of this life is a consequence of individual choice in accepting, through obedience to His commandments, the invitation of the Lord to be with Him and other loved ones everlastingly. The path to earthly and eternal happiness always leads from the individual and the way each uses her agency. The prophet Lehi taught that God's children "are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient. . . . And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through [Christ], or to choose captivity and death." (2 Nephi 2:27.)

It is important to know how the Lord feels and who we are to Him. Socrates said, "The ignorance which causes vice and immorality is not ignorance of moral principles or laws but an ignorance of self, an ignorance of who we really are."

God is our Father; He loves us; He desires for us everlasting joy. We may be confused when we are young, as Lucifer was—he who "knew not the mind of [his Father]" (Moses 4:6), who did not want men to follow the plan God presented for our mortal experience and ultimate maturity. Lucifer wanted to "destroy the agency of man." (Moses 3:4.) He wanted to conduct us on a safe, round-trip journey, not one soul to be lost—and not one soul any better for having made the trip. Why? Because growth and maturing are processes involving opposition and free agency, contending forces between which we must choose.

Failure, futility, frustration, loss of self-respect because our conscience cannot approve what we have just done or decided, or long ago did or decided—these are elements of normalcy, but they are meant to be overcome as we mature in our capacity to understand what God really wants and how much He wants it. In our life before mortality He permitted Lucifer to tell his story and mislead a host of our Father's beloved children. In this world there is "opposition in all things" and freedom to choose.

For parents who suffer through destructive decisions made by beloved children this should be comforting. God understands, and He believes enough in the importance of our eternal growth not to shield us from the experiences of mortal life which we came here to undertake. Perhaps we did not foresee every detail, but all of us understood in principle. This is what is at the heart of it all.

In the wonderful musical Fiddler on the Roof, Tevye explains that the strength of their beleaguered lives is possible because "Everyone knows who he is and what God wants him to do."

What is mankind? Who are we? Is it so vital that we know? Ah, yes! The apostle Paul taught the Romans: "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ." (Romans 8:16-17.) His testimony to the men of Athens on Mars Hill is that we are all the "offspring of God." (Acts 17:29.)

I humbly confirm with you today, then, what your nature is and who you are. You are unique in personality, in pattern special. You belong here on God's earth and in this time. The Book of Mormon and Bible both declare in specific language that the earth was created for us and that it may be our eternal home. "Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited; and he hath created his children that they should possess it." (1 Nephi 17:36.) Isaiah, seven hundred years before the coming of Christ, taught that God formed the earth to be inhabited. (Isaiah 45:18.) And in the dispensation of the fulness of times it is written: "The poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it. . . . That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever." (D&C 88:17, 20.)

Someone to Love

The very essence of our natures is perhaps best expressed when we are following the Savior's example of service. This was forcefully emphasized for me in the last several weeks of stake conference visits, during which I had two of the tender experiences of my lifetime. On a Saturday recently I stood on the steps of a stake center and listened to a lovely lady whose husband had been killed a few months before. She had a large family of little children. I told her about herself and who she is and what she can do. I didn't pretend it would be easy; it wasn't for my mother or any other in like condition. She said something I shall never forget: "Brother Hanks, we miss him terribly. We miss his taking care of us. We miss his love. But you know," she said reflectively, "I think even more we miss having him to take care of; we miss having him to love."

A week later I listened to a man speak of his wife who had suffered painfully over a long year of terrible illness before her death. He said, "I don't seem to think as much now about all those happy years with the children, of the wonderful coming together, of the passion, the union, her beauty, and all the sweetness of all our many married years, as I do about that one last year we had together. I think especially of the time when I was kneeling at her feet to put on her shoes for her when she couldn't do it for herself. I looked up," he said, "into those beautiful eyes filled with tears and filled with love and appreciation. I thank God that through all the pain and anguish she suffered during that heartbreaking year, I could take care of her and serve her and comfort her and help her know how much I truly love her. That picture is the one I wake up in the night with—my kneeling at her feet, putting on her shoes, and looking up and seeing those dear eyes brimming with gratitude and love."

Women in Scripture

In the scriptures we learn of the sacred roles of Mother Eve and of Mary. We may know less about Hannah, noble wife who was unable for a time to bear children. Through her humility and faith and prayers, ultimately she was blessed with that privilege. Bringing forth a son, she prepared him for a prophetic calling, schooled him and taught him and loved him and prayed with him, and helped him to get ready to hearken to the voice of God when He spoke. Samuel became a mighty prophet.

Abigail saved her family and friends through wise and courageous counsel to an irate David bent on violence and vengeance. The words of David to her when he had turned from his angry course are instructive: "Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me: and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand." (1 Samuel 25:32-33.)

Abigail is described in the scripture as "a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance." (V. 3.) She represents the civilizing, refining, gentling influence of choice daughters of God.

Esther saved a whole people. Orphaned, brought up by a cousin, she undertook a very dangerous mission to the king in behalf of her people. To them, with her life on the line, she sent this message, "Fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go . . . and if I perish, I perish." (Esther 4:16.)

In the Book of Mormon we meet an unnamed queen and learn the story of her love and faith, which reflects the unselfish service rendered by many noble women. Lamoni, Lamanite king, was taught by Ammon and touched by the Spirit and was overcome as if he were dead. He thus lay for two days and two nights, and his servants were about to take his body and lay it in a sepulchre. But his wife, the queen, had great faith in the power of Ammon, a servant of God. She sent for him, keeping vigil by the side of her husband. The words she spoke to Ammon were pertinent to the circumstance: "Some say that he is not dead, but others say that he is dead and that he stinketh, and that he ought to be placed in the sepulchre; but as for myself, to me he doth not stink." (Alma 19:5.)

It is recorded that "she watched over the bed of her husband, from that time even until . . . the morrow." (V. 11.) The king arose as Ammon declared he would, "and as he arose, he stretched forth his hand unto the woman, and said: Blessed be the name of God, and blessed art thou." (V. 12.)

There are many other examples, but could there be a lovelier tribute to a woman than this from her grateful husband: "Blessed be the name of God, and blessed art thou"?

What do we learn from these scriptures? Again, the importance of women in motherhood and home, and leading children to leadership and contribution; gently bringing wisdom and refinement to rough men; influencing events through wise judgment and courageous action; expressing the intuitive intelligence and faithfulness of a pure woman; serving as agent of God in prayer and healing and stilling contentions; comforting, inspiring, teaching, and bringing music and beauty and art into the congregations, as did Emma, who was invited to put together a hymnal of sacred songs which, said the Lord, are "prayer[s] unto me." (D&C 25:12.)

Our Father's Will

How does one live with integrity and self-esteem? Is it in frantic flailing for a perfection we won't find on this earth? Is it seeking to do anything and everything to meet all the standards everybody else seems to set for us, to give the faultless performance they seem to demand of us?

The apostle Paul prayed for an Israel who had, he said, "a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge." (Romans 10:2.) They had the zeal but not the understanding. Their purposes were proper—they wanted to please God; they wanted the comforting assurance of His approval but thought they could accomplish this through a punctilious preoccupation with their own perfection. Like Lucifer, they did "not understand" the mind of the Father. "For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God." (Romans 10:3.)

We may set up stern standards for ourselves or others—or struggle with standards set up by others for us—and then judge ourselves or others harshly for failing to meet them when they may have little reference to the true qualities of fidelity that constitute God's plan for us.

In the Doctrine and Covenants are these words concerning the "best gifts," which we are to earnestly seek: "For verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do." (D&C 46:9; italics added.)

How real and how comforting—as He is real and full of compassion and loving kindness!

We do not always remember that He understands, that He loves, that we are esteemed in His sight equally with all others. Our hope lies in learning to submit ourselves to the will of the Father, learning to accept His forgiveness and affection, to look to Him and His unfailing love with confidence. For this purpose Christ came into the world, as He clearly explained. (3 Nephi 27:13; John 4:34; 5:30.)

We are here to learn the lesson, also, that we are here to do the will of the Father. And how do we discover His will? How do we find Him? Pascal gave us a line: "You would not seek me had you not found me." God is closer than we know, more truly concerned for us than we understand. And the best in us is better than we know and reaches out and up, seeking Him.

We worry about our faith: does He really exist? We worry about our worthiness: could He love me? We remember our sins: is He really willing to "rescue a soul so rebellious and proud as mine"? (Hymns, 1985, no. 193.) We want to find Him. We would like to yield to His will. But how do we do that? How do we qualify for the relationship that we so earnestly desire?

We do this through prayer, of course, and through studying the scriptures. I believe we can find Him best by learning to know the Christ, who seems nearer, who was "made flesh and dwelt among us," and of whom Paul wrote that "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself." (2 Corinthians 5:19.) God was making Himself known through His Son. "If," Paul declared to the Romans, "when we were enemies [that is, apart from God], we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, [how] much more, being reconciled [brought back into unison with Him], we shall be saved by his life." (Romans 5:10.)

Saved by His Life

Being reconciled to God by Christ's death, we can be saved by His life. That means we have to know about His life, doesn't it? We are reconciled to God through the life of His Son. When we've seen Him, Christ said, we have seen the Father. He came to do the Father's will, to say what He had heard His Father say, to do what He had seen His Father do. In coming to know Him, we come to know the Father and the Son, and knowing them is peace in this world and life eternal in the world to come.

The scriptures constantly encourage us to—

"Seek this Jesus of whom prophets and apostles have written" (Ether 12:41)

"Be faithful in Christ" and remember Him (Moroni 9:25)

"And partake of his goodness" (2 Nephi 26:33)

"And bring forth works of righteousness" (Alma 5:35)

"And lay hold upon every good gift" (Moroni 10:30)

"And partake of his salvation" (Omni 1:26)

"And be perfected in him" (Moroni 10:32).

We are taught to "remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that [we] must build [our] foundation" (Helaman 5:12); "feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do" (2 Nephi 32:3). Christ is "the right way." (2 Nephi 25:29.)

Nephi, at the height of his concluding testimony, said that he had charity for his own people and great faith in Christ; he had charity also for the Jew and for the Gentile. "But," said he, "behold, for none of these can I hope except they shall be reconciled unto Christ, and enter into the narrow gate, and walk in the strait path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation." (2 Nephi 33:7-9.)

These scriptures are a sure source of discovery. Each of the standard works has remarkable windows of knowledge and understanding and insight to lead us to Him. Nephi said that the writings of prophets "persuadeth them to do good; . . . maketh known unto them of their fathers; and . . . speaketh of Jesus, and persuadeth them to believe in him, and to endure to the end, which is life eternal." (2 Nephi 33:4.)

Why are we to read the Book of Mormon, along with the other magnificent scriptures? Because the book, like all the other scriptures, has a single central aim; and that is to prepare the world for the coming of Christ, to celebrate His meridian advent, His holy atoning sacrifice, and His death and resurrection, and to prepare the earth for His coming again.

Each of these great volumes that constitute our scriptural heritage testifies in similar fashion. But they respond not to the lazy, or to the indifferent, or to the unconcerned, or to the mind diluted with too much of what one may see in books or television programs or otherwise that is inconsistent, indeed incompatible, with the Spirit of Christ. One does not need to be a scholar to learn from and rejoice in the scriptures, but they do not yield their spiritual treasures to those who do not seek, ask, knock, search.

We are promised personal revelation. As we read, as we listen more carefully than perhaps we have done, as we seek to organize our comprehension of the gospel, as we get the strength of it into our bloodstream and share it with others, personal revelation becomes the key to our understanding, to our use of agency and our accountability. Through the Spirit we may know the truth of all things.

That leads me to the major thing I want to say to you.

The Temple

There is a special place where one may learn more about the Savior than anywhere else I know. If we are praying and seeking and trying to learn, and if we are walking reasonably well on the path He laid out, there is a place to go where He has promised to "manifest himself to his people," where we can come to know Him. That place is the temple.

The temple has been called by someone "the binding point of heaven and earth," but the meaning of that is not immediately comprehensible to many of us. My soul was really comforted when President David O. McKay spoke to me of the "bewildering" experience of going for the first time to the temple. That is why we must know we are involved in a long learning experience, not a single journey "through the temple."

In the temple one may learn many things, chiefly, I believe, by thinking and feeling and learning to comprehend and apply in our own lives the concepts beyond the symbols. There are concepts beyond the symbols. Again, one does not have to be a scholar, but a little guidance may help.

What is done in the temple is often thought of as chiefly benefiting the dead. Perhaps the greater blessing comes to the living who serve the dead in the pattern of their Lord and who pray and worship and put themselves in the path to enjoy the Spirit that is constantly accessible in the temple.

In the dedicatory prayer of the first temple of this dispensation, a prayer revealed from God, the Prophet made known the great personal blessings that can come to us from going to the temple in the right spirit and often enough in order to begin to comprehend the experience through repetition, through thought, through prayerful effort.

Listen to these four promises as indicative of what may be experienced through temple service, temple worship. They can be read in the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple.

"That they may grow up in thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost, and be organized according to thy laws, and be prepared to obtain every needful thing." (D&C 109:15.)

What a magnificent picture of what can be—to "grow up" in the Lord, to enjoy a fulness of the Spirit, to organize our lives according to His laws, and to be prepared to obtain every needful thing. In the temple we may "grow up," mature, in the Lord. Maturity is a key word to me. God is perfectly mature in every eternally important quality. There is no immaturity in His response to one who makes a mistake, no quick judgment, no condemnation. There is love and a way provided for us to recover from the consequences of our mistakes. There is no immaturity in Christ, no lack of love.

Peter—who knew Him well, who himself failed Him and denied Him, and who wrote, I have no doubt, through tears and a broken heart—said: "[Jesus], when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously." (1 Peter 2:23.)

Christ was perfectly mature. We are not. We are learning.

When God made these promises, there was an historical preparation. When He first instructed Moses and his people to build the little tabernacle in the wilderness, their prototype temple, He said, "Make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them." He revealed the pattern of that building and all that pertained to it and said, "There I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee." (Exodus 25:8, 22.)

In that remarkable dedicatory prayer at Kirtland in 1836 are these opening words, after the salutation: "For thou knowest that we have done this work through great tribulation [the people have sacrificed for this temple]; and out of our poverty we have given of our substance to build a house to thy name, that the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his people." (D&C 109:5; italics added.)

A temple is built that the Son of Man might manifest Himself to His people! A few days later in that same temple, the Lord declared: "Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let . . . all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name. For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house." (D&C 110:6-7; italics added.)

What does that mean? Does that mean that occasionally God will come to His house and occasionally the pure in heart may see Him? Hear the words of Elder John A. Widtsoe, that pure and saintly man with the great mind and the humble heart. I wish your generation could have known him better, or at all. He said of this promise of God that He will "meet" and "commune" with His people there—does it mean the occasional visit or the occasional personal manifestation or "does it mean the larger thing, that the pure in heart who go into the temples, may, there, by the Spirit of God, always have a wonderfully rich communion [communication]," with the Lord? [^4]

In the temple we can, as the scriptures attest and as I personally attest, feel the presence of the Lord in the warmth, the love, and the kindness of those who serve there, in the sense of spiritual presence one may feel. This, to me, is the glorious blessing of the temple, that in temples the Son of Man does manifest Himself to us through the Spirit in the principles and ordinances and covenants. A temple truly is a place of revelation to those who go with minds freed from ordinary earthly cares and there learn to walk with Him on the path He has walked and prescribes for us.

Has it occurred to you in going to a temple or thinking about it that the principles around which the sacred covenants of the temple are formed, which are often thought to be the heart of the experience, are those principles that were absolutely fundamental in the mortal life of the Lord Jesus Christ? It is His pattern we are following, through His blood we are symbolically cleansed and blessed, through His life, "saved by his life," that we are learning.

We do not discuss in detail or in the exact vernacular what happens in the temple, but we are learning the gospel there, and we are learning it out of the scriptures and revelation and in a way understandable to those who prepare themselves. We learn, for instance, that we make a covenant with reference to the principle of doing the will of God. We have spoken of that. Christ came to do the will of the Father. We came to do the will of the Father. That is our mission. In the temple that principle is strongly taught. Does it not become manifest to us as we sit and ponder that the highest and holiest exemplar of this great quality, the capacity to do the will of the Father, in all history is the One who in Gethsemane said, "Not my will but thine be done"? Do we not walk in His paths, even though they lead us through our own Gethsemanes, when we seek to do the will of our Father?

In service, in sharing, in giving, are we not representing in its highest and holiest form the path of the Savior? When we make a commitment to give what we have to give, to serve usefully, are we not following in His path and pattern?

What is the basic principle by which God governs and which was central in the life of our Lord? Was it not that love which Christ declared, the love of the individual for God, of person for person, of each of us for our neighbor? Was it not the love of God and love of our fellowmen that He said are those commandments upon which all others depend for meaning and for substance? Was it not that love that caused Him to give everything? "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself." (John 10:17-18.) "No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself." (Italics added.)

And what of our commitment to purity and honor and integrity and self-discipline, of loyalty to holy commitments? In His great encounter with the devil at the beginning of His mission and throughout His ministry, Christ was "in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." (Hebrews 4:15.) He met the tests we are meeting right now, and He positively and absolutely rejected the enticements and blandishments of the tempter. Is not this the path we are here to learn to follow?

And finally, what of priorities? We are taught priorities in the temple: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness" (Matthew 6:33), and then whatever else you need that is important to your joyful life will be added.

But a respected writer has said:

"We are half-hearted creatures, fooling about with drink and sex and ambition when infinite joy is offered us, like an ignorant child who wants to go on making mud pies in a slum because [she] cannot imagine what is meant by the offer of a holiday at the sea." [^5]

In the temple we walk for a time with One who bought us with a price. We cannot fully understand the price, but we can seek to understand this: "Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's." (1 Corinthians 6:19-20.) "Daily in the temple," it is written, "and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ." (Acts 5:42.)

You may be interested to consider one last matter. There are some women who come from the temple (thoughtful, very bright women, sensitive, sweet women) uneasily thinking that somehow they have less value than men in the eyes of God. I have the sure conviction that that is not true, not what we are meant to learn. Repeated exposure to the remarkable institution of the temple leaves me believing the opposite to be so.

The scriptures teach us that Adam and Eve are placed in the garden in a beautiful union. Lucifer finds Adam alone and tries to convince him and fails. He then finds Eve alone and holds out the importance of knowing good and evil to her. She with spiritual perception and intuitive wisdom sees, beyond the blandishments of the tempter, the importance of the commandment that they multiply and replenish the earth. Somehow she understands the mighty importance of that instruction. She partakes of the fruit and then finds Adam and tells him about this special commandment, which they cannot in their present condition fulfill. He eats, they become mortal, and, when God calls him to account for that decision, notes that he was led to do so by the woman whom God had given him with the commandment that she should remain with him.

Alma explained: "Now we see that Adam did fall by the partaking of the forbidden fruit, according to the word of God; and thus we see, that by his fall . . . [they became] as Gods, knowing good from evil, placing themselves in a state to act, or being placed in a state to act according to their wills and pleasures, whether to do evil or to do good." (Alma 12:22, 31.)

In short, they became free—free to have a family, free to learn to truly love, free to act according to their wills, whether to yield to the plan of God or subject themselves to the devil, free to enjoy the fruits of the plan of redemption, the plan of mercy, the plan of happiness, free to choose and to be accountable.

Eve did the right thing, made the right choice, had the intuitive comprehension to see the end from the beginning. What if they had made a different choice and stayed in the garden? That seemed so plausible; it seemed so good there. Somehow she knew better.

"And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God.

"And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." (Moses 5:10-11.)

Most of us know Lehi's declaration that concludes "men are, that they might have joy." Preceding it are these words: "Adam fell that men might be." (2 Nephi 2:25.)

Eve made a choice. We honor her. We honor her.

And so we must choose, and sometimes the choices are between options that are or seem good, or may seem against counsel—whether to remain in the garden in unchallenged comfort, or to become vulnerable, subject to death, and candidates for eternal life.

I come from the temple believing that Eve understood, that through a woman's intuitive faith she knew what must be done, that Lucifer intensified the difficulty but illuminated the vital importance of her choice. I have always believed since I began to think at all seriously that that dramatic event is meant to emphasize the absolute importance of the principle of agency and accountability, the magnificent miracle of motherhood—that incredible, dangerous journey into the deep valley to bring forth life; the responsibility of fatherhood—the lifelong love and labor of a priesthood leader in a family.

Hear these words from the scripture: "Ye [who] have . . . received Christ Jesus the Lord . . . walk ye in him: Rooted and built up in him." (Colossians 2:6-7.)

Oh, there is so much we have yet to learn, and I think many of you here are way ahead of the rest of us, you pure and sweet women.

I said there were several writings on the wall in my office. I have already quoted one, and I end with another. A young lady came to my office years ago declaring her confusion because the father whom she loved was not the father she felt she could respect. I talked with her a long time about him. There were things she didn't know, dear things, unselfish, lovely things to balance, or at least to be taken account of in her criticism, in her anguish. I talked to her of the Savior. I wanted to help her know and love her father and her Savior, and I was praying a simple, familiar prayer: Lord, help me now.

She went away, and things changed at home and have remained changed. A year later she came back just before Christmas, with a shadow box for me. She had dried beautiful flowers and hand lettered and put in the box these words:

Though Christ a thousand times in Bethlehem be born, If he is not born in thee, thy soul is still forlorn.

She was and is no longer forlorn.

I think we will not be forlorn if we come unto Christ, if we learn patiently that we cannot accommodate everybody's estimate of what we ought to be or do, if we walk in the way our own conscience will approve, if we seek to measure as God measures, and if we esteem ourselves and others as He esteems us. I testify that He is good and loves us and wants us to "make it," that He is pulling for us, that His anxiety, His whole plan, His great sacrifice in sending His Son and the sacrifice of that Son in giving His life, all were meant to help us meet the dramatic or drastic or difficult test life lays upon us.

I thank the Lord for this sweet opportunity. In the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.

Equality of Esteem Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] See, for example, Simone de Beauvoir, The Second Sex (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1953); Sheila Ruth, "The Naming of Women," in Issues in Feminism (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1980), pp. 84-97.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Jr., The History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), 1:364.
[^3] A. D. Sorensen is professor of political science at Brigham Young University. After receiving his Ph.D. from the University of Illinois, he taught for several years at Indiana University before joining the faculty at BYU, where he has taught courses in political and moral philosophy, law and morality, and the philosophy of science. His Church callings have included bishop and president of a BYU branch. He and his wife, Necia Marie Lee Sorensen, have six children.
[^4] C. S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses (Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1965), p. 2.
[^5] Elder Marion D. Hanks has served as executive director of the Priesthood Department of the Church and as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy. He has also served as president of the British Mission, Church administrator in Southeast Asia/Philippines, and president of the Salt Lake Temple. He has been a member of the President's Citizens Advisory Committee on Children and Youth and the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports, receiving in 1978 the Distinguished Service Award of that council. He has served on the National Executive Board of the Boy Scouts of America, receiving all of the special scouting awards, including an honorary National Eagle Scout Award. He holds a J.D. degree from the University of Utah as well as honorary degrees from several other institutions of higher learning. He and his wife, Maxine, are the parents of four daughters and one son.
