Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

No Respecter of Persons: Equality in the Kingdom

A. D. Sorensen [^1]

Those who speak for the women's movement unanimously condemn patriarchal societies. They point out that in such societies the male-dominated hierarchies and structures of control leave women with diminished opportunities for self-fulfillment and self-determination. They argue that patriarchal societies exclude women from the centers of power and creativity, ranging from science and industry to art and communication, and confine them to subordinate positions from which they can only serve the interests of men. They contend that the rule of women by men works ultimately because the driving ethos of patriarchal society embodies masculine perspectives. This means that women receive their very identity from men by virtue of the fact that the prevailing visions and images by which women live are creations of men. Consequently, men see women—and women see themselves—as adjuncts to men, as satellites, as helpmeets, as the "other half." Thus defined, women by nature stay in the background, do the chores that would impede men in their work, cheer men from the sidelines, provide men with sexual satisfaction, and assure men of paternity. The upshot is that in patriarchal society, women cannot reach full personhood. Some who speak for the women's movement even claim that the barriers to full personhood for women, and indeed for all people, cannot be overcome until we eliminate from culture the very distinction between male and female. [^2]

From the feminist viewpoint, Mormon society is a patriarchy par excellence. The men occupy the positions of power and privilege, while the women, defined from the male perspective as helpmeets to man, have children, do housework, and sustain their husbands. Like women in all patriarchal societies, Mormon women fail to realize themselves fully as persons. The final barrier that blocks their way to full personhood is the male-female distinction that operates in Mormon culture. That distinction, some believe, has its roots in the master myths out of which Mormon patriarchy arises and receives its rationale. The central myth has it that God made woman so that man would have a helpmeet and not be lonely. (Moses 3:18.) Then God tells the woman that her desires should be to her husband, and that he should rule over her. (Moses 4:22.)

Some critics of the Church think that patriarchy in Mormon society creates for LDS people a crisis of faith that has no satisfactory remedy. For, on the one hand, the liberation of women from patriarchal rule is an idea whose day has come. It is an idea that has freedom and justice as its allies and cannot be convincingly resisted by a group that claims to be the people of God. Yet, on the other hand, patriarchy is so deeply rooted in the Mormon society's foundation and system of beliefs that it cannot be removed without a major revision of belief and practice, which would undermine the Church's claim to be the restored Church of God. So some believe that the LDS people face the unwelcome dilemma of either not giving up patriarchy in the face of change that has right and good on its side, or forsaking patriarchy by sacrificing doctrines and practices supposedly received by revelation from God Himself which form the very core of Mormonism.

It must be admitted, as some of our critics claim, that sex discrimination exists among LDS people more or less as it does in the societies surrounding them. But the explanation for this discrimination does not lie at all in the belief system of the restored gospel but in the fact that we live too much in the world and fail to realize the equality between man and woman that living in the kingdom requires. The fact is that the doctrines and principles of the kingdom are the proper remedy for the unequal treatment of the sexes in the Mormon society, not its cause. So as a people we do not, in fact, face the dilemma of either resisting the women's movement for equal freedom and justice or giving up central tenets of the faith; but as always, we must choose whether or not to continue living as the world does. The real crisis of faith will come from postponing the right choice for too long.

In this essay I propose to lay out what I see as the fundamental social structure and ultimate aim of the earthly kingdom and the equality between woman and man within it. If I am successful, the results will be a general framework within which all relations between the sexes should be understood. Anyone who attempts what I do here faces the difficult and sensitive task of untangling the beliefs and practices not of the kingdom—especially those we cling to as a result of living so much in the world, with its deep-rooted traditions of false patriarchy—from those peculiar to the kingdom. This task can best be done simply by strictly confining the analysis to officially recognized revelations on the subject and by laying out each step in the discussion as fully as space permits, beginning with what I take to be elementary but fundamental truths and building from there. Needless to say, in discussions of this kind the author should not make authoritative claims that he has the final truth.

First, I will discuss the fundamental organizing principle of the kingdom—the principle of divine love—and the absolute equality among all persons who participate in it. My task here will be to examine in sufficient depth only those properties of divine love that I will need later in order to justify the distinction between male and female and to illuminate the equality between them that should characterize every operation and goal of the kingdom. Next, I will consider the kingdom's basic social structure and ultimate aim and the equality between persons within it. Finally, I will take up in a general way the distinction between male and female in divine love, review the justification for its existence, and explain the sexual equality that should extend throughout the organization and purposes of the kingdom.

II

We know from scripture that the earthly kingdom must be organized according to "the law of the celestial kingdom." (D&C 105:4.) "Otherwise," the Lord says, "I cannot receive her unto myself." (D&C 105:5.) As we also know, divine love, in the words of Paul, comprehends and fulfills the whole law (Galatians 5:14; Romans 13:8-10), including the law that governs the celestial world and determines the organization and aims of the earthly kingdom. So if we want to grasp the meaning and significance of the equality between persons that distinguishes the organization and purpose of the kingdom, the place to begin is to examine the human equality inherent in divine love as fundamental law.

But before that can be done, we must understand the general meaning and significance of divine love itself. To grasp its general meaning and significance, we need to review divine love's twofold relationship with the scriptural categories of spiritual life and death as humankind's ultimate possibilities. Only by considering this twofold relationship can we grasp the ultimate justification of the very distinction between male and female and fully appreciate the final importance of equality between the sexes in organizing the kingdom. The relations between divine love and humankind's ultimate possibilities—spiritual life and spiritual death—provide the minimum framework for discussing what equality in the kingdom means and what role it plays in the organization of the kingdom. As we will see, unless we can achieve the equality between persons required by divine love, the spiritual life of neither the man nor the woman can be full.

In scripture the term life (the Greek term zoe) means fulness of life everlasting, not primarily life biologically understood. Life in the sense of zoe represents the highest possibility of humankind, its final good, the ultimate point of the human existence. Death, the opposite of life, is explained in terms of life in its fulness. When fully realized, it means the weakest form of human "life," human existence drained or emptied of its distinctive vitality—existence that is spiritless, dark, without meaning. Together, life and death constitute the grand alternatives, the overall possibilities, of human existence. The picture of humankind individually and collectively facing these grand possibilities as the caretakers of their own existence and having a natural desire to realize life and avoid death represents the scriptural view of the universal human situation.

Divine love has the meaning and significance it does—it comprehends and fulfills the whole law of the gospel—because of its twofold relationship to the grand alternatives of life and death. First, divine love has for its ultimate aim that humankind avoid death and realize everlasting fulness of life. The achievement of that aim represents, as we have observed, the highest possibility of humankind, their ultimate good, and the final purpose of God. But second, divine love also makes possible, indeed literally constitutes, fulness of life. Scripture provides us with a powerful metaphor that reveals how this is so, the metaphor of the seed that grows into the tree of life.

In the Book of Mormon the "tree of life" represents at once both "the love of God" (1 Nephi 11:21-23) and "everlasting [fulness of] life" (Alma 32:40-41). Alma describes the "seed" that grows into the tree of life as "the word" (Alma 32:28) that is contained in "the words" (Alma 32:27), both written and spoken, by which Christ offers his gospel to the world. The word in Alma's sense Paul calls "the word of life" (Philippians 2:16) and John "the words of eternal life" (John 6:68). Alma tells us that if we "plant" the word of life in our "hearts" (Alma 32:28) and "nourish" it properly (Alma 32:39), then it "swelleth and sprouteth" (Alma 32:28, 33-34), "enlarge[s the] soul" (Alma 32:28), and expands the mind (Alma 32:34) until the person reaches "everlasting [fulness of] life" (Alma 32:41-42). We can see that the enlargement and expansion of life and its fulness have to do with the degree and quality of our distinctive vitality as living beings.

Now, in its fundamental meaning, the word of life represents the perfect love of God. We know this because Alma tells us that "every seed bringeth forth unto its own likeness" (Alma 32:31) and, as we know, the seed—"the word"—develops into "the tree of life" (Alma 32:28, 40-41), which represents divine love (1 Nephi 11:21-25). So the word as a seed must represent the germ of divine love, just as the tree of life symbolizes divine love perfectly formed. In this John agrees with Alma. John tells us that "whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected" (1 John 2:5), and everyone in whom God's love is perfected is "born of God" (1 John 4:7) and has "passed from death unto life" (1 John 3:14).

Clearly, the life of divine love and fulness of life are not two things, but one. The seed is both the germ of divine love and the source of life. The development of the seed is both the growth of divine love and the increase in the degree and quality of life. And the tree of life itself represents both divine love perfected and fulness of life. So as we see, divine love constitutes life as well as aims at life—everlasting fulness of life. Indeed, divine love constitutes life by being aimed at life in its distinctive caring-for-life way. Fulness of life actually consists in being a caring-for-life person in the rich and comprehensive sense implied by divine love.

That divine love constitutes life by the way it aims at life explains the law of the harvest (Galatians 5:13-26): if we live lives of sin, we will reap death. Paul writes, "The wages of sin is death." (Romans 6:23.) But if we fulfill the requirements of righteousness, we will harvest everlasting fulness of life. Righteousness produces fulness of life because righteousness consists of satisfying the requirements of divine love that comprehends and fulfills the whole moral law and all righteousness. (Romans 8:1-13; 13:8-10.) And the reason sin produces death is that in sinning we violate the conditions that make life lasting and full—the requirements of divine love. The bottom line is that we must lose our lives to find our lives. We lose our lives by becoming people of divine love and serving its ultimate aim. And we find our lives because the divine love present in us when we live this way constitutes fulness of life. To repeat, divine love is the fundamental law by virtue of its twofold relationship to our ultimate good—it both gives life and governs life.

We now have the minimum scriptural framework in place for introducing the concept of equality. Equality between persons forms an integral part of divine love, and, consequently, it plays a critical role in its power to give fulness of life. Clearly, each person has supreme worth, and his or her everlasting fulness of life has supreme value, in view of divine love. It is easy to see that in divine love there is no respecting of persons: in range it encompasses every person, past, present, and future; its scope embraces each person's total well-being, his or her everlasting fulness of life; and in strength, measured by the suffering Jesus willingly underwent on the cross, it does not vary with regard to persons. We may say that from the perspective of divine love, persons are equally everything. Because divine love reaches out to all persons totally and equally, it embodies the rich and comprehensive caring for life that constitutes fulness of life. If persons were not equally everything as subjects of love, then life could not reach fulness. If inequality infected divine love—if it singled out any person from others by excluding her from all concern or by not caring for her total welfare or by taking a weakened interest in her well-being—then love ceases to be perfect, and life cannot be full. And whenever inequality in caring for life invades human relations in a large way, as it often does, it greatly impoverishes life.

III

The kingdom on earth and in heaven is a society of divine love. It has the same ultimate aim as divine love—bringing about humankind's fulness of life everlasting—and the organization through which its aim can be accomplished consists of relations of divine love. For this reason the earthly kingdom conforms to "the union required by the law of the celestial kingdom." (D&C 105:4.) Since it fulfills the requirements of divine love in its purpose and organization, the kingdom can promise fulness of life to its members. Indeed, by reason of being a community of divine love, the full operation of the kingdom itself constitutes fulness of life for its members. So, as we should expect, the equality inherent in divine love characterizes every operation and objective of the kingdom. It begins with the fact that all persons are everything in view of divine love, and this principle extends throughout the kingdom's organization. If it did not, if inequalities invented by the world because of sin infected the kingdom, then the kingdom would lose its power to give fulness of life.

The law of divine love that determines the basic structure of the kingdom is the law of consecration. That law combines both elements of divine love—serving and being served, giving and receiving, loving and being loved—into one formula. It obligates every person to help realize the purpose of the kingdom, to perform a stewardship of love, to the full extent of his or her ability. And it requires that each person receive and be cared for according to righteous wants and needs. As we will see, the equality inherent in divine love distinguishes both parts of the law of consecration and the operations of the kingdom to which it gives rise. Accordingly, in the kingdom, persons labor together in love as equals and receive in accord with their wants and needs as equals. Both in the doing of and the receiving of things persons are equals in divine love. Let us bear in mind that, as a principle of divine love, the law of consecration itself contains power to help make life full and never-ending. As a precept of divine love, it aims at life and helps constitute life that is full and without end. That power to create life remains untapped unless we abide the law of consecration and achieve in our daily affairs the equality inherent in divine love.

Let me mention a word about how I will now proceed in describing the equality that marks the law of consecration as a principle of divine love. The most detailed scriptures we have on the everyday working of the law of consecration are concerned with its operation in the economic order of the kingdom. So what I will do is identify a general form of equality that characterizes the law of consecration in all its workings, and then illustrate that form with scriptures about the economic operation of that law. I should emphasize that my interest is not so much in the particular economic form of the law of consecration as in its general form and the overall organization of the kingdom as a community of equality to which it gives rise.

I have noted several times that the earthly kingdom must be organized according to the law that governs the celestial kingdom. (D&C 105:4-5.) The law of consecration is one such law. When we inquire into how celestial beings organize themselves, we should not be surprised to find that the equality of divine love obtains among them and that we, like them, must attain this equality. We learn from revelation that in preparation for a "place in the celestial world," the Saints must be "equal in earthly things" and "equal . . . in heavenly things." (D&C 78:5-7, 13.) Continuing our inquiry, we discover that persons in the celestial world carry out their stewardships as required by the law of consecration according to a system of equal power. In the words of revelation, all those "who dwell in his presence" He makes "equal in power, and in might, and in dominion." (D&C 76:94-95.) And, as I intend to show, when we examine the revelations on how the earthly kingdom should operate, paying particular attention to who can make what decisions and carry out what actions, we discover that the earthly kingdom clearly exhibits a system of equal power. Just as we would expect, the earthly kingdom is indeed modeled after its heavenly prototype.

This, then, is one form equality must take in the earthly kingdom when it is modeled after its heavenly prototype and becomes a society of divine love: each person carries out his or her stewardship in obedience to the law of consecration within a structure of equal power. How fitting, not to mention how necessary, it is that in the society of divine love, wherein persons are equally everything, they should share equally in power in accomplishing the ends of divine love.

Since analyzing equal power as set forth in scripture can itself be a lengthy undertaking, I limit myself to several carefully selected examples of how equal power operated, or at least was meant to operate, in the united order of the Prophet Joseph's time. I think I will depart this once from using recognized scripture as a source and begin with instructions the Prophet Joseph once gave concerning one way power should be equal in the kingdom. The passage is worth quoting at length:

"The matter of consecration must be done by the mutual consent of both parties; for to give the Bishop power to say how much every man shall have, and he be obliged to comply with the Bishop's judgment, is giving to the Bishop more power than a king has; and upon the other hand, to let every man say how much he needs, and the Bishop be obliged to comply with his judgment, is to throw Zion into confusion, and make a slave of the Bishop. The fact is, there must be a balance or equilibrium of power, between the Bishop and the people, and thus harmony and good will may be preserved among you." [^3]

Note how clearly the notion of equal power figures here in the Prophet's teachings. In acts of consecration the requirements of divine love prevail and, consequently, "there must be a balance or equilibrium of power" among all parties involved.

The second illustration of how power operates in the kingdom concerns the relationship between each steward (or particular group of stewards) and the order acting as a whole. Like the relation of power between the bishop and the individual steward, this relation involves the law of consecration. The text I have chosen is section 104 of the Doctrine and Covenants. There the Lord instructs the Saints that "all moneys that you receive in your stewardships, by improving upon your properties . . . shall be cast into the treasury as fast as you receive moneys." (D&C 104:68.) Here we see the law of consecration in operation, but this time the "moneys" go into the "treasury" controlled by the order acting as a group, rather than being "laid before the bishop" (D&C 42:31-34), as in the first example.

The principle of equal power determines how the moneys of the treasury will be redistributed. From revelation we learn that "there shall not any part of it be used, or taken out of the treasury, only by the voice and common consent of the order." (D&C 104:71.) The right of counsel and consent is to be exercised according to equal power. Again I will quote at length:

"And this shall be the voice and common consent of the order—that any man among you say to the treasurer: I have need of this to help me in my stewardship—

" . . . the treasurer shall give unto him the sum which he requires to help him in his stewardship—

"Until he be found a transgressor, and it is manifest before the council of the order plainly that he is an unfaithful and an unwise steward.

"But so long as he is in full fellowship, and is faithful and wise in his stewardship, this shall be his token unto the treasurer that the treasurer shall not withhold." (D&C 104:72-75.)

The words the Prophet Joseph used, which were quoted earlier to describe the relation of power between the bishop and a steward, may be repeated here. Between the order as a whole and the steward "there must be a balance or equilibrium of power." On the one hand, as the quoted passage indicates, if a steward is both wise and faithful, his or her just claims (see D&C 82:17) cannot be turned down. If this were not so, the members as a collective could become the center of initiative and decision in the performance of his or her stewardship; this would give the order "more power than a king has." On the other hand, if a steward is unwise or unfaithful, the membership may instruct the treasurer not to honor that steward's request for funds to run his or her stewardship. If this veto power did not exist, an unwise or unfaithful steward could assume power to direct the order itself or to usurp another steward's power to carry out his or her own stewardship. This would "throw Zion into confusion." There must be a "balance or equilibrium of power."

So as we can see, the relation between the steward and the order, much like the relation between the steward and the bishop, is a relation of equal power.

I offer one last illustration of how equal power was meant to work within the united order. From the first two illustrations we learn that each person within the kingdom enjoys self-direction equal to every other person in carrying out his or her individual stewardship. But stewardship also includes helping determine the overall direction of the order as well as performing individual tasks within it. In the order "all things" are done "according to the counsel . . . and united consent or voice of the order." (D&C 104:21.) Each steward has an equal voice in the membership's power of counsel and an equal say in its power of consent. Thus, persons in the order are equal in being joint stewards as well as in being individual stewards.

This joint aspect of stewardship is an important aspect indeed: it prepares each steward for life in the heavenly kingdom in ways in which individual tasks alone do not. In eternal life, being "one" with others and the Lord consists of a joint stewardship as well as individual stewardships. As the scriptures read, if we are faithful and wise we shall become "heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ." (Romans 8:17.) In the kingdom of darkness there is no joint stewardship, for Satan seeks to "reign over" people (2 Nephi 2:29), not to make them joint heirs. Preparation (D&C 78:6-13) for this sort of kingdom would, of course, be quite different. A different structure of power would be required—one that is hierarchical and authoritarian.

It is important to notice the degree of human freedom that the kingdom's system of equal power makes possible. Every steward in his or her individual work enjoys the highest degree of self-direction compatible with each steward's enjoying the same freedom. And in things that concern the whole group, each shares the power of counsel and consent equally with others. As a result, a person has the greatest opportunity for self-direction that this social order can allow. This is as it should be within a community of divine love.

Consider now the second part of the law of consecration. That law requires that each person receive equally according to righteous wants and needs. Wants and needs can be conveniently divided into two kinds. First, there are the wants and needs the person has in carrying out his or her stewardship. Concerning these, the Lord tells members of his kingdom that "you are to have equal claims on the properties, for the benefit of managing the concerns of your stewardships, every man according to his wants and needs, inasmuch as his wants are just." (D&C 82:17.) Here equality is part of the system of equal power already discussed. But persons have other wants and needs that may not be immediately related to the daily work of the kingdom, yet essential to a full life. These include the desire to learn or know for its own sake, to enjoy things of beauty, to play, to celebrate life itself. In the opportunities to fulfill these wants and needs, persons also must be equal in the kingdom, every person being treated as an "equal according to his family, according to his circumstances and his wants and needs." (D&C 51:3.) When equality in this sense operates among the Saints, there exist no rich nor poor among them. Only then are they truly a Zion people (Moses 7:18; 4 Nephi 1:3)—a people living as one in an earthly kingdom that is organized according to the law of heaven.

So we see that under the law of consecration, because it is a principle of divine love, persons labor together in love as equals in power, and as equals all receive alike. When the Lord's people are not equal, then they, like the world at large, "lie in sin" and "the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheld." (D&C 70:14.) Life for them will not be full, because the total and equal caring for life required by divine love does not exist among them.

IV

We now have before us the framework of beliefs within which we can understand the distinction between male and female in the gospel and the equality that should define all relations between woman and man in the kingdom. Every major point covered so far will now be used in arriving at this understanding. I will begin with the basic task of laying out the justification for the very distinction between male and female implicit in the design of divine love. I do this having in mind the view of some critics that the distinction between woman and man in Mormon belief and practice has its roots in myths of patriarchy that justify man's ruling woman and woman's being an adjunct to men. Then I will consider the equality between man and woman that divine love requires. I will argue that the law of consecration requires that women and men be equal as stewards in doing the work of the kingdom and in receiving its blessings.

Let us consider first, then, the ultimate justification of the distinction between male and female (implicit in scripture). I suppose that God could develop a kingdom wherein the cultural difference between woman and man hardly exists, or even create intelligent nature that is biologically unisexual. So the reason God made persons male and female must finally be a matter of their fulness of life everlasting, which is the defining aim of His work and glory as well as their ultimate good. We may say that without male and female, fulness of life would be less than it is.

This implies that the distinction between male and female must be essential to divine love itself, since divine love makes possible fulness of life. How essential it is can be seen when we consider briefly two things. For one thing, scripture describes the kingdom first and foremost as a family—the family of God. Better than any other term, family expresses the essential character of the kingdom as a community of divine love. In the kingdom persons are one in the bonds of love as sons and daughters of God and as brothers and sisters to each other forever. If the everlasting community of divine love were not a family, it would be very different indeed. And without the distinction between male and female, the essential relations of divine love that make the kingdom a family would not even be possible. Divine love itself would be radically altered and would not be what it is.

How essential the distinction between male and female is to divine love can be seen by considering a second closely related principle. We know that the growth of divine love in the heart enlarges the soul and expands the mind until the person reaches fulness of life. (Alma 32:27-41; 1 Nephi 11:23-25.) This process of rebirth and purification involves in an essential way the transformation of persons as male and female. Scripture tells us that those who thus attain fulness of life are "born of [Christ]" and "become his sons and his daughters." (Mosiah 5:7.) They put off old definitions of man and woman and put on new ones. They become truly woman and man as measured by their fulness of life.

It seems apparent that fulness of life is constituted essentially by kinship relations in all the variety and subtlety that divine love comprehends. Without the distinction between male and female, the kinship relations of divine love that comprise the kingdom as a human family would vanish, and the possibility of fulness of life would be irredeemably diminished. The resulting void in eternal existence could not possibly be filled by the remaining relations between human beings defined simply as persons. We may say that in a comprehensive sense male and female—as well as female and female, male and male—are not without each other in the Lord.

In divine love woman and man are equal—absolutely equal. There can be no doubt that this is so. In light of their equality before God's love, all rankings and gradings of woman and man favored by the world melt away, and they appear as they really are, equals. All illusions of ruling over, being better than, or possessing more than dissolve. Then woman and man can see each other as equally everything: each as a person has supreme worth, and the fulness of life of each has supreme value in the eyes of the other. Their total, and therefore equal, caring for each other helps make possible fulness of life together. If inequality infected the relations between woman and man, divine love would be corrupted and life could not be full for either of them.

Once man and woman fully grasp that they are equals in divine love, they are prepared to labor and benefit as equals in the work and blessings of the kingdom. This means particularly that woman and man work and receive as equals in obedience to the law of consecration. Consider once more what we observed earlier about how the equality inherent in divine love characterizes the law of consecration as a precept of divine love. In doing so we should bear in mind that the earthly kingdom should be modeled after the heavenly kingdom in its operations. (D&C 105:4-5.)

The law of consecration requires that all people labor in the kingdom according to their talents and to the full extent of their ability. We saw earlier that, in accord with divine love, persons serve together under the law of consecration in a system of equal power. This should be true of women as well as men. We can say this because it is in accord with the order of heaven after which the earthly kingdom models itself. From scripture we learn that if the marriage between man and woman is "sealed" by the "Holy Spirit of promise," then they "shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers," and "they" shall "be gods," because "they have all power." (D&C 132:19-20.) Furthermore, we know from scripture that all those who "dwell in his [God's] presence," all members of the highest kingdom, women as well as men, are "equal in power, and in might, and dominion." (D&C 76:94-95.) There, one sex does not rule over the other.

The same equality operates in the earthly kingdom when it is organized, as it should be, in accord with its heavenly prototype. (D&C 105:4-5.) Revelation tells us that to "prepare" ourselves for "a place in the celestial world," we must be "equal in the bonds of heavenly things" and "earthly things also" while in this world. (D&C 78:5-7.) So in the only way befitting beings of divine love, man and woman labor together to accomplish the purposes of the earthly kingdom in a system of equal power. Not only as individual stewards do they do this but as joint stewards as well. Each has an equal voice in counsel and an equal say in consent in those matters in which both participate together as stewards. Thus, each enjoys equal maximum freedom compatible with social order. The man does not reign over the woman in the earthly community of divine love any more than he does in the heavenly community.

There is a principle here that should not be missed. It is a principle designed to guide how all power should be used in the kingdom. It says that power must be exercised "by persuasion, . . . by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned." (D&C 121:41-42.) This principle is not, I think, about one person's being kind and loving in exercising authority over another in a hierarchical system involving unequal power. Rather, it is a principle that springs from divine love itself and reflects the system of equal power based on that love. Divine love demands that men and women in the kingdom perceive and treat each other as equally everything and, therefore, work together as equals in carrying out their respective stewardships within the kingdom. No hierarchy exists between them, only different stewardships, different labors of love, that they perform individually and jointly. So, based on divine love, the kingdom's system of equal power requires that persons exercise it through persuasion, meekness, gentleness, and unfeigned love in serving with others.

Let me summarize the main points just made. In carrying out their stewardships in obedience to the law of consecration, all persons in the kingdom, women as well as men, labor together within the system of equality required by divine love. This means that women as well as men share equally in the power of the kingdom, even though at this time only men are ordained to priesthood offices. Because power is equal, priesthood power must necessarily be handled with persuasion and love unfeigned. It is unrighteous dominion for any man or woman to think he or she is a ruler.

I hardly need to mention that the law of consecration's second requirement of equality also applies to women as well as men. Both should enjoy "alike"—all should receive equally—the opportunities to grow offered by the kingdom according to their "wants" and "needs" so they "may be one." (D&C 82:17; 51:3, 9.) If they do not, then like much of the world at large, they "lie in sin" (D&C 49:20), and God withholds from them "the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit" (D&C 70:14). The inequalities favored by the world stand as a barrier to the fulness of life that might otherwise be theirs.

V

Let me conclude with a simple observation. The society in which we live, and in which the Restored Church had its origin, is characterized by inequalities of power, status, and wealth. From the viewpoint that sees power, status, and wealth as things of value, these inequalities favor men over women. About this there can be no doubt. But the inequalities of the world around us stand in stark contrast to the equalities between all persons, however they might be categorized, that divine love requires as the fundamental organizing principle of the kingdom. Insofar as we choose to be of the world, we exhibit its inequalities, which our critics misperceive as being inherent in the gospel and the kingdom.

These inequalities cannot be eliminated from among us, or from society at large, simply by removing sex discrimination from the existing order of things as some propose. For even if all discrimination were removed, the inequalities between persons would remain. They are inherent in the worldly system itself. So we and the world would continue to live in sin even if all "sexism" were eliminated. (D&C 49:20.) The only way we can finally escape the sins of inequality is to embrace the order of life required by divine love—to become a Zion society. The kingdom can be built up in no other way. (D&C 105:5.) The reforms offered by many of our critics will not work for us any more than they will work in the world. Those reforms leave intact inequalities that prevent persons from realizing the fulness of life which the gospel alone promises.

No Respecter of Persons Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Donna Lee Bowen Barnes, associate professor of political science at Brigham Young University, received her Ph.D. in Near Eastern languages and civilizations from the University of Chicago. She has conducted extensive research in Morocco as a recipient of Fulbright-Hayes, National Institute of Mental Health, Ford Foundation, and BYU Kennedy Center research grants for work in that country. The author of numerous scholarly publications on the Middle East, she has taught classes in Arabic, comparative politics, the Middle East, Islam, and the Book of Mormon. She has served in all the Church auxiliaries, including most recently as a Sunday School teacher.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Jr., The History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971), 1:364.
[^3] A. D. Sorensen is professor of political science at Brigham Young University. After receiving his Ph.D. from the University of Illinois, he taught for several years at Indiana University before joining the faculty at BYU, where he has taught courses in political and moral philosophy, law and morality, and the philosophy of science. His Church callings have included bishop and president of a BYU branch. He and his wife, Necia Marie Lee Sorensen, have six children.
