Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

A Struggle for an Eternal Order

Donna Lee Bowen Barnes [^1]

In all the accounts of creation, the primeval state of this universe is one of chaos. In the Babylonian story of creation, chaos, the most ancient of gods, is represented by a great dragon, Tiamat, who destroys all before her. A god, Marduk, is sent to slay the dragon and thereby impose order upon the cosmos so that man may flourish, rather than being consumed in the vast yawning abyss of the void.

In our tradition, the need for order is equally apparent. In creating the world, God imposes form upon the void and light upon darkness. (Genesis 1:2-4; Moses 2:2-4.) There is no question of the source of power or of the source of order in the formation of this earth—all reside in God.

The need for order extends throughout God's creations—beyond that of the physical earth, to the regulation of all that falls within its purview. The intelligences and spirits given bodies on this earth also have a critical need for harmony in their relations and a guiding method in their progress through life. Although God's universe is ordered, we can create our own lives and can live them observing God's order or we can create our own chaos.

The earth was ordered to pull itself back from chaos and remove itself from dangers far greater than the fiery breath of the dragon Tiamat. In our mortal existence, we need to find an order to give sense and structure to our existence and to thrust the chaos far from us; we need to recognize God's overarching eternal order.

An Eternal Order

Too often the idea of order conjures up the term orders and connotes a sense of hierarchy, power, and authority. Once having recognized that an order exists, mortals seem to react by either meekly obeying it or rebelling. In both cases, they may see the rules but not the meaning of an ordered system.

We have our personal peace to make with the universe. If we realize how we are a part of this system, then it is possible to work within it. Otherwise, we try to dominate it, establishing our own demands and procedures, discarding what does not please us, reasoning through our own philosophies or setting up some substitute authority that we choose to obey.

As one of five billion persons on this earth, I recognize that my religious and cultural system is one of many. And, because my world is a pluralistic world where one cannot be condemned for differences in belief, I am often confused. How can I convince my friends of the importance of chastity when their world claims love and its physical expression to be a primary value? How can I assert the truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ to my Catholic, Hindu, or Muslim friends who have their own scriptures and knowledge of the divine and live a more exemplary life than I do? How can I resolve the conflict when Church leaders tell me to marry when I haven't had the opportunity to marry or to raise children when all my efforts result in miscarriage? Often when such friction results, individuals begin to construct their own systems and establish independent personal orders.

Nevertheless, the order established by God cannot be voided by personal inconvenience or appeals to alternate authority, however reasonable. A personal mortal order can never supersede an eternal one.

The order established by God in this world affects us on two levels—an eternal one and an immediate, personal one. The eternal level of order began in the preexistence. It regulates our lives through mortality and into eternity; it gives us the plan of salvation and hope for exaltation.

The plan of salvation is an elegant and simple part of this order—that we may have a method to receive salvation and, beyond that, exaltation. Such is the importance of His system that, having set it up, even God is bound by its precepts if we follow His commandments.

"For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

This order is predicated upon the sustaining force in this world and the next—that of the power of God, also known as the Spirit of the Lord. The Spirit of Christ, the agency by which God governs and controls in all things, fills the immensity of space. (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1979], p. 752.) This spirit of light strives with the righteous to guide and induce them to seek the truth of the gospel and prepare them to receive it and ready themselves for eternal life. God's power is the means by which He creates, governs, and controls all things that are, were, and will be. This is the power by which the plan of creation, redemption, and exaltation operates throughout eternity, binding on earth and in heaven. (McConkie, p. 594.) The terms order and command have meanings that are very close, both based on the concept of authority. Since all authority is God's, He alone possesses the power to establish order and to command.

On a personal mortal level, the order of the gospel leads us to structure our lives to realize both our own needs and our place in the larger plan. As a literal spirit child of God, each person has a unique place in His divine plan. Separated from God by a veil, we stumble to find our place in the system unsure of how we fit in the overall schema and what our actions should be. If, rather than stumbling, we hold sight of our goal (reunion with our Father in Heaven), our everyday progress can be more surefooted and serene.

The gospel of Jesus Christ makes no pretense of being an unstructured system. Rather, there are numerous steps in a progression through which we are led if we act in righteousness in accord with the Spirit of God. In this life, it is illogical to perform ordinance work out of order—to ordain to the priesthood before baptism, to receive temple endowments without proving one's worthiness. This order makes sense to us because we have been taught a certain logical progression and have practiced it, but it makes eternal sense as well as we are guided from one step to another. This progression ranges from ordinances such as baptism through those of the temple, through the priesthood hierarchy, each with its respective keys, to individual lessons that we each experience, each capable of building faith and strength in the gospel of Christ. We must realize that the priesthood is a means to funnel the power of God to us on this earth. It is the means by which order is imposed, by which the steps are established that we must follow to return to the Lord. The Spirit of God empowers us through the priesthood and gives us earthly ordinances that help us make sense of life through the eternities.

Imagine trying to discern God's wishes for us without prophets, without scripture, without guidance from the tribulations and triumphs of the Israelites, the Nephites, the Lamanites. How could we know of a Messiah if we had to construct His existence from rational proofs and without the reports of His disciples? Even with the scriptures, most of the world's population doubts the historical veracity of Christ, although most postulate the existence of God.

Although we don't deal with cosmic questions every day, the same principles apply. Our lives are made up of the ordinary: alarm clocks, three square meals, bus schedules or consistent automobile maintenance, work, some exercise, and a little entertainment to restore our good humor. If one area of our life slips out of synchronization and moves into the space allotted other areas, we notice—fall out of sorts, suffer from gastric distress, inordinate weight gain, car troubles, or loss of our jobs. Chaos, or the lack of order, throws us off and can have at first annoying but often ultimately distressing symptoms.

More seriously, disobedience to God's laws can pull us into real chaos. Disregard for chastity results in a living hell of deception, the agony of a family unit being ripped into separate concerns. If we turn aside from ethics or moral considerations and condone killing, theft, or lying, we reduce society to a jungle where the strongest rules.

Late in her long life, my dear grandmother suffered from constricted blood flow to her brain. The result was loss of memory and increasing disorientation. Nights I would find her wandering from room to room in her home trying vainly to remember where she was and what she was doing there. I would calm her panic for a moment, but when I left, I knew the disorder of thoughts returned. The loss of her sense of place and time had panicked her, and she could not bear the emptiness. My grandmother's confusion was physiological, but the spiritual chaos that we flee is a deep and lasting hell. We can create this hell ourselves through actions that scorn God's order.

If we, however, are aware of the natural world and our place within it, we notice the system of order whereby the elements were molded to God's purpose. Each enzyme, each chromosome, each spiral of DNA has its separate function, which combined with that of others takes on purpose and meaning. Likewise, we have talents that enable us to perform certain functions. Each is given certain abilities. (D&C 46:11-26, 29, 33.) And each has certain roles. The logical extension of each of our receiving certain gifts is that none can supply all the abilities needed to run the world.

All of God's children share certain tasks. The first is to make ourselves worthy to return to His presence. We must work hard, study, and acquire knowledge of God's plan revealed through His prophets in order to learn how to return to Him, as well as develop the most important component—the will and the desire to regain His presence. Inherent in this mortal slice of the divine order is the idea that we are given roles, duties, and the agency to decide how we will respond.

The second task we are given is to replenish the earth and instill in our children, as well as in all others, the desire to live forever in His presence and to learn the means to achieve that goal.

In order to keep the first task in mind—that of our returning to our Father in Heaven, it is vital that the second—bearing and raising children and teaching others—be correctly understood. We are responsible for ourselves and can guarantee no one else's exaltation. Even our spouse, whom we need for exaltation, cannot be forced to the celestial kingdom. We can only help and guide; we cannot determine another's eternity. We can bear and raise children, but while their births are one purpose for which we were created and placed on earth, they are a means to our goal, not the goal itself. Our goal is eternal life, which comes to us only through obedience and righteousness and reliance on Christ's atonement.

Our major role in this life that leads to the life beyond is parenthood. Thus, much is commanded regarding it. In addition to bringing life into the world, we have the responsibility to guide it; however, if we see being a father or a mother as our end goal in this life, we further misconceptions. If we see it as a necessary part of an eternal goal, then all the pieces fit well together.

Maturity within God's Order

An example of one who found his place within God's order and gained in maturity and strength is Nephi, probably my favorite person in the Book of Mormon. I am fascinated by his growth from a single-minded, tactless young man, dedicated to his parents and his God, but incapable of enforcing his convictions and obeying God's commandments without raising the hackles of his older brothers, Laman and Lemuel. As he matured, his qualities of courage, his faith in the Lord and strength in obeying His commands, however difficult or foreign, triumphed. His care for and his belief in his father, Lehi, was absolute. When asked by the Spirit of the Lord what he desired (1 Nephi 10:2), a question reminiscent of that asked of Solomon, he disdained any personal gain and answered that he wanted to see what his father had seen. He was then shown a revelation foreshadowing the rest of the Book of Mormon, depicting the future history of the world, and outlining the plan of salvation. He saw great things, things "even too great for man." (2 Nephi 4:25.)

Although he was blessed by God's attention, Nephi often offended his brothers. They accused him of seeking power and authority over them. Before his death Lehi reproved them:

"Ye have accused him that he sought power and authority over you; but I know that he hath not sought for power nor authority over you, but he hath sought the glory of God, and your own eternal welfare.

"And it must needs be that the power of God must be with him, even unto his commanding you that ye must obey. But behold, it was not he, but it was the Spirit of the Lord which was in him, which opened his mouth to utterance that he could not shut it." (2 Nephi 1:25, 27.)

At Lehi's death, the prophecies that had so grieved Lehi began to play themselves out as the two older sons separated from Nephi, Sam, Jacob, and Joseph. Feeling his weakness and mortality, Nephi, in writing upon the plates of brass, berated his own limitations and left a record of his innermost thoughts for our learning and profit. (1 Nephi 4:15.)

What follows is for me one of the most inspiring parts of scripture, the psalm of Nephi, as Nephi expresses both his delight in the gospel of our Lord and the recognition of his own imperfections.

"Nevertheless, notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord, in showing me his great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth: O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities.

"I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me.

"And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins; nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted.

"My God hath been my support; he hath led me through mine afflictions in the wilderness; and he hath preserved me upon the waters of the great deep.

"He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh.

"He hath confounded mine enemies, unto the causing of them to quake before me.

"Behold, he hath heard my cry by day, and he hath given me knowledge by visions in the nighttime." (2 Nephi 4:17-23.)

Then Nephi, who is worthy of revelation from God, goes on to lament his own weakness—his propensity to yield to sin, to allow a place for the evil one in his life.

As quickly as he has realized his weakness, he acknowledges the source of his strength and delivers a strong testimony of the power of the Lord, echoing the earlier verses, calling on the Lord to grant him strength and to guide him.

"O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness! . . . Wilt thou make my path straight before me! Wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way—but that thou wouldst clear my way before me, and hedge not up my way, but the ways of mine enemy.

"O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever. I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh. Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm.

"Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss; therefore I will lift up my voice unto thee; yea, I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness. Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee, my rock and mine everlasting God. Amen." (2 Nephi 4:33-35.)

The plan of God for this life was revealed to Nephi, as well as matters too great for him to speak of. Yet being human, he doubted his own strength but knew that of the Lord. The paradox here is that Nephi was both weak and strong. As he recognized, he himself was weak, but with the Spirit of God, he gained strength as he accepted and relied upon the place of God's power in his life and deeds.

Without a revelation as overpowering as Nephi's and without a faith as strong and purposeful as his, we confuse mortal goals with eternal goals, mortal order with eternal order, mortal concerns with eternal concerns in trying to make sense of life on the earth. We fail to realize how all-encompassing the strength of the Lord can be and how much comfort and serenity His Spirit can impart, if only we are willing to request strength, comfort, or serenity.

My Search for an Eternal Order

Unfortunately for my parents, or perhaps because of them, I was born with a restless, rebellious, and willful spirit. My basic redeeming quality was my willingness to see reason and the other side of any question. All of the faith and meekness in our family went to my siblings—especially my younger brother Cacey and my youngest sister, Kristey. I have always had a difficult time taking things on faith or obeying because it was commanded. I always needed to know why and how. The order upon which I based my life was centered in the gospel, but it was a difficult centering—more responsive to reason than to faith.

A few years ago I came up against something that reason and logic could not crack. My husband, a good man whom I loved dearly, ran into a personal crisis and reacted by gradually and then rapidly pulling away from the Church, from me, and finally from his own self. As I struggled to sort out and then put back together the scraps my marriage had been reduced to, I attempted to make sense of what was happening and to understand my place in all of this. I quickly found that reason was insufficient for my needs (it further confined me), but that prayer sustained me.

My patriarchal blessing tells me to pray at all times, in all places, and regarding all things. Those words suddenly had new meaning, and I prayed constantly for the strength and serenity to get through each night, each morning, each afternoon, and often each hour. Although I have always relied strongly upon my Father in Heaven, never had I needed Him so much. And as my need increased, so did His sustenance.

Never have I been better behaved. I clung to the Lord's commandments, used the scriptures as a marriage counseling handbook, and followed all they suggested. In return, I found that I could command serenity, peace of mind and of heart during the greatest period of turbulence in my life. If I prayed for calm, I received it. If I prayed for guidance, inspiration followed. If I needed patience and understanding, new depths of meekness were made available. Family and friends sensed my needs and supplied them. I was truly blessed, and I learned so much.

One night, as I was reading the scriptures I was struck by a recapitulation of the Beatitudes in chapter 3 of Colossians. Paul instructs us how to be risen with Christ:

"But now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy. . . .

"Lie not one to another . . . ;

" . . . put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him: . . .

"Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering;

"Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

"And above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness." (Colossians 3:8-10, 12-14.)

I realized as I read that I had learned some lessons in the past months: that anger would not get me anywhere, that meekness and forbearance were far better suited to my needs than arrogantly asserting my rights, that longsuffering, forgiveness, and, finally, charity—or love—were essential if there were to be a solution to our problems. And, finally, I realized they were necessary even if there were no solution—as there was not. I stopped needing to have all the answers immediately—to fit them together in a tight mosaic, any one piece which would not fit immediately invalidating all the rest. I learned to live with space and with ambiguity, and I learned that I could wait for some answers, that in time all would be comprehensible. I did not learn all this in pleasant ways. I learned it by having it pounded into me by experience. And the lesson is more valuable for the cost.

Close to the beginning of this experience, I took a deep breath and looked around at the new world I had discovered as others, learning of my difficulties, began to confide their problems in me. I saw a world of turmoil, not calm, a world of tears rather than joy, a world of endurance rather than triumph. I was overwhelmed at the trials men, as well as women, suffered at each other's hands.

I realized that many of them, as they dealt prayerfully with their situations, after being struck blows of adversity, were learning lessons that better equipped them to enter the celestial kingdom than others who had more agreeable lives. In recognizing their weakness, they were not misled by ideas of their own strength or by goals of fame, status, position, or material goods.

Meekness and forbearance and forgiveness are qualities not easily acquired. In addition, these traits are not valued in today's world, which teaches assertiveness and how to stick up for ourselves. None of these former qualities, of course, imply not realizing our self-worth and defending it. Rather, to my mind, they demand our knowing our place in God's system and holding firmly to it.

Through our absolute need for free agency, we are left to make our own choices, including if and to what extent we wish to involve God in our lives.

Once I turned to God to give me strength, recognizing my own inability to affect another's behavior and realizing my total ability to determine my own behavior and my own course of action, I began to feel a sense of liberation, freedom born of working within a discipline and an order. I established order in my life and, by placing myself under God's care, avoided the dark chasm which threatened to engulf me.

The knowledge of one's relation to oneself and to others and to God, and the dependence on His Spirit and adherence to the ordinances are the best means to develop the qualities to regain God's presence. I had to realize that the spirit and the power of God are there to be tapped and brought into our lives. We are denied nothing if we ask in righteousness.

"He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh.

"And again, I say unto you, all things must be done in the name of Christ, whatsoever you do in the Spirit." (D&C 46:30-31.)

Unfortunately, although the scriptures systematically teach us of the availability of spiritual help, we usually coast along relying upon our own abilities and following our own will until we reach a problem we cannot overcome. So we turn to the Lord and request His Spirit in times of frustration and great need, times when we have found that we cannot trust in the "arm of flesh" that Nephi spoke of in his psalm:

"O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever. I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh. Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm." (2 Nephi 4:34.)

Maturity for me came when I recognized the paradox of my existence. If I held to my strength and my own system of organizing and understanding my life, I was weak—more than weak, for I was brittle and I could break.

Conversely, by recognizing my weakness and inability to manage by myself, and by asking for help, I was given, so generously, the Spirit of God—a power that enabled me to deal with problems and to understand and see beyond myself. But holding this power is not a constant or permanent process. It ebbs and flows with my receptiveness to the Spirit of Christ. It must be worked at.

Clumsy Mortal Attempts to Live Immortal Principles

Although through the Spirit of Christ we can be given all the help, strength, and comfort necessary, to gain this spiritual help for ourselves certain things are expected: that we are righteous, that we obey the precepts and commands of the gospel, and that we seek help from the Lord on our knees in prayer. Access to the Spirit is not granted by office held in the Church, or by wealth, by status, by gender or color. It is available to those who truly desire it and are willing to humbly do as they are commanded.

Thus, all the power of God is at our disposal to be used in our behalf when we need it, dependent only upon our righteousness, our spirituality, our desire to bow to God's command.

Unfortunately, the harmony that results from adherence to these divine injunctions is sometimes shattered by selfish human concerns. If the divine order is upset, the result is a kind of chaos with individuals' imposing their own means of ordering their lives rather than living in accordance with the divine plan.

"For although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him." (D&C 3:4.) Too often when this happens, order becomes command, and force is introduced into human affairs. Often materialism, recourse to wealth, status, fame, and influence, become overriding goals.

At this point the whole order of the gospel is upset. Our order is one of service, of stewardship. Whatever function we perform in the Church, we work within parameters established to guide that work. Positions in the Church, to my mind, are very far from reflecting power. Rather they force us to be sensitive to the Spirit of Christ, to seek, to listen, and to obey. Our stewardships are to induce us to serve, not to command. They give us responsibility, not glory. The more responsibility an office entails, the more tightly a person is tied to obedience to the Lord's commands and to attention to the Spirit. As Nephi gained in knowledge, maturity, and spirituality, he became more, rather than less, dependent upon the Spirit of God. Thus, in reproving Laman and Lemuel for wrongly accusing Nephi of seeking power and authority over them, Lehi contrasted the two senses of power: first, the mortal sense of power and authority as command with its implicit sense of force and repression; second, the immortal sense of power as Lehi described it, the "power of God within him," the "truth according to that which is in God which he could not restrain." (2 Nephi 1:25-26.)

Our major purpose on this earth—besides sustaining life, which necessitates food, shelter, and a modicum of other needs—is to help teach and influence others to enable them to achieve celestial life. In my opinion, that which furthers this goal is worthwhile, that which detracts from it, misplaced energy. We have life-styles and professions that help. First of all are the nurturing roles of mother and father. Second, there are professions, work, and callings which, pursued correctly, can help steer others to God: the positions of teacher, doctor, nurse, neighbor, visiting teacher, bishop, Relief Society president, and so many other roles that can add to our understanding of our place in this life and make it richer, healthier, better. Nevertheless, these same jobs, if not pursued correctly, can be more damaging than any other. I have friends who trace problems of members of their family to uncaring or malicious teachers or inattentive health professionals. These possibilities provide a yardstick to help us determine how we wish to spend our professional lives—as Anne Sullivans or as Ivan Boeskys.

If we fall victim to what is known in the Church as "unrighteous dominion," we are in a sense helpless. The Church organization is being used against us, and for purposes opposed to the divine order. Often reasons for command rather than service tie in with misunderstandings of the role of men and women in the gospel, sometimes with personality problems being played out in interpersonal relations. Too often those commanded are women. And women—or more personally, I—get very tired of being told what to do, how to do it, how I should feel, how I should react, and how I should interpret the scriptures. The Spirit of Christ is there to guide me if I make use of it. If not, then I am the loser.

The concept of priesthood is often misused by both men and women. Rather than seeing it as the structure that makes the universe intelligible to us, which permits us to follow the order—baptism, confirmation, ordination—that God has set down, we confuse it with the Spirit of Christ or the power of God. Priesthood funnels God's power to man; it does not replace it. Any righteous person can partake of God's Spirit; indeed, that is how prayer and repentance function. Therefore, we can never place responsibility for our actions on anyone else, for each of us has access to the Spirit of the Lord. Conversely, we can never take responsibility for another by virtue of priesthood office and thwart the working of free agency. Women are not saved by their husband's priesthood (although they can be greatly aided by him—just as the husband is aided by the wife); they are saved by their faith, works, and the atonement of Christ. This principle is the same for all of us.

Every reference to power in the scriptures speaks of it as residing only in God (if it is used righteously), although it can be delegated to those having authority and acting in righteousness. The missionaries in my father's mission years ago always impressed and touched me when they insisted that they did not convert investigators to the Church—"the Spirit of the Lord did." The Spirit of Christ or the power of the Lord is intended for our assistance. It is offered for the benefit of mankind. We know from the scriptures and from statements by President Spencer W. Kimball that the Spirit of Christ exists for all, not just for Mormons or those living in Salt Lake City, Utah County, or the Wasatch Front. In some degree, all, regardless of religious background, can call upon the Spirit of Christ and be given help. I have seen this in experiences in other cultures, and there is no other explanation than that the Spirit extends Itself to all.

In 1978 President Kimball said in "A Statement of the First Presidency Regarding God's Love for All Mankind": "We believe that God has given and will give to all peoples sufficient knowledge to help them on their way to eternal salvation, either in this life or in the life to come."

The major qualification to this statement is that all power cannot be extended to all inhabitants of the earth without all following the gospel. In other words, there is one eternal order and one eternal truth that all must follow. Authority—and the power of God that fuels it—comes from Christ and is vested in the priesthood and ordinances of the Lord. This priesthood is only available under the direction of one who has the keys of prophecy and the stewardship of the community of the saints to direct the Church of Jesus Christ.

The Mortal Clash of Temporal Orders and Divine Order

In my medium-long lifetime I have been exposed to various temporal orders ranging from peer pressure in Bountiful, Utah, to attempts to convert me to Islam in the desert oases of Morocco. In graduate school my life was bound by formal rules and orders. Two years of one language, four years of another. Expertise in fourteen centuries of Middle Eastern history, command of a system of doctrinaire philosophy, understanding of the theological arguments that underline that philosophy. Four years of tuition paid into the university (or the approved equivalent thereof). Annual applications for fellowship funding. Reports and financial accounting to the Fulbright Commission. Signatures of advisers for the finished Ph.D. dissertation. Fees paid to the graduation office. The lists run on and on.

In addition I had others' systems influencing my life: friends from Chicago's North Side, New York City, Pakistan, Sweden, Tunisia, Iran, Sioux Falls, and Alpine, Utah, with varying needs and their own methods to resolve those needs. In some ways, these temporal orders were the most trying of all. Close friends and peers seemed to have inordinate influence when I was far from my family. We all had so many problems at that time and needed each other's support to keep going through romantic attachments, academic disasters, family problems, and the trials of daily life in southside Chicago. Determining a basis upon which to resolve problems was a major conflict in itself. Religious teachings did not seem viable bases when arguing my position with friends who were fiercely agnostic rationalists or were simply of a different religious tradition. I did not feel free to impose my values upon them. At times I even felt reluctant to bring up religion in our discussions and tried to develop reason-based arguments to support my position.

The most puzzling of the collisions is related to my work and continues still. As I work professionally in the Middle East and North Africa with non-Mormons and non-Christians, my adherence to a principle of one eternal truth makes my treatment of their religions and their traditions inherently difficult. If I declare my religion to be the only truth, I thereby declare their religion to be false. If I take an easy out and weasel around this dogmatic position, I trivialize both religions. Dealing with foreign cultures, traditions, and customs is tricky. When religion comes into the picture, it becomes triply complex.

Trying to work within all of these orders, each of which has had a strong impact on my life, is enough to make my head spin. Resolving the dissonance so all systems can operate in tandem, given their mutual irreconcilability, requires adroit juggling. There is no single answer for resolving conflicting temporal orders as many of them cannot be reconciled. But knowledge that they cannot be reconciled and that they are mortal orders, not eternal ones, and that they do not have to be reconciled provides an answer in itself.

A scholar of Native American culture, Gary Witherspoon, once stated that the similarities on this earth come from the preexistence. The differences come from this earth. When we were divided at the Tower of Babel and given different languages, we also developed different customs and habits separating us from each other. As a scholar, I relish and learn much about others and myself from the differences of our cultures, but my soul yearns for unity. This unity I find in the gospel of Christ, a truth that transcends diversity. In the gospel, all begins to come together, and I find truth from the diversity, not in spite of it.

Recognition of the divine order, which stretches for eternity, removes the uncertainty and ambiguity in dealing with our varieties of temporal orders. For many, giving in, surrendering oneself to a heavenly order is not easy for it necessitates great faith and humility. But once accomplished—when the leap is made—one finds that no control over life is lost, no freedom is surrendered. Instead, far more control is gained, and the freedom of the eternal order is far sweeter than anything this earth can offer.

Once I achieved this level of maturity and delighted in the freedom I had found in following the rules of the gospel, I wanted more than anything to share this feeling with my former husband. He could not comprehend what I was talking about. This was the most bitter part of those years: knowing that what Nephi said was true—that we had to depend upon our Father in Heaven and follow His strictures—and yet being unable to persuade my husband that this was the answer, or the beginning of the answer, to our problems.

Free agency is a double-edged sword that is often used in a most painful manner. It is part of our Father in Heaven's order that we are responsible for our own destiny and none other. We can help, support, guide, but we do not have the power—even God does not have the power—to influence anyone unless he or she wishes that influence. So many times I prayed for my husband to turn to the Lord to calm his personal demons. I could not understand for many years why such a righteous prayer was not answered. Finally, I realized that I could govern only my own spiritual relationship; others were in charge of theirs. Although my prayers might open doors, my husband had to walk through them himself. If our positions had been reversed, he would not have been able to do any more for me, despite his priesthood. This plan reflects great eternal wisdom, but it is sometimes difficult for mortals to accept and live when we want instant answers and relief for our pain. Now, a few years later, my former husband has worked things through himself in his own time and is returning to the gospel.

A few years ago I taught an honors Book of Mormon class. At the end of the year I gathered the class together at my house to share insights about the Book of Mormon. One freshman related an experience I have never forgotten.

She told how her father had died early in the year and what a hard time she had had accepting his death, an occurrence made more difficult by being at BYU and absent from her family. She said she could not understand how God could have done such a thing to her and she was inconsolable. Then one day in class we discussed the psalm of Nephi and the importance of asking our Father in Heaven for help. She said she was very skeptical at that, believing that her grief was unique, that no one could understand, care, or relieve it, but she decided she had nothing to lose. The next night she prayed for help. At that point her voice broke. When you ask, she admonished us, you had better be ready, because the Spirit of the Lord will come pouring out faster and stronger than you can ever imagine.

Then she opened the Book of Mormon to 2 Nephi 4:35:

"Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss; therefore I will lift up my voice unto thee; yea, I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness. Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee, my rock and mine everlasting God. Amen."

A Struggle for an Eternal Order Note

---
Notas:
[^1] W. F. Albright and C. S. Mann, "Jesus and the Law," in The Anchor Bible (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1971), vol. 26, Matthew, cvii-cx.
