Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

Becoming Bone of Bone and Flesh of Flesh

Eugene England [^1]

A good friend said to Charlotte and me, during our courtship, "Happiness in marriage consists not so much in finding the right person as in being the right person." I was certainly trying to become that right person. I was feeling some of the happiness and pain that comes from any real growth, but many of my mistakes—and much of the pain I caused Charlotte, then and later—were because of some dangerous notions I had about men and women. I want to discuss some of those dangerous notions and what can be done about them to improve our marriages, present and future.

In the Book of Mormon, Nephi claims that the Lord "doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men" and that "he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness" and "denieth none that come unto him." (2 Nephi 26:33.) Nephi gives us some specific examples of the "all" who are thus invited—and who are, he says, "alike unto God": They include "black and white" and "male and female." What evidence do we have that male and female are indeed equal in this fundamental sense? How do we know they are alike to God and invited equally to come to Him and to be blessed equally when they do? In our time, there seems to me no more important matter for men and women to understand and agree about if we are to have effective courtships and build eternal marriages.

We have an immediate problem. In this passage Nephi assures us God is "plain" in all He does for us—which would have to mean that the record we have of God's doings must be plain, at least when the "plain and precious things" Nephi earlier tells us were lost from the Bible are restored through modern revelation. But we have clearly not always seen this plainness, even in modern scripture like the Book of Mormon. For instance, shortly after the revelation giving blacks the priesthood was announced, Elder Bruce R. McConkie asked a group of Church educators to disregard what he had previously said on the subject. He stated that because of the recent revelation there was now available new understanding of that scripture from Nephi about all being alike to God: "Many of us never imagined or supposed," he said, "that these passages had the extensive and broad meaning that they do have." [^2] He implied that we must use greater vigilance against such misunderstanding in the future. That warning, it seems to me, might suggest that if we didn't understand for such a long time what it means that "black and white" are alike, perhaps we still don't understand what it means that "male and female" are alike to God.

What could possibly cause such misunderstanding? Many times the Lord warned Joseph Smith that the plain gospel of light and truth had been lost to God's children because of "the tradition of their fathers." (D&C 74:4; 93:39.) Joseph understood specifically that "our wives and children" have been made "to bow down with grief, sorrow, and care" because of "that spirit which hath so strongly riveted the creeds of the fathers, who have inherited lies, upon the hearts of the children, and filled the world with confusion." (D&C 123:7.) All around us we can see examples of how the traditions of human culture, passed down through the fathers' false patriarchal creeds, have destroyed the plainness of God's equal dealing with male and female and have caused women and children sorrow and care and all of us confusion. [^3]

The process that produced this continuing tragedy is now becoming plain: in the apostate creeds of Christianity, which God told Joseph were an abomination but which have been the main tradition of Western civilization, Eve was blamed for the fall and thus women for all evil on the earth. In fact they were blamed for subverting God's plan for His children on the earth. They were assigned a place inferior in every way, defined and treated as property, and it was seriously debated by theologians whether they had souls. Even when women were exalted, as in the cult of the Virgin Mary or in the chivalric code of "courtly love," the female image was being made to serve "male" purposes: the image of a few women raised on a pedestal was used to debase most other women and to undermine such "female" purposes as a healthy, equally shared sexuality and equal fidelity within marriage—as well as to excuse male neglect of the values of peace and mercy. One of the main purposes served was what Robert Heilbrun has called the "man-honor-fight" dogma. [^4] It is a dogma that Shakespeare opposes in much of his greatest work, both in his early festive comedies like The Taming of the Shrew and As You Like It, which are centered on strong, witty, merciful women who lead men eventually to salvation in a marriage of equals, but also in his powerful anti-revenge tragedies like Troilus and Cressida and Hamlet, where women and "feminine" values of mercy and forgiveness are destroyed by male allegiance to war and vengeance.

That "man-honor-fight" dogma, along with the apostate Judeo-Christian notions about women's inferiority, survived even into the Victorian period, where men fostered the perverse image of woman as either a madonna to be worshipped and thus "protected" from the demands of real living and relationship—or a prostitute to be exploited (often by men who were bored by a madonna-like wife they had created themselves). I believe it was at least partially in response to this perversity in American culture that the Lord endorsed the practice of polygamy for a time in His Restored Church. He thus attempted to provide for nearly all women the challenge of child-bearing and home-building in a sanctified but down-to-earth relationship.

There seems to have been little chance for madonna-like posturing or for degradation in successful polygamous homes. Mormon women formed remarkable bonds of sisterhood and developed unusual skills and confidence while running farms and businesses with their husband absent on missions or at his other homes. They developed a great tradition of equal and often superior accomplishment in ranching, economics, politics, writing and publishing, Church leadership, and (perhaps most important but least remembered) in receiving spiritual gifts, such as healing others and speaking in tongues and prophesying. [^5] At the same time they passed the Abrahamic test of polygamy and successfully used that great and painful trial to teach the spirit of covenant sacrifice to their children in ways that produced much of the strength of the Church to this day.

I honor those, including some of my own ancestors, who were willing to pay the cost of polygamy, in response to commandments that I believe came from God. They were thus worthy of blessings that outweighed the costs for a time, as well as countering some of the difficulties caused in nineteenth-century America by the false traditions of the fathers about the value and needs of women. But the nineteenth century is past, and I do not believe the costs or blessings of polygamy are a good basis for imagining what eternal marriage will be like. [^6] They are certainly a bad basis for imagining what marriage now should be, when we are clearly commanded and encouraged to practice perfect, one-to-one fidelity.

What is a good basis for imagining eternal marriage, then? The plain scriptures, I believe. In the first place, modern scriptures and revelations suggest quite plainly that we would more accurately and profitably read the scriptural references to "God" as meaning God the eternal partnership of Heavenly Father and Heavenly Mother. They have a more perfect unity even than that of God and Christ and the Holy Ghost, and so the word God implies both of them, at least as much as it denotes the three beings in the classical Christian trinity called "God."

Such a more correct identification of "God" might help us better comprehend the direct role our Heavenly Mother played in our creation and salvation. When we read in Genesis that God said, "Let us create man in our image," it makes most sense to read it as God the Father and God the Mother speaking as One. When we read in John that God sent His only begotten Son to save us, it would be better to understand, as it certainly makes more sense, that our Heavenly Parents sent Their only begotten Son. This process is truer to the evidence—and to our real needs as men and women—than looking for a female God between the lines in the scriptures or in apocryphal works or mythologies, as many feminist theologians are doing. It might help us better imagine our futures as husbands and wives, equally yoked in what Shakespeare called "the marriage of true minds"—and to work toward that future now.

Second, modern revelation tells us that when God put "man" on the earth, "in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them." (Moses 2:27.) Clearly men and women were both created in the "image" of Christ. That would seem to mean we are created in the image of the Heavenly Parents who together make up the "God" whom Christ came to reveal, that is, the perfect eternal partnership He came to teach us how to achieve and to show us in His life and character what we would be like when we achieved it.

One of the false traditions about women that survives into the twentieth century is expressed in statements, meant to be compliments, such as "She thinks like a man" and "She fought like a man," or those, meant not to be compliments, like "He wept just like a woman" and "He gave in like a woman." We still imagine and approvingly describe men as rational, objective, even tough-minded and revengeful. Women, on the other hand, are supposedly all intuitive, gentle, even immaturely emotional and merciful. Isn't it strange that these qualities we belittle in women are the very ones that best identify Christ? We should remind ourselves constantly that the Pearl of Great Price tells us God made both male and female in the image of Jesus. Mormons believe that when Christ came to earth He said plainly, "What manner of men [clearly meaning 'humans,' male and female] ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Nephi 27:27.) We believe He both showed us what He is like, in His infinite patience and mercy, and also taught us: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart" (Matthew 11:29)—or literally, in the Greek, "gentle and humble." Male and female, we all are made in the same image and have the same ideal. It is a terrible stumbling block to us all that, in the false traditions of the fathers, that image and ideal of Christ is the one that has been assigned to women and thus thought of as inferior and avoided by many men.

Clearly, we are combinations of qualities, some merely individual, some associated with our great gift of being male or female. Our culture, not the gospel, names certain of these qualities feminine and certain masculine. But our task is to transcend culture, to value all the Christ-like qualities—both in ourselves and in our eternal companions—and to learn how to discover our full selves, all of our individual qualities, through mature relationships, especially in marriage.

Modern scriptures help us understand how men and women are alike unto God in a third way by making it clear not only that the references in Genesis and elsewhere to God actually mean our Heavenly Parents but also that those passages referring to Adam often actually mean Adam and Eve together in their eternal partnership. This corrects what is perhaps the most damaging false tradition of the fathers, one which underlies most degradation of women in Western civilization and is amazingly still subscribed to by many Mormons: I mean, of course, the idea that Eve was the only one deceived by Satan and partook of the forbidden fruit first, that she was thus responsible for Adam's fall and most of our troubles, and that she was rightly punished accordingly with child-bearing and subservience to her husband. Such a notion is terribly, destructively false doctrine. In the first place, if Eve really did act first, since Mormons supposedly believe that action was intended by God and the right one to make the plan of salvation work, we should honor her as being brighter and more courageous than Adam—who in the scriptural account seems, like modern husbands, mainly able to blame his wife for what is happening that he doesn't understand.

Honoring Eve over Adam is simply reverse sexism, however, and, in fact, modern scriptures say plainly that Adam was responsible for the fall. God teaches Joseph Smith that "the devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment. . . . Wherefore, I . . . caused that he should be cast out from the Garden." (D&C 29:40-41; italics added.) Clearly, the Lord is not reversing the Genesis story and blaming Adam alone. He is using "Adam" to mean Adam and Eve in perfect partnership. Just as we might have assumed, our first parents, our model for eternal marriage, made that most crucial decision together—and both had the same understanding and courage and love for us.

I realize that many Mormon men who blame Eve and, thus, to some extent denigrate all women—and Mormon women who degrade or trouble themselves over Eve's "mistake"—take their notions from the temple endowment ceremony as well as from Genesis and the writing of Paul (for example, 1 Timothy 2:14-15). But if they do so, they act in error: they fail to heed the clear warning given at the beginning of the endowment that what they see and hear concerning Adam and Eve is "only figurative." The endowment drama teaches a great truth about God's involvement in the creation of man and woman and in the process by which they entered into a world of moral choice and growth together, but it does not presume to depict with cinematic accuracy the literal events through which that happened. If we assume such literal accuracy, despite the warning, we reinforce destructive stereotypes about both men and women.

Now what does this all have to do with becoming "bone of bone and flesh of flesh"? Those are the words used by Adam to create a symbol for both the reality and the ideal of that first earthly eternal marriage created with Eve in the Garden. They imply a unity that is unique in the universe, not possible even for the gods, except with their eternal partners in marriage, because it directly suggests not only spiritual and intellectual and emotional unity but also physical unity. Only eternal marriage partners can enjoy a "continuation of the seeds forever." (D&C 132:19.) Only they can participate in sexual relationship in the largest and most profound sense: the unity of equal opposites, male and female, expressed fundamentally in the literal sexual act but in many other ways as well. Sex in that largest sense makes mortal life possible. But according to Lehi's law, sex also, as one of the complementary oppositions which undergird all reality, makes possible all life in the universe, all meaning, godhood, even existence of any kind. (2 Nephi 2:11-15.)

The Mormon view of sex, therefore, is not merely positive; it is, in every sense, grand. Like the priesthood, however, sexual relationships can operate only on the principles of righteousness, that is, "without compulsory means" but rather "by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned." (D&C 121:36-46.) Mormons believe God is neither a lonely male nor a lonely female—but an eternal partnership of equal opposites, one male and one female who have become "bone of bone and flesh of flesh" in the perfect creative unity that we begin to build in our painful, struggling, exasperating real marriages in this life.

Becoming bone of bone and flesh of flesh is itself, of course, a very sexual image. The Lord makes this even more explicit when He continues, after Adam's recognition that he is now "flesh of flesh" with Eve, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh." (Moses 3:24.) We who are married know that sexual intimacy can be the fundamental expression of our deepest unity and purposes as eternal partners capable of eternal increase. We are able through intercourse to literally create something new in the universe that is partly each of us but potentially greater than our sum. We thus symbolically image forth the eternal increase of godhood, creation not only of spiritual children but also of universes. Such intimacy can also be a delightful, uniquely intimate counterpoint to the repetitive, public cares of career and homebuilding—a relief even from the cares of the parenthood it makes possible. After literal childbearing (or in cases where the couple cannot have children), it can continue to be a reminder and pledge of the partnership that produced those children and of the unity that continues to nurture them (or will do so for spirit children). It can be none of these things, however, if it is entered into without fidelity, without perfect trust that the partner is unwilling to violate that deepest unity and perfect vulnerability, or if it is entered into with shame or lust, or only as an act of self-sacrifice or self-gratification.

Paul said some things about sex that are not plain, that in fact seem to me quite strange. Fortunately, he said most of them, as he admitted, on his own. But he did say one thing that captures well the perfect equality and modest but affirmative attitude about sex that the gospel implies generally (and here I use the Phillips translation for better plainness): "The husband should give his wife what is due to her as his wife, and the wife should be as fair to her husband. The wife has no longer full rights over her own person, but shares them with her husband. In the same way the husband shares his personal rights with his wife. Do not cheat each other of normal sexual intercourse, unless of course you both decide to abstain temporarily." (1 Corinthians 7:3-5.) Because of both the repressions and obsessions about sex in our culture, as well as our individual trials and tragedies as we form our sexual identities in such a culture, that ideal of Paul is not easy to attain. And the very effort to make certain both husband and wife are equally "willing" can itself become obsessive rather than liberating; however, such an ideal is far superior to destructive actions of male dominance and aggression and female passivity and resentment rampant in our traditional culture—or their reversal in much feminist and playboy fantasizing.

The ideal sexual relationship can best be achieved by applying another ideal articulated by Paul. He borrowed Adam's image of becoming "bone of bone and flesh of flesh" as a metaphor for the perfect unity possible both within the Church and between the Church and Christ. He also wrote, "So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church: For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones." (Ephesians 5:28-30.) Using marriage as a symbol he taught, in 1 Corinthians 12 and 13, how the members of that body of Christ, the Church, should relate to each other—and by reverse implication, of course, how the members of the eternal one flesh of marriage should relate to each other in order to become bone of bone and flesh of flesh with Christ. Let me make some additions to make this parallel plain:

"Now there are diversities of gifts [between husband and wife], but the same Spirit.

"And there are differences of administrati[ve responsibilities], but the same Lord.

"And there are diversities of operations [in the family], but it is the same God which worketh all in all.

"But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every [person] to profit withal. . . .

"But now are they [two] members [in marriage], yet but one body.

"And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

"Nay, much more [either] member of the body, which seem[s] to be more feeble, [is] necessary:

"And [whatever partner] of the [marriage] which we think to be less honourable, upon [that partner] we [should] bestow more abundant honour; and our uncomely parts [then] have more abundant comeliness.

"For our comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered the body together, having given more abundant honour to that part which lacked:

"That there should be no schism in the body; but that [both] members should have the same care one for another.

"And whether one member suffer, [both] the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, [both] the members rejoice with it. . . .

"Have [both] the gifts of healing? do [both] speak with tongues? do [both] interpret?

"But [both of you should] covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I unto you [both] a more excellent way. . . .

"Though [either of you] have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though [you] have all faith, so that [you] could remove mountains, and have not charity, [you are] nothing. . . .

"Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity . . . is not puffed up,

" . . . is not easily provoked . . . ;

"Beareth all things, . . . endureth all things."

Martin Luther once said that marriage is "the school of love," and of course he was talking about charity, the pure love of Christ. Marriage is not the result or even the home of love so much as it is the school of love—and it is a school of hard knocks. I am still in school, and it is not easy. I am constantly challenged, threatened, embarrassed, even wounded at the very core by my struggles and my failures to respond to the challenges Charlotte's love and our covenanted partnership pose to me—not because she wants to wound me but because of what she is, an honest, complex Other, meek and lowly in heart, to whom I am eternally bound and whom I want to be like. I am painfully becoming, in increasing unity with her, what I want and need to become, though it is what, without her, I might not have chosen to become.

Becoming bone of bone and flesh of flesh, together, does not mean that I am trying to be more "womanly" and Charlotte more "manly"—nor that I am neglecting my own gifts and responsibilities, some of which are given, though only temporarily I think, because I am a man. I believe that the Melchizedek Priesthood and bearing the bodies of mortal children are simply assignments made for mortality. This does not mean the two are equivalent: certainly priesthood should not replace the nurturing duties of fatherhood nor does bearing children replace the spiritual gifts, including healing, nor the administrative gifts and duties given to women. But I believe priesthood and child-bearing are alike in providing, if we let them, similar opportunities to learn charity, to love and serve unconditionally. If we learn those lessons, we will pass beyond Melchizedek Priesthood and physical motherhood to a higher state of more perfect equality. That higher state, promised in the eternal marriage covenant, is called becoming kings and queens, priests and priestesses unto the most high God. Fatherhood and motherhood are equivalent right now in their intrinsic responsibilities. (President Lee said to both men and women that the most important work we will ever do is within the walls of our own home—and President McKay said to us both that no success could compensate for failure there.) The roles of man and woman are absolutely equivalent in their intrinsic joys and opportunities to learn the greatest joy—and the ground of our salvation—which is that pure love of Christ.

The lesson to be taken from all this is not that women need more devotion to their careers in order to be equal with men, but that men need less devotion to their careers. For the first ten years of our marriage I simply assumed that where we lived, what graduate school I accepted, what job and how much time and attention must be paid to keep and advance in that job, were simply my decisions, to be made from the perspective of myself as breadwinner. That was simply wrong—and destructive. A kind of charity that could have seen how wrong that was is what I think both men and women, equally, must learn in order to make eternal marriage work—and to found a good courtship upon. The core curriculum of the school of marriage is unconditional love, mercy, long-suffering, forgiveness.

I know of a successful marriage that began in the forgiveness of a man for a woman's abortions in her teenage years that left her unable to have children. I know of another marriage that was able to continue because of a woman's forgiveness of a man's long-continued promiscuity after marriage. Elder Marion D. Hanks, at a BYU devotional, told us of a marriage that had recently ended with the death of the husband, who had left his wife and children to "be himself," had contracted AIDS, and finally came home to die, in the words of Mother Teresa, "in sight of a loving face." He found that blessing in his family, particularly a wife who "read Walt Whitman to him and played Beethoven to him" for those last days. [^7] I know of many marriages that endure, despite male chauvinism or female passive aggression, despite a man's or a woman's habits, conditioned by our sexist American culture or spiritually handicapped parents or personal tragic experience. I know many that fail because one or both partners, with smaller problems than those I have mentioned, cannot forgive, or think they can trifle with the covenant bonds of fidelity without wounding others—and themselves—deeply. They leave the school of love, the god-producing arena where we only can know the pain and joy of becoming bone of bone and flesh of flesh.

Bruce Jorgensen, of the BYU faculty, has written a fine short story called "A Song for One Still Voice," which tells of an ordinary man with an extraordinarily firm and reflective sense of husbandry over his crops and his family. He wakes in the night to take his irrigation turn; then he changes a daughter's diaper and kisses his wife on the temple but resists his passion, his desire to awaken her, because he feels her need for sleep—and reflects: "There is no loneliness like the body, nor any delight." [^8] The pain and joy of being bone and flesh go together, but the joy is certainly worth the pain.

Modern revelation (as well as our own intuition) teaches us that we have existed eternally as unique individuals—and always will. A modern Mormon thinker, B. F. Cummings, has put the case this way: "The self is insubordinate, wandering, imperially aloof, solitary, lonely, withdrawn, unvisited, impenetrable. . . . This aloneness is a fact for men and Gods to live with, for it is inherent in existence." [^9] Such cosmic loneliness is a source of pain that can only be assuaged by finding our deepest selves, our fullest being, in relationships—ultimately in eternal partnership and continuation of the seeds, becoming bone of bone. That yearning for relationship is painful, too; it often seems a threat to that eternal uniqueness that is our original joy as individuals.

Becoming one flesh, especially in the central act of that becoming, which is making love, contains within its joy the full implications and responsibilities of having children. For a woman it means literally risking her life in bearing them. For both women and men, it means caring for our children, even when because of genetic defects or social problems the care of them devastates us emotionally and financially, and it means nurturing them, even when they turn on us in misunderstanding and hatred. Would we have children if we could see them first as teenagers? Yet we do have them, partly because there is no greater joy than coming to know those we have nurtured when they become mature individuals in their own right—our children as dearly loved friends. When we make love we are already expressing incredible courage—the courage to enter the valley of the shadow of death and of failure and of rejection. I believe our Heavenly Parents have the same kind of courage when, in whatever is Their equivalent of making love, They begin a universe. That courage makes possible existence, and the greatest joy, that of being bone of bone and flesh of flesh.

Becoming Bone of Bone Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Anne Firor Scott, "On Seeing and Not Seeing: A Case of Historical Invisibility," Journal of American History 71 (June 1984): 7-21, discusses such societies, noting an observer's remark that "it was as if in the year 1800 a bell rang and all over the country women began coalescing into groups" (p. 12). See also Keith E. Melder, Beginnings of Sisterhood: The American Woman's Rights Movement, 1800-1850 (New York: Schocken Books, 1977), pp. 42-53.
[^2] Sarah M. Kimball, "Autobiography," Woman's Exponent 12 (1884):51.
[^3] Brigham Young explained that priesthood "forms, fashions, makes, creates, produces, protects and holds in existence the inhabitants of the earth in a pure and holy form of government preparatory to their entering the kingdom of Heaven." Sermon of 30 Oct. 1870, in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1853-86), 13:281.
[^4] "A Record of the Organization and Proceedings of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo," 30 Mar. 1842, microfilm of holograph, Archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereafter cited as LDS Church Archives.
[^5] Fifteenth Ward, Riverside Stake, Relief Society Minutes, manuscript, vol. 1, 1868-1873, 25 Feb. 1869; vol. 4, 1873-83, 6 January 1876, in LDS Church Archives.
[^6] Minutes of the Relief Society General Board, 31 May 1917, microfilm of typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^7] Stakes reported their success with the early course of study at semi-annual conferences of the Relief Society. See, for example, Emmeline B. Wells, "National Woman's Relief Society Record," 10 Oct. 1892 to 8 Apr. 1901, holograph, 3 Oct. 1895, in LDS Church Archives. An excellent discussion of the development of Relief Society curriculum is Carol Lois Clark, "The Effect of Secular Education upon Mormon Relief Society Curriculum, 1914-1940" (Ph.D. diss., University of Utah, 1979).
[^8] Alpine Ward, Alpine Stake, Relief Society Minutes, 26 Apr. 1901, microfilm of manuscript, LDS Church Archives.
[^9] "General Relief Society Conference," Woman's Exponent 39 (June 1910): 6.
