Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

Communities of Love

Shari E. Pack [^1]

Just as my own dear parents yearned and prayed for the birth of their children, my husband and I have also prayed for the birth of each of our children. As each child was born, it has been for me like opening a very special present, a gift from our Father in Heaven, a precious surprise of inestimable worth whose value grows with time. I have sometimes wondered, as this tiny soul has been placed in my arms, if at birth those spirits who have associated with the new baby before mortality have mixed feelings such as we do at death, rejoicing for the loved one's chance for progression beyond mortality but mourning the loss of the loved one's presence for a time.

Death is for all of us a separation of an undetermined length. From our point of view here, death is so final. No matter how we miss the one who has died, we cannot contact them. My husband and I have experienced the death of a child twice in our life together. The first time we were rather young. Our third child, a son, was born one beautiful balmy evening in Hawaii in the Kahuku Hospital amid the sugar cane. I remember how easy the birth had been and how nonchalant I was about everything. I had another beautiful boy—it had almost been too easy. His heart defect did not show, and when he died, it was so quick and final. But we live in communities of love. The first is our family, and the other that we become aware of very soon and that will help us all our life, if we let it, is the Church. At the graveside funeral our good bishop in his talk promised us that we would be blessed with other children. His words were an answer to our prayers. And indeed his promise was fulfilled. Within two and a half years we had two wiggly, special boys: as a dear Polynesian sister of faith said to me, "The Lord took one away and gave you two."

Many times it has come to me that we can be the answer to someone's prayer by what we do or say. We can be a great force for good without our knowing, if we are trying to serve the Lord. The bishop's promise and the Polynesian sister's words of faith were such forces for good.

Our second experience with the death of a child came just a few years ago in Idaho where we now live. Our oldest son, seventeen years old, collapsed and died after running in a long distance race. Evidently his heart could not take the stress of long running. He had been such a choice young man. This son, this gift from our Heavenly Father, had grown in value to us over time, and we did not want to let him go. My good husband's priesthood healing blessing for our son in the hospital, as the doctors were working frantically to bring him back, was answered with a quiet "No." And then we began to search for answers from the scriptures and the prophets. What a community of love is found in the Church writings and the gospel of Jesus Christ. We were taught that the priesthood blessing was right, but that our son had been appointed unto death and was to join his brother in the next world of spirits.

So many people answered my prayers for understanding and comfort during this period. These people did not know they were answering my prayer; they were only being a part of this community of love in the Church. One gray afternoon I was driving home. It had been raining slightly, and as I drove up the wet hill, I noticed a sister walking to her home. The Spirit whispered to me, "Pick her up." I really didn't know her very well; but, after a brief argument with myself, I turned my car around, went back to where she was, and offered her a ride. What a sweet feeling she gave me in those five minutes as I drove her home. She told me of a recent fast meeting in her ward, during which a young man had borne his testimony and had talked about our son who had died and the work that he would be doing in the spirit world. This young man had prayed for understanding and received inspiration that there was an eternal purpose for our son's death. How grateful I was for her words that reinforced what I had thought and felt.

Several months later I was participating in a musical program in another city. I have often found that when I have accepted opportunities to participate in meetings I would not ordinarily attend, such participation aids me; I learn something I would not otherwise have learned, or something is brought into my life that I would have missed. After the program an older man came up to me. He had read my name in the program and asked if I were related to ---------, and he gave the name of our son. "Yes," I said. "I am his mother. Did you know him?" He said, "I did not meet him when he was alive, and yet I feel as if I know him very well." He took off his coat and laid it on the edge of the pulpit and talked about our son for a long time. He explained that he worked for the county with the assignment to prepare the dead bodies and assist in the examination of them. He had experienced an unusual feeling as he had been asked to work with our son's body. He sensed that this young man was righteous, and he felt he knew all about him. He wanted me to know that our son's body had been treated with great respect and care. I treasured those words and pondered them, recognizing them as part of the community of love, and another example of answered prayer through other people's words and actions.

In the Doctrine and Covenants a scripture has become important to me.

"Wherefore, fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not full, but in me your joy is full.

"Therefore, care not for the body, neither the life of the body; but care for the soul, and for the life of the soul.

"And seek the face of the Lord always, that in patience ye may possess your souls, and ye shall have eternal life." (D&C 101:36-38.)

I have thought about these words, to "seek the face of the Lord always that in patience ye may possess your souls, and have eternal life." (Italics added.) For me this translates into striving each day to become better, to be worthy to seek the face of the Lord. Each new day gives us many opportunities; how wonderful it would be to live so that we could be the answer to someone's prayer. I am glad that we are taught weekly in our meetings and are reminded continually of the things that will help us in our life, such as daily prayer and daily study, for I believe that it is through our daily actions that we are seeking "the face of the Lord." Another key word in that scripture for me is "patience," since perfection is built slowly as we go on from grace to grace. We are all striving to be on the straight and narrow path that leads to eternal life, but we each are in different places along the route. As we help each other along the way, we also help ourselves, for we really cannot be exalted alone.

There is an additional example of how my prayers were answered by others in the communities of love that surround us all. A year after the death of which I have spoken, I was asked to come to the cemetery for a special graveside service for a woman I did not know, who had spent her life working to establish and maintain a hospital in Hawaii. Her family had brought her body back to Idaho and wanted me to sing "Aloha Oe" as a final good-bye to this beloved sister at her graveside service. In reality it seems that I came to learn and feel as well as to sing. As we waited around the grave, I saw members of the family and friends arrive and mingle quietly, and yet so happy to see each other among the grave markers and granite tombstones. I could feel with them what a pleasure it was to be together after the periods of separation, and I thought about the resurrection—how much more joyous would be their greetings and radiant faces if they were there to bring someone forth from the grave and not to bury them. There was a beautiful feeling of love in the cemetery among those special people. It taught me to look forward to the promises of the resurrection, that we all will be brought forth from the grave. It is almost impossible to imagine such a joyous time!

The words of a new hymn describe better what I feel:

Savior, may I learn to love thee, Walk the path that thou has shown, Pause to help and lift another, Finding strength beyond my own. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I would be my brother's keeper; I would learn the healer's art. To the wounded and the weary I would show a gentle heart. Savior, may I love my brother As I know thou lovest me, Find in thee my strength, my beacon, For thy servant I would be. Savior, may I love my brother— Lord, I would follow thee. [^2]

I am grateful for the love and the answers to prayer that I have experienced in my life. I am grateful for the promised resurrection. I pray that we may always seek the face of the Lord in our lives and live so that we can be the answer to another's prayer.

Communities of Love Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Signe Hale Gillum, a graduate of Brigham Young University in music education and member of the Utah Valley Symphony, worked for four years as departmental assistant in the history/religion reference section of the Harold B. Lee Library at BYU. She co-chairs with her husband the Springville, Utah, Historical Preservation Commission. She has been a stake missionary, ward music director, and teacher in the auxiliaries. Her marriage to Gary P. Gillum after the death of her first husband created a family of seventeen children, her eleven and his six.
[^2] Shari E. Pack, homemaker and music teacher, received a degree in vocal music from Brigham Young University—Hawaii. She has taught voice and harp at Ricks College and has served as choir leader in her ward. She and her husband, David, are the parents of thirteen children, eleven of whom are living.
