Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

Worse Is Better

Signe Hale Gillum [^1]

I began my "great balancing act" about eight years ago. Our family's life was relatively smooth and uneventful, except for the birth of nine of our children, the eighth and ninth being twins. Our business was beginning to show signs of success, we were building our dream home, the children were bright and healthy, we were active in the community, school, and church, and were raising two Navajo daughters.

Then, in January 1978, the roof fell in on our world. I was eight and one half months pregnant with our tenth child, when my husband slipped into unconsciousness one morning. The doctors soon discovered that three of my husband's main arteries to the heart were 60 to 90 percent closed, and he would need bypass surgery to stay alive. Everything happened so fast that I didn't have time to think or plan anything. I hadn't even packed a bag and ended up staying at the hospital for the next four weeks. The doctors didn't want me to travel the thirty miles each way from home to the hospital because I could deliver any minute.

Three days after my husband passed out, he had triple bypass surgery. The operation went beautifully. In fact, the doctor said the angels were in attendance. My husband had every expectation for a long, healthy life. He seemed to be recuperating normally, but ten days later, while still in the hospital, he had a stroke. I don't know why I didn't crumble right then and there, but I didn't. It seemed that I knew I had to do whatever had to be done, even though I didn't know what that was. I do know that two very important things helped: my knowledge of the Savior and tremendous family support, both from my husband's family and my own.

Two weeks after my husband's stroke, I delivered our third son. My husband didn't realize the birth had occurred until several weeks afterwards. After leaving the hospital, I continued to visit my husband for the next six weeks while he was in rehabilitation. He was ready to come home three months later.

Then the trials really began. The stroke was disastrous to my husband. I hadn't known up to that time that he had a very low self-image. When we met at BYU, he was a "big man on campus"—yearbook editor and photographer and well-respected and liked. During our marriage, he was always in control, very much the patriarch. I was a new member of the Church and very anxious to be a model Mormon wife and mother. I went about raising children, helping in the business, and learning the gospel. It was a good life. But it's better now, and let me tell you why it's better.

As my husband's personality altered, he became increasingly demanding; his temper was violent, he began using terrible language, and his judgment was very poor. He also became severely depressed and was suicidal for about four years following his stroke. On top of that, his diabetes was completely out of control, which caused further emotional and physical damage.

Three months after my husband came home, we lost our business. He had been in and out of the hospital several times for his depression. Shortly thereafter we also lost our home and moved to Provo, to a nice, but smaller, home. We were surviving but drowning in debt. I began to feel trapped in an impossible situation. I cried until I couldn't cry anymore and prayed until all I could do was groan. On the outside I appeared strong and in control (everyone asked, "How do you do it?"), but on the inside, I was a mess.

After about a year of incredible verbal abuse to me and our children, my husband was convinced by the bishop and the doctors to get psychiatric help. We went together and over the next few years "wore out" four different doctors. If my husband wasn't helped, I certainly was. I learned a lot and, gradually, I began to pull myself together.

After much thought and prayer, and advice and help from family, I decided to look for work. I didn't know what I could do, but I could type and I did have a degree, so I began looking. I was very fortunate to find the very good job I have now. It has helped me learn how to talk to people, to see life from different perspectives, and to really appreciate home.

I learned to talk to people, to neighbors, the bishop, friends and family. When the neighbors came to help me clean house, we shared our experiences. I appreciate those times. I discovered that many people have very similar problems—parents who have had strokes, family members on the verge of divorce, and loved ones facing death or terrible illnesses. It was so good to talk, to share ideas on how to cope, and to help each other by just listening and understanding.

We cultivated our already-established family traditions—making gingerbread houses and taking them to friends and neighbors at Christmastime, visiting friends and making new friends at nursing homes. Our children transferred the skills of compassion they learned at the nursing homes to their daily coping with their father, and even though he never got well, there were many times that he responded positively. Gradually, the children and I were able to feel calm and in control, even when he responded negatively. Each of the children, even the little ones, began to see things in an eternal perspective. Having expensive toys and clothes no longer mattered to them; unthoughtful children calling them names didn't bother them; their studies at school became more important; and getting along with each other became top priority.

I learned to exercise. I began to walk and do aerobics. My mind cleared up; I felt better about everything, and I had more energy.

I learned that the main ingredient was a good attitude—not a Pollyanna attitude, but a positive, realistic one, looking at all the beautiful things around me but recognizing the problems and dealing with them in a positive way.

I discovered I was strong and had been all along, but I hadn't realized it. I found out I was intelligent and capable of making decisions. I learned to do the bookkeeping: it took seven years, but we are now out of debt.

One of the nicest things I have learned is the "soft touch." If someone I love is out of control and shouting at me, I just reach out and lightly touch his or her arm and force myself not to yell back. It's impossible to be angry with that person, when I have done that simple thing. At least, it really works for me.

I learned not to envy others or their accomplishments. It was incredible to discover that my friends, the eloquent, highly educated ones, the famous ones, the accomplished ones, all had serious problems, problems I am very glad I don't have.

I have learned there is not just one right way to do something, that my way may not be the way someone else may do it, but, if it works for me, it's okay.

I have learned to be less discouraged and to pick myself up and try again, over and over and over again.

I have learned how important it is to completely submit myself to the Lord. My favorite scripture has come to be Psalm 46:10, "Be still, and know that I am God." This means to me to be calm, that God is in control, and everything will be all right. I just have to do my best and be patient. I have learned to talk to the Lord every moment, in all situations, not just on my knees morning and night, but any time. I pray when I'm typing, or driving, or walking from one place to another, or playing my violin—even when I'm disciplining children! The Lord is always there, and I know it. The biggest trick is to really listen and understand His answers. But I know that whatever happens is a means for me and mine to grow.

I have learned that one of the best ways to forget or at least minimize my own problems is to serve someone else. It is rejuvenating to do something nice for someone.

I have learned not to waste my time thinking about Satan. He has no power over me, only to instill fear in me. People have the power of God to overcome their problems, and we should rejoice, because God finds us worthy and capable of great things.

Coping with our situation has had its price, however. Being a musician, I hunger to give my children music lessons, but I don't have time to teach them myself and can't afford private lessons. But music is still in our home, and the children have learned to appreciate all kinds of good music and to discern the good from the bad. It's very gratifying to me to tiptoe past their bedroom doors and hear them listening to good music while they are doing homework or just visiting with each other.

Home evenings, as a structured time, have been mostly abandoned, because my husband hasn't the ability to lead or contribute in a positive way. Instead, I try to make every moment a family home evening, either with several children together (around the dinner table), or one-on-one. I think they are learning the gospel just as well that way.

A big price for me is our messy house. Much of the time our house isn't very clean. I used to despair, but I began to realize we're doing our best under the circumstances. The children and I have drawn very close to each other; we have learned to talk openly and to express our feelings and frustrations, and to have fun with each other. We just try to be happy and loving, and that is very important to me.

Through all of these experiences, I have learned much. Many of the problems are still with me, but by learning to see more clearly and using new skills, I have been enabled to cope better. I know that as Heavenly Father's children, if we not only endure our trials but learn from them, we will conquer them and become capable of great things.

Worse is Better Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Signe Hale Gillum, a graduate of Brigham Young University in music education and member of the Utah Valley Symphony, worked for four years as departmental assistant in the history/religion reference section of the Harold B. Lee Library at BYU. She co-chairs with her husband the Springville, Utah, Historical Preservation Commission. She has been a stake missionary, ward music director, and teacher in the auxiliaries. Her marriage to Gary P. Gillum after the death of her first husband created a family of seventeen children, her eleven and his six.
