Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

Understanding Our World

We need to lengthen our stride, learn everything we possibly can, and develop our talents so we can serve God's children in the best possible way. . . . As we become prepared and empowered, the Lord can pluck us out of His scabbard and use us wherever and whenever He needs us. —Ida Smith

LDS Women: At Home and Beyond

Ida Smith [^1]

Women at home and beyond is a topic of current interest. I would like to explore with you what it might mean for us collectively or individually in our rapidly changing society. These ideas are gleaned from my own personal observations and from working with women for many years and are not intended in any way to be a pronouncement to the women of the Church. Rather, they are intended to stimulate thoughtful contemplation surrounding some very difficult issues for women today. I share these with you for what they might be worth and pray that what is said will be helpful as you—and your own personal revelator, the Holy Ghost—plot the course of your destiny.

Some of you will identify with some things, and some with others. We all do not fit just one mold. Some of you are married and at home full-time with husband and children. Some are married and working to subsidize the family income in order to put children through school or to support them on missions. Some are divorced and working to support yourselves and perhaps your children. Some are older and widowed with empty nests; others are young and widowed with children still at home. Some of you have never married, but many—of all ages—still hope to be. Some have serious financial worries, while others are financially secure and will probably never have to worry about where their next meal or their next month's rent will come from. There is no set of answers to fit all of the above situations, because they have different sets of questions.

I feel a need for us to be honest with ourselves, with our families, and with each other. I saw a fascinating educational film recently entitled The Abilene Paradox, which deals with this issue of being honest with ourselves and others. The film depicts four individuals (two couples) who end up traveling a fair distance on a hot summer afternoon to have dinner in Abilene. They later discover that none of them wanted to go. They all went because they thought everyone else wanted to go, and no one wanted to play the spoilsport. Being honest with ourselves and admitting our own needs must be central to the plotting of our destinies, because if we cannot be true to ourselves, we will ultimately find it impossible to be true to anyone else.

Our lives are filled with paradoxes and hard questions. One of the most often asked questions I hear is: how can I prepare for a career (i.e., to acquire a marketable skill in order to care for myself and perhaps, if necessary, care for dependent children as well) and at the same time prepare to be a wife and mother in the home? And I want to ask: can you be the wife and mother you need to be in this era of the world and not acquire a marketable skill? Sister Camilla Kimball stated it best:

"I would hope that every girl and woman here has the desire and ambition to qualify in two vocations—that of homemaking, and that of preparing to earn a living outside the home, if and when the occasion requires. An unmarried woman is always happier if she has a vocation in which she can be socially of service and financially independent. . . . Any married woman may become a widow without warning. Property may vanish as readily as a husband may die. Thus, any woman may be under the necessity of earning her own living and helping to support dependent children. If she has been trained for the duties and emergencies of life which may come to her, she will be much happier and have a greater sense of security." [^2]

Some of the ideas I am going to present may be frightening—or seem threatening—to some. I plead with you to stay with me and not read selectively what I write. As we think about the admonition to be at home and some of the implications of "going beyond," we must consider how we define "home." Is a "home" to you as a chador might be to a woman of Islam: a veil to be worn at all times and forever, the leaving of which is to be seen as creating an offense to your society as serious as a Muslim woman's removing her veil might be to hers? Is a home, then, to be a woman's prison? Is she to be labeled deviant should she desire, or try, or need to leave? What does it do to a woman psychologically to feel that she is "taking off her veil" if it becomes necessary—for whatever reason—to venture beyond the walls of her own home?

Do we define home narrowly as the four-walled structure in which we live? Or do we more broadly think of home with the many facets listed in a dictionary which move from a "personal dwelling place," to the "city, state or country" in which we were born or reared, to a "restful congenial place where one is comfortable and likes to be"? Let us take a look for a moment at what a home has been historically.

A home two hundred years ago was a manufacturing and producing center where children were regarded as extra hands rather than as additional mouths to feed, and husband and wife were considered business partners, both of whose activities were considered economically essential to the survival of the family.

Home, historically, has been a center of learning. Many of our great leaders, such as Abraham Lincoln, received their educations at home—in humble homes—rather than in the hallowed ivy-covered walls of a university. Homes were social and community centers long before buildings were built specifically for those purposes. Home was a base from which to make things happen; the results of these efforts would influence the family, city, state, nation, and even the world. Some of the most important religious movements in history, including the restoration of the LDS Church, began in someone's home. Indeed, the lion's share of the teaching of the gospel in our day takes place in homes. One of our most famous homes, the Beehive House in Salt Lake City, was the center of activity for much that transpired in the early Church in Utah. During the years the Beehive House was home for Brigham Young, it resembled Grand Central Station as virtually every dignitary who passed through Salt Lake City was entertained there. President Young brought the world to his family, and the family was enriched thereby.

The spread of the gospel in ancient times as now has been quickened or slowed to the extent of the members' willingness to open their homes to missionaries and non-members. Martha set the example: she enriched not only her guests and her brother's and sister's lives, but her own as well as she listened to the gospel in her own home from the Savior himself.

Joseph and Emma Smith had people from all walks of life pour through their home, many of whom stayed for extended periods of time, and went away the better for the experience. Their home was a place where connections were made and growth was encouraged. Perhaps in our efforts to maintain our homes as havens from a hostile world, we sometimes exclude rather than expand to include what is noble, exciting, or worthwhile in the world. Where better to learn about and become prepared for the outside world than within the walls of one's own home? If we are to feel comfortable (at home) in a variety of places, be they the halls of legislatures, offices of business, courts of law, or classrooms, where better to gain knowledge and self-confidence than within the walls of our own homes?

I was fortunate to grow up in a home where our parents brought the world to us in wonderful ways. Our house in Honolulu was host for thousands from every conceivable walk of life: social, religious, governmental, and educational circles. Some of my best childhood memories are of being allowed to sit on the fringes and listen to the grown-ups visit (we were seen and not heard on those occasions). We listened to individuals renowned in their own spheres, Church authorities, professors in a variety of fields from all over the country—visitors who would never have been in our home were it not for our parents' dual involvement outside it. Unfortunately, Mother never kept track of all the people who stayed at, let alone visited, our house in Honolulu. But during the thirty years we lived there, the number was in the thousands. I was very glad that my parents were not absorbed with material things and that having a very modest home and possessions did not deter them from inviting anyone to come into it.

Both our parents were teachers. As children we were convinced that it was necessary for us to be poor so that Mother would have to teach. We were convinced that the Lord recognized that all those little non-LDS children needed her love and guidance, too! I never thought of her as a "working mother." I thought of her as a mother and a teacher—both worthy vocations, one inside the home and one outside it. We learned a lot through her experiences as she, as well as my father, brought colleagues and students home.

In the early sixties Father did two exchanges with professors in New York, and our family lived on Long Island. One of those years Mother taught at a Jewish yeshiva. She brought the rabbi home one evening, not for dinner, since he ate only kosher and our kitchen was not equipped to cook kosher, but for a long visit with the family. He taught the children much about his religion and the Jewish culture. Mother always felt that life would be very dull if you did not reach out to those around you—and so she and my father always did.

On another occasion in New York my father invited four of his students to dinner: one Greek, one Russian, one Jewish, and one black. All came but the Russian. It was 1960, and the civil rights movement was making headlines. The Jewish student described what he thought the blacks were experiencing, the black described what the blacks were, in fact, experiencing, the Greek tried to mediate, and my siblings will never forget it! That experience forever colored my sister's view of the civil rights movement, giving her insights she might never have had otherwise. And that connection was made in the home.

On another occasion in Hawaii Father invited a black professor to dinner. The one-on-one experience with this fine man forever destroyed the "black stereotype" in the minds of my brothers and sisters. How many of us are guilty of not bringing members of other churches or races into our homes for fear they will somehow contaminate us—instead of thinking how such contacts and connections can broaden and enrich our family's experiences? Or how many of us do not bring strangers in because we doubt our own abilities to deal with what is outside our prior experience and, therefore, outside our comfort zones? Mother's comfort zone was critically stretched the night we had ninety people at a fireside in Honolulu. She feared our house on wooden stilts would not be able to sustain the weight!

A home is a place where people learn to connect: first with Mother and Father, then with siblings, aunts, uncles, and cousins, widening the concentric circles until we feel connected as the family of God, which includes us all. At issue here is the question: will we accept full adulthood within the family of God, and if we do, what does that mean? What does it mean to establish a home? When the Lord said, "Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing, and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God" (D&C 109:8), did He not intend that description for our own homes as well as for the building of a temple?

The importance of building a home in which all who live therein can thrive and grow cannot be overemphasized. And in the scheme of things there is no question that women have a vitally important place there. Problems begin to arise for women when we fail to distinguish between what it means to be at home and what it means to be mentally housebound.

First, let us examine some of the reasons we stay at home in addition to child-rearing responsibilities: is it not safe there? Do we not feel secure and know that we will be taken care of there? (Any of you who have been through a divorce and consequently forced out of the home to be a breadwinner have learned that that sense of security can be illusory.) There may be less pressure to change there. Familiar chores fill the day and with this routine comes a sense of belonging. If you have done what is expected of you, you feel you have a right to be happy. That is why feelings of malaise are so disquieting. How often I have heard women complain: "I have a wonderful husband, lovely children, money to spare. I have no 'right' or 'reason' to be depressed—so what is wrong with me?" The facts are that women are twice as likely to suffer depression as are men, and doctors tend to prescribe more drugs for women than for men suffering from depression. The greatest drug abuse in Utah—and perhaps elsewhere—continues to be with prescription drugs. According to the Deseret News, Utah has the highest per capita drug prescription rate in the country, and the highest abuse is among women ages thirty-five to fifty who are at home full time. [^3] Any woman who must have downers to get to sleep at night, uppers to get out of bed in the morning, and something else in between just to get through the day is demonstrating neither a positive self-esteem nor control over her life.

Medical research shows overwhelming evidence that both positive self-esteem and good health are related to the degree of control a person feels over events in his or her life. Women who do feel they are in control of their lives rarely need to abuse drugs to help them function. Eating disorders—anorexia and bulimia—are other serious problems for women, which also grow out of problems of low self-esteem and issues of control. We tend to be happy in large part to the degree we feel we have control of our own lives. A bird in a gilded cage—no matter how opulent the cage—is still in prison. A gorgeous spacious house on a hill can be a prison to the woman who is confined there if she sees it as the only proper place for her to be. If the door of the bird cage were opened, many a bird might very well stay, but knowing she had the option to spread her wings and fly occasionally would in all likelihood make her staying a happier experience. So, too, with the woman who stays at home because she wants to, not because she has to.

It is crucial for a woman's mental health that she have victories of her own, accomplishments for which she alone is responsible. If she lives only through the accomplishments of her husband or her children, she runs the risk of either becoming a nag or feeling that if they fail, she is a failure. We all at one time or another make a big mistake in thinking we are, or can be, responsible for the happiness of others. No person can make another person happy. Abraham Lincoln once said that a man is just about as happy as he decides to be. We need to be concerned about our own happiness. Happy people shed their own sunlight, warming others as they warm themselves. They give of themselves freely, dispensing joy to those around them; blessed is the home that has such people in it. But no individual can make another happy unless that person is already inclined to be happy. Women who feel that they are responsible for the happiness of their husband and children have placed themselves in a no-win situation. If family members are in a mode of daring their mother to make them happy, no matter how much she does for them, it will never be enough. Many abused mothers and battered wives have had to learn this lesson the hard way. Children need to be reared to understand that they are not only responsible for their own things and their own rooms, but for their own moods and their own happiness as well. Husbands need to understand that principle too, as children will learn responsibility by modeling responsible parents.

Often women seeing their own children having problems will entrench themselves in the home in the belief that pulling up the drawbridge and backing off from all outside activities will somehow "fix" their children's problems when, in fact, perspectives and insights they might gain from working with others in the Church and in the community might offer them the very things they need in order to deal with problems at home in a more effective way.

Too often, also, many of us put on our veils and feel justified in shunning our responsibilities and withholding contributions (i.e., hiding our light under a bushel) to the community by using "my place is in the home" as an excuse not to be involved with or responsible for anything that happens outside it. There are others who feel so secure and comfortable at home they want someone else—anyone else—to deal with any trouble or unpleasantness that might arise in the community. If so-called "adult" bookstores and movies abound in your community, you need to be concerned about it. If there are drugs in your children's school, or if there are antichrist or atheistic ideas being taught to your children, you need to be concerned about them. If satanism is taking root in your community (and it is in some Utah communities), you had better be concerned about it. Paraphrasing Edmund Burke, all that is necessary for evil to triumph is that good men—and good women—do nothing. The best way for you to protect your home might be to take off your veil and spend a few volunteer hours in your local school, hospital, or shelter for the homeless, or to monitor school board and city council meetings or sessions of the state legislature. You may determine that you can best serve your child and affect the climate in which he is growing up by running for an office in one of these bodies yourself. If you wait to engage the battle until it has reached your own door, you may very well be too late.

Family concerns and issues do not stop at the front door of our houses. To show we care, sometimes we will have to do things outside the home. Mothers with small children may not have the freedom to do what they might later when the children are older or in school, but they still have options, such as using the telephone or exercising the power of the pen. If your imagination has atrophied to the point where you cannot even imagine an activity outside the home, perhaps you are doing not only yourself and your family a disservice but your community and the world as well.

Being "housebound" is a state of mind, not just a physical state. There is nothing wrong with being at home. But if you are at home because you feel there is no other choice, you are denying God's greatest gift to His children: agency.

If we could only grasp the enormity and significance of this gift, we would do everything in our power to sustain and defend it. The Lord evidently felt strongly enough about our right to exercise agency that He prepared a land and a government founded on the principle that all men are created equal and are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights. Two hundred years after the Revolution we have taken those words so for granted that we forget how much the principles of equality must have chafed England's King George III, who believed some (England-born Englishmen) were more equal than others (the new "Americans"), and who, believing in the divine right of kings, ruled in England because "God had ordained it." As long as King George held his view of the world and the new Americans clung to their beliefs, war was inevitable. Because our government was founded on the principle of free agency with man being endowed at birth with rights from God, the restored gospel has survived.

We deny the gift of agency to whatever extent we live our lives in an externally controlled world, where rules for all our actions come from outside ourselves. We skew our own growth if we spend our lives trying to live up to someone else's expectations and plans for us rather than listening to and following the Spirit's directives to us personally. From the beginning of the restoration we have been exhorted by our leaders to seek and follow the Spirit for guidance in our own lives. Speaking in the Tabernacle on January 12, 1862, Brigham Young said:

"I am more afraid that this people have so much confidence in their leaders that they will not inquire for themselves of God whether they are led by Him. I am fearful they settle down in a state of blind self-security, trusting their eternal destiny in the hands of their leaders with a reckless confidence that in itself would thwart the purposes of God in their salvation, and weaken that influence they could give to their leaders, did they know for themselves, by the revelations of Jesus, that they are led in the right way. Let every man and woman know, by the whispering of the Spirit of God to themselves, whether their leaders are walking in the path the Lord dictates, or not. This has been my exhortation continually. . . .

"Break not the spirit of any person, but guide it to feel that it is its greatest delight and highest ambition to be controlled by the revelations of Jesus Christ; then the will of man becomes godlike . . . [and] God shall reign within us to will and do of his good pleasure.

"Let all persons be fervent in prayer, until they know the things of God for themselves and become certain that they are walking in the path that leads to everlasting life; then will envy, the child of ignorance, vanish, and there will be no disposition in any man to place himself above another: for such a feeling meets no countenance in the order of heaven." [^4]

At an April general conference in our own time President Ezra Taft Benson stated similarly:

"Usually the Lord gives us the overall objectives to be accomplished and some guidelines to follow, but he expects us to work out most of the details and methods. The methods and procedures are usually developed through study and prayer and by living so that we can obtain and follow the promptings of the Spirit. Less spiritually advanced people, such as those in the days of Moses, had to be commanded in many things. Today those spiritually alert look at the objectives, check the guidelines laid down by the Lord and his prophets, and then prayerfully act—without having to be commanded 'in all things.' This attitude prepares men for godhood." [^5]

This is not to say that following the Spirit may not sometimes seem risky or dangerous, causing us or others discomfort. A passerby watching Nephi from a side street the night he separated Laban's head from his body might not have thought, "There goes a future prophet about his Father's business." And yet not only was Manasseh's posterity blessed because of Nephi's obedience to the Spirit, but Ephraim's and the whole of the house of Israel's as well. Mary Fielding Smith incurred the displeasure of her wagon master by deciding to come West when she did, but she was following the voice of the Spirit to her and came despite the displeasure. Her descendants, numbering in the thousands, are the beneficiaries of her obedience to its promptings.

Ann Littlefield was told by the Spirit to leave her abusive husband in England and bring her children to Zion in Utah. She did so at great personal sacrifice to herself, having to go against conventional wisdom in order to follow the Spirit's prompting for her. Because of her courage, hundreds of her own descendants have enjoyed the blessings of the restored gospel, and thousands more have been brought to a similar knowledge through the missionary labors of her posterity. If Mary Fielding Smith had not had the courage of her convictions, my father might not have been raised in the Church, and if Ann Littlefield had not been similarly strong, a host of my mother's cousins would not have been members either. If anything, the Lord needs even stronger women now than He did a hundred and forty years ago to help bring the wagons across the plains. We are headed toward the winding up scene. The world is being polarized. Women strong enough to lay claim to being daughters of Rebecca are needed as never before: first, to listen to the spirit of revelation to themselves, and then to take courage in their knowledge and convictions to follow it.

We can live our lives with "I should" and "I ought" rather than "I want," but that does not exemplify a use of agency. We are taught in the gospel of Jesus Christ that to achieve godhood and become like our Father and Mother in Heaven means to grow in righteousness to the point that our desires and actions have become aligned with Theirs, that we do what we do, not because we have to or because we are commanded to, but because we want to, because that is our choice! That ideal state cannot be reached without our exercising agency.

No two of us are alike. We have not had identical backgrounds, our current experiences vary enormously, our timetables are not the same. It is important that we not compare ourselves with others, which often causes us to see ourselves in a negative light. Also, we must constantly guard against the temptation to assume that where there is a difference, there must also automatically be a defect. Too often we not only berate ourselves, but each other as well, saying, "If you were really a righteous woman, you would/wouldn't be doing what you're doing!" If we are honestly doing what we feel we must do for ourselves and our loved ones, and are doing so because that is our choice, ratified by the Spirit, we have the right to feel good about ourselves and to be free of feelings of guilt. There is a world of difference between being guilty and feeling guilty, and women are far too prone to allow themselves to feel guilty when they are not living up to someone else's expectations of what they should or should not be doing. My youngest sister started college the fall my father died. When Mother returned to Honolulu after the funeral, she returned to an empty house. It took a while before she stopped feeling she had to go home right after school every day. She felt guilty about not going home to prepare dinner and had to remind herself there was no one at home waiting for her, no one but herself to prepare dinner for when she got there. It took a while for her to let the guilty muscles atrophy and to learn to readjust her life to an empty nest: one devoid of husband as well as children.

I learned a great lesson from watching my mother in her travels after my father died. She traveled to see and be with her children and to go to school for a year at BYU. Mother has a marvelous way of sinking her roots to China no matter where she goes, and in a very short time she is truly "at home" wherever she is. Home does not have to be a geographic location, but can be anywhere you allow yourself to feel comfortable—i.e., any place you extend yourself to make connections. If you confine yourself to a physical spot rather than to a frame of mind, you are truly limiting your capacity to exercise agency.

An important aspect of agency is responsibility; the two are opposite ends of the same stick. We cannot—should not even try to—pick up one end without also picking up the other. Thus, if we choose to marry and choose to have children, we have taken upon ourselves responsibilities to that husband and those children as the second and third most important of our priorities. Our first priority must always be ourselves and our relationship with God. If that core relationship is good, we will somehow manage to accomplish what we must regardless of our circumstances. If we allow anything else to be at the core—be it husband, children, church, or whatever—our labors will be more difficult. Putting oneself first is not selfish if our aim in perfecting ourselves is to become a perfect shaft in the Lord's quiver so that we might be ready to answer the call whenever and wherever He needs us. Having a family may very well curtail our involvement in other activities for varying periods of our lives. That is going to influence where our bodies can be physically, but it should not imprison our minds nor curtail our concerns nor inhibit the influence we can exert on a world with which our children will have to deal even if we do not.

The Lord prepared the world as a place for Adam and Eve and their posterity to grow and develop so that we may all return "home." In the 88th section of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord outlines some of the things we must learn in order to eventually be at home with Him. We need to lengthen our stride, learn everything we possibly can, and develop our talents so we can serve God's children in the best possible way whenever and wherever we are called upon to do so. Spencer W. Kimball said:

"The basic decisions needed for us to move forward, as a people, must be made by the individual members of the Church. The major strides which must be made by the Church will follow upon the major strides to be made by us as individuals.

"We have paused on some plateaus long enough. Let us resume our journey forward and upward. Let us quietly put an end to our reluctance to reach out to others—whether in our own families, wards, or neighborhoods." [^6]

Mother Teresa, a native of Bavaria, has made her home among the poor of India, and people all over the world have been blessed as she has extended herself to suffering members of the family of God. Golda Meir was not a far out liberationist. She was, rather, a woman who extended her motherly instincts to establish a home for her Jewish brothers and sisters in Israel. Florence Nightingale forever changed the course of nursing with what started out as an extension of home care.

This is not to say that these well-known women are in any way superior to the woman who has spent her life at home full time with her children. Their life experiences have simply been different. We need to take care not to imply a defect with the difference.

We have been criticized in the past that too few full-time homemakers have been highlighted at Women's Conference, that all the women who have been asked to speak have done things outside the home with the implication being that the former are the obedient ones and the latter are not following the proper, prescribed plan. Perhaps the latter simply see their role as "homemaker" extending to individuals and families that live beyond the four walls of their own houses. Would we really want to eliminate all female school teachers? Every grade school teacher I had was a woman. I can remember all of their names where I find it difficult to remember the names of teachers since. Imagine what would happen to the status of our health care if all the nurses quit and went home? Or to the entire economy if all the secretaries packed it in?

Where, then, should LDS women be "at home"? President Spencer W. Kimball taught that women's role was to preach the gospel, to be a righteous example not just in the home but in the world. Indeed he said that:

"Much of the major growth that is coming to the Church in the last days will come because many of the good women of the world (in whom there is often such an inner sense of spirituality) will be drawn to the Church in large numbers. This will happen to the degree that the women of the Church reflect righteousness and articulateness in their lives and to the degree that the women of the Church are seen as distinct and different—in happy ways—from the women of the world." [^7]

The Prophet Joseph Smith told the women in the newly formed Relief Society in 1842 that knowledge, intelligence, and the gifts of the Spirit would flow down to them henceforth, and that from that time forward they were to be responsible for their own sins. Their eternal salvation was not to be in the hands of their fathers, nor of their husbands, but in their own wise use of agency. [^8]

If Mormon women are going to make a difference in this world, they need to make their presence known. Women have often been referred to as the world's civilizers. Examples abound. The wild-wild West was civilized as the female population grew beyond the saloons and into homes. It was women just like you who, in the last century, led the fight for child labor laws. Women just like you who were concerned with temperance. Women just like you who have led the battles to curb domestic violence of every kind. It was women like you in my former community of Palo Alto who led the fight, and won, to have prostitution fronting as massage parlors eliminated from our town. It was in fact our Relief Society president who spearheaded that movement.

Not long ago there was a newspaper story of a young woman who made the boys' team in high school basketball. No comparable program existed for the girls. When the boys were asked how they were adjusting to having a girl around, one said that it had caused them to clean up their language. I hear the same kind of comment made by businessmen who have had women break into their previously all-male ranks. They clean up their language, and the off-color stories start to diminish. We hear that women should not be subjected to "rough situations," and yet their very presence can have an upgrading and civilizing effect. There is a message here of the power of positive female influence that should be noted, not ignored. If women expect to help civilize the world, some of us are going to have to be in it.

Latter-day Saint women who have set a standard of service for us are legion: from an Emmeline B. Wells, Relief Society general president, editor of the Woman's Exponent (forerunner of the Relief Society Magazine), and promoter/supporter of women's rights, to a Belle S. Spafford, also general president of the Relief Society, as president of the National Council of Women, to an Ardeth Kapp, who with no children of her own has become mother to hundreds of thousands as president of the Young Women of the Church, to a Christine Durham, mother of four and justice on the Utah State Supreme Court, to your local PTA or Primary worker who is at home with her own children as well as serving others as she is called upon to do so or as she perceives a need.

For more than a hundred and fifty years LDS women have set a standard for leadership and caring. I feel many of them must have read about the "virtuous woman" in Proverbs who managed somehow to do it all: she was working from early morning to late at night. She had her own garment business, making and selling clothing; she was in the real estate business; she planted her own vineyard; she succored the poor and took care of the needy; she was vocal and was known for her wisdom; and her children and husband rose up and called her blessed. I should think so! (Proverbs 31:10-31.) I, for one, find that superwoman model extremely difficult to follow and really don't like to hear women encouraged to "go thou and do likewise." It makes me tired just to read about it!

As we rise to meet a proper standard for us, it is important to remember that it was not Satan who put Jesus where he could be tempted, but rather the Spirit. The Joseph Smith Translation states that the Spirit took Jesus to the top of the mountain and to the pinnacle of the temple and then left Him to allow the devil to come and tempt Him. (JST, Matthew 4:1-10.) We need to allow ourselves to be led by the Spirit and be placed where the Lord knows we need to be. It is only by listening to the Spirit and following its promptings that we will develop the muscles we need to reaffirm here the choices we made in the pre-existence that qualified us for our mortal experience. It is important to remember also that the Lord's primary desire for His children is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man and woman. That is to say, His primary goal is to empower us to become like Him. If we are to be workers in our Father's business, we must first of all prepare ourselves. That means we must stop waiting for somebody else to make things happen for us or to tell us what to do, and begin to see ourselves as being capable of becoming empowered by our Father in Heaven to act for ourselves.

I believe that President Romney had both men and women in mind when he said:

"Doctrine and Covenants 29:34-35 tells us there is no such thing as a temporal commandment, that all commandments are spiritual. It also tells us that man is to be 'an agent unto himself.' Man cannot be an agent unto himself if he is not self-reliant. Herein we see that independence and self-reliance are critical keys to our spiritual growth. Whenever we get into a situation which threatens our self-reliance, we will find our freedom threatened as well. If we increase our dependence, we will find an immediate decrease in our freedom to act.

"Thus far, we should have learned that self-reliance is a prerequisite to the complete freedom to act." [^9]

As we become prepared and empowered, the Lord can pluck us out of His scabbard and use us wherever and whenever He needs us. A few years back my sister, then living in another state, felt impressed to volunteer for the crisis line. She was told by the counselors that all she needed was to care; they could teach her what to do. The requirement was that when she was "on duty," she had to stay at home and keep her telephone free. She suggested that other women in her stake might get involved as a natural extension of compassionate service, and the Relief Society presidents favored such participation. The advisor to the Relief Society discouraged their involvement; however, the Spirit continued to prick my sister to become involved, and so she did. At one of the monthly crisis center training meetings someone made derogatory remarks about the Church and the behavior of its male members. My sister spoke up and defended the Church and the men in it. She could have defended neither the Church nor its male members had she not been involved in the crisis program and present at that meeting. We need to learn confidence in following the Spirit, and to have faith that our brethren, after recovering from the initial shock of our acting on our own, will see fit to support us in our righteous endeavors.

Another example that has touched me recently is Jihan Sadat, a very impressive woman who has done much to further the cause of women and children in Egypt. She didn't come to her present status suddenly. She married at age fifteen, had four children fairly quickly, and lived a very traditional life. For years she took care of the house and children and stayed aloof from her husband's affairs. Her first serious ventures out of the home came during and just after the Six Days' War when she did volunteer work in the hospitals. Later she left home to work in villages and suburbs devastated by poverty. By then her husband was president of the Egyptian Parliament, and his understanding and tolerance of her new activities outside the home came very slowly. In the process, however, she became his confidante. They grew together, working for each other's causes, sharing each other's lives. She truly became a companion and a help-meet for her husband. Through her influence on him and through her own efforts since his assassination, she has done much to improve the status of women and children in her country. She didn't plan to step outside the home; she simply broadened her concerns and, therefore, redefined her home as the whole of Egypt.

Again, her kind of service should not be compared to the value of a woman who serves by shopping for a sick friend or who reads to and plays with her children or who cares for an aging parent. All are valuable. The differences should not imply a defect. We should not judge ourselves or each other on what we see with our mortal eyes. God in His infinite wisdom will judge us, and as with the widow's mite, each act of private care and human kindness will weigh heavily on the scales of eternal justice.

According to the apostle Paul, we need to be both hungry and filled. [^10] Home, therefore, should be a place of refuge; it also needs to be a place where we are pricked to grow, to reach out, to connect. Yet, in order to grow, we must leave our comfort zones. We are faced with a paradox: on the one hand we need to be at home wherever we find ourselves; yet, on the other hand, we need to be so committed to growth toward our eternal home that we will never feel completely at home until we get there.

It is important that you understand that I am not advocating a single course of action here for anyone. Nor am I advocating that a woman abandon her responsibilities at home. What I am saying is that it is important for you to view realistically the vast changes that have taken place in women's lives in our lifetime and be flexible to the individual changes that will take place in your own. I hope that you will see yourselves and others in expanded ways, and then do what you can, when you can, the best you can, and that you support each other in your differences as well as in your similarities, and that you expand your vision of what home is. President Joseph Fielding Smith frequently paid honor to our Mother Eve for her courage in making the choice that led the way to our having this vital mortal experience, without which we could not progress to become like—or live eternally with—our Heavenly Parents. She moved out of her comfortable and beautiful Eden and took on the lone and dreary world for our sake. The world is our, as it was Eve's, God-given home. We have only, as did Eve, to move in.

LDS Women: At Home and Beyond Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Stephen J. Bahr received his Ph.D. in sociology from Washington State University. He is a professor of sociology at BYU where he also heads the Family and Demographic Research Institute. He has served as associate editor of the Journal of Family Issues and has previously served as president of the Utah Council on Family Relations and associate editor of the Journal of Marriage and the Family. His Church callings have included stake high councilor, stake physical activities director, teacher, and scoutmaster. He and his wife, Carol, have six children.
[^2] "Hospital Offers Treatment for Women with Prescription-Drug Dependencies," Deseret News, 6 Sept. 1987.
[^3] Brigham Young, "Eternal Punishment—'Mormonism,' &c.," in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (Liverpool: Latter-day Saints Book Depot, 1853-86), 9:150.
[^4] Ezra Taft Benson, in Conference Report, Apr. 1965, p. 121.
[^5] Spencer W. Kimball, "Let Us Move Forward and Upward," Ensign, May 1979, p. 82.
[^6] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Role of Righteous Women," Ensign, Nov. 1979, p. 104.
[^7] See Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Co., 1976), pp. 227, 229.
[^8] Marion G. Romney, "The Celestial Nature of Self-Reliance," Ensign, June 1984, pp. 5-6.
[^9] See Philippians 4:12.
[^10] Ida Smith, founding director of the Women's Research Institute at Brigham Young University, is currently coordinator of Student/Alumni Programs at BYU. She received her B.A. from the University of Utah and is pursuing a Ph.D. with the Union Graduate School. Previously she worked for fifteen years as office manager with the National Association of Manufacturers. A popular and widely traveled lecturer, she has served in various Church capacities including ward and stake Young Women presidencies, Gospel Doctrine and Relief Society teacher, and member of a BYU Relief Society stake board.
