Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

Family Structure and Its Influence on Family Dynamics

Stephen J. Bahr [^1]

Families come in a variety of forms. Some have two parents, others only one. In some families both parents are employed in the labor force, while others depend on one parent for economic support. Families differ greatly in size, sex composition, and spacing of children. These basic differences in family structure influence interaction among family members.

Family Size, Spacing, and Birth Order

One important aspect of family structure is the size of the family. Growing up as an only child is much different from growing up with one or more siblings. A child with five siblings has a very different environment than a child with only one sibling. Also, birth order and the length of time between births may affect a child. Having a sibling five years older is much different than having a sibling a year older, and being the youngest of three children is quite different from being the oldest of three. How much effect does family size, spacing, and birth order have on the development of children?

First, let us examine what we know about only children. There is a popular stereotype that the only child is alone, unhappy, and maladjusted. There is no evidence to support this stereotype. Glenn and Hoppe (1984) estimated the effect of being an only child on eight dimensions of psychological well-being. They found that, although the differences were relatively small, only children scored higher than others on all eight dimensions. Mott and Haurin (1982) found no unique advantage to being an only child in terms of intelligence, educational progression, career, family, or social-psychological outcomes. Their data did suggest that being an only child was preferable to coming from a large family. According to Kidwell (1978) only children perceive greater parental affection than firstborns, and Blake (1981) maintained that only children do not suffer from lack of siblings. On the other hand, Bell and Avery (1985) noted that only children regard parents as more intrusive than do children with siblings. Overall, there appear to be some advantages and disadvantages to being an only child, but the overall effect on children is very small (Bell and Avery, 1985).

Popular wisdom in the press and among professionals is that large families are bad for children. Many assume that the more children there are, the less parents are able to provide personal and economic resources to help each child develop. Because parental resources are finite, the greater the number of children, the fewer interpersonal and material resources there are for each child. This has been termed the "dilution model" by Blake (1981).

There is some evidence to support the "dilution model." Blake (1981, 1985) noted that children from large families tend to have less ability, lower grades, and lower levels of educational achievement. In a review of existing research Heer (1985) concluded that family size is related to educational attainment, although it has relatively small effects on occupational status and earnings. In a provocative article titled "Dumber by the Dozen," Zajonc (1975) maintained that intelligence declines with family size. To have smart children, Zajonc suggested that parents have few children and space them far apart. According to Rahav (1982) delinquents tend to come from larger families because parental involvement and control are reduced as family size increases.

Economic well-being is negatively associated with family size. As the number of children in a family increases, the family standard of living tends to decrease (Espenshade et al., 1983). Delayed childbearing along with small family size may have long-term economic benefits, according to Hofferth (1984).

Kidwell (1981) observed that adolescents perceived their parents to be more punitive and less supportive as family size increased. As space between siblings increased, perceptions of punitiveness decreased and perceptions of supportiveness increased. Kidwell (1981, 1982) also reported that middleborns, compared to firstborns or laterborns, had lower self-esteem and perceived their parents to be more punitive and less reasonable and supportive.

Other research, however, suggests that the apparent effects of family size, spacing, and birth order may be artifacts of other variables. Heer (1985) identified methodological limitations that may have affected results of many studies. Price et al. (1984) have shown that the formulas used by Zajonc (1975) are logically invalid and that his model's ability to predict intelligence is a mathematical artifact. Mare and Chen (1986) maintained that some of Blake's (1981, 1985) results may be artifactual. Mednick et al. (1985) investigated the relationship of family size and birth order with seventeen measures of children's intellectual, psychosocial, and physical growth. The effects of family size and birth order were weak. Family size was related to only one measure of intellectual performance and to none of the psychosocial variables. Galbraith (1982, 1983) demonstrated that individual differences in intelligence were not related significantly to family size, birth order, or spacing. In a comprehensive review of existing research on birth order, Ernst and Angst (1983) concluded that birth order has little or no influence on personality. Finally, Bell and Avery (1985) found that the effects of family size, birth order, and spacing on parent-adolescent relationships were small.

Given the conflicting results, what can be concluded about the effects on family dynamics of family size, spacing, and birth order? Recent research that has controlled for other relevant variables indicates that the effects are small. It has not been demonstrated that children from large families tend to be inferior or superior to those from small families, or that close spacing of births is better or worse than wide spacing, or that there is a disadvantage or advantage to being a first or last born. Additional research is needed to resolve the currently inconsistent findings.

Sex Composition

Another important structural determinant of family interaction is sex composition. The family I grew up in illustrates this well. There were five boys and one girl in our family, the girl being the youngest.

In American society there has been a tendency to divide family labor according to gender. Females are more likely to be assigned household tasks such as cooking, sewing, and cleaning, while males are more likely to do outside work. In our family, however, there were no girls available to whom household tasks were assigned, since my sister was too young to help initially. My mother was not about to let us sit around while she did all the household work. As a consequence, we all had to help with household tasks, which were not defined as "woman's work," but simply as family work that needed to be done. Having no girls available affected the family division of labor and our attitudes toward household work.

Dual-Earner Families

Another important element in family structure is the employment status of the parents. One of the major social changes during the past fifty years has been the increase in labor force participation among married women. In 1940 only 9 percent of mothers were employed compared to 57 percent in 1980 (Hoffman, 1984). As the proportion of mothers who are employed has increased, some have expressed concern for its possible effects on children. How does the employment of the mother affect children?

From World War II to the present there have been numerous studies exploring the possible effects of the employment of mothers on their children. Most of the studies have found that the employment of the mother, by itself, has little effect on children. It depends on the mother, the child, and the situation.

This is illustrated by the experiences of three adolescents. Jane said that when her mother went to work her family situation improved. Her mother liked working and always had interesting things to talk about. Jane's mother seemed to be happier and have higher self-esteem when she worked. She became more confident and informed. And, her working enabled the family to be more financially secure. Jane was able to get clothes and do other things she wanted (like take piano lessons) that she had not been able to do before her mother became employed. Jane said her mother spent just as much time with the children after she went to work; in addition, the quality of the time improved.

Conversely, Linda hated it when her mother went to work. Before she began working, Linda's mother spent much time doing things with her children. After becoming employed, however, her mother usually came home from work tired emotionally and physically and, thus, no longer felt like doing things with the children. She not only spent less time with them, but the time she did spend was lower in quality. Linda felt neglected, and her relationship with her mother deteriorated somewhat because of her mother's employment.

A third adolescent, Ken, resented his mother's calling as Relief Society president. His mother was not employed, but she might as well have been. She was seldom there after school, and Ken felt as if his mother put everything into her church responsibilities and did not have time or attention for him.

These three examples show how employment of the mother may have positive or negative consequences, depending on the situation. Whether a mother is employed or not, the critical factor is the quality of the parent-child interaction. Employment may help, hinder, or have no effect on that interaction. Also, church and community involvements may have negative effects on children in some circumstances. Just because a woman is not employed does not make her a better mother. A mother may be physically in the home but give precious little time and attention to her children. This fact was noted by another adolescent, Jed, who said when his mother went to work it did not affect him one way or the other because he didn't have a very close relationship with her anyway. Her working made little difference in the amount of time and attention he received from her.

The research on employed mothers is consistent with the above examples. Most of the research has failed to identify differences between the children of employed and non-employed women. Children of employed mothers do just as well in school as children whose mothers stay at home. In fact, in lower class families, there is some evidence that children do better in school if the mother is employed (Moore and Sawhill, 1984). Several studies have found that when the mother is employed the children, particularly daughters, tend to develop less traditional sex role attitudes and value female achievement (Hoffman, 1974, 1984; Lamb, 1984; Moore and Sawhill, 1984). Children of employed women may become somewhat more responsible and independent, and fathers sometimes do more child care and housekeeping if the mother is employed (Hoffman, 1984; Moore and Sawhill, 1984).

Over the years one of the concerns has been whether very young children develop adequate attachment to their mother when she is employed. Although some scholars have found no significant effects of maternal employment on infant-mother attachment, several recent studies suggest that the likelihood of insecure attachment increases when the mother is employed (Lamb, 1984). Nevertheless, Lamb (1984) and Sroufe and Ward (1984) maintain that maternal employment does not necessarily have an adverse impact on infant-mother attachment, and that the quality of the infant-mother interaction is the critical variable.

In summary, the mother's employment may increase independence and responsibility in children and make their sex role attitudes less traditional. In some cases fathers may become more involved in child care and housekeeping. Among infants, maternal employment may in some cases interfere with infant-mother attachment. Nevertheless, the major conclusion from research is that the effects of maternal employment on children depend on a variety of factors, including motives for employment, salary, satisfaction with job, flexibility of hours, attitudes of husband, adequacy of child care, age of children, help with housework, and socioeconomic status (Moore and Sawhill, 1984).

It is the situation and meaning of employment that makes the difference, not employment per se. If a mother is dissatisfied with staying home, she may become a more adequate mother if she works. Women who are dissatisfied with staying home and stay home only out of "duty" tend to do poorly as mothers (Sroufe and Ward, 1984). On the other hand, if a woman's job leaves her tired and unresponsive to her children, her employment may be harmful to the children. The research is conclusive in showing that the quality of parent-child interaction is the critical factor, not whether or not a mother is employed.

Single-Parent Families

One of the dramatic changes in family structure during the past twenty years has been the increase in single-parent homes. In 1970 about 85 percent of children were living in a two-parent home, compared to only 74 percent of children in 1984 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1985). More than half of all children will live in a single-parent home at some point before they reach age eighteen (Bumpass, 1984a; Hofferth, 1985; Furstenberg and Nord, 1982). Hofferth (1985) estimates that white children born in 1980 will spend 25 percent of their childhood in a single-parent home, while black children will spend 44 percent of their childhood in a single-parent home. A large majority of children are in single-parent homes as the result of divorce, and most children in single-parent homes live with their mother.

What effect does living in a single-parent home have on children? Some maintain that it has negative consequences for children, while others counter that it is not the single-parenthood that hurts children, but inadequate parenting. Let's look at the evidence.

When children from single-parent homes are compared with children from two-parent homes, it appears that children from single-parent homes are not as well adjusted. Adolescents from single-parent homes take more health risks, such as intemperate drinking and not fastening seat belts (Saucier and Ambert, 1983). They tend to start dating earlier and are more likely to have premarital sex, which is related to pregnancy and out-of-wedlock childbearing (Coleman et al., 1985; Newcomer and Udry, 1987). Further, they are more susceptible to pressure from friends to engage in deviant behavior (Steinberg, 1987).

Children, and particularly boys, from single-parent homes have poorer social adjustment and do not perform as well academically as children from intact homes (Guidubaldi et al., 1986; Hodges et al., 1984). Differences in social and academic adjustment are evident even after six years (Guidubaldi et al., 1986).

Kellam et al. (1977) found that children's social and psychological adjustments were related to family structure. They examined the adjustment of school age children who lived in four different types of families: (1) two natural parents, (2) mother-grandmother, (3) mother-stepfather, and (4) mother alone. Children in mother-alone homes were at greatest risk for maladjustment, while children who lived with both natural parents had the best adjustment. Children in mother-grandmother homes did almost as well as children from intact homes, however, while children in stepparent homes did almost as poorly as children in mother-alone homes. Kellam et al. (1977) concluded that remarriage may not help adjustment, and that mother aloneness was more important than father absence.

Children from single-parent homes evaluate their parents more negatively than do children from two-parent homes (Parish and Kappes, 1980). Fathers, who usually are the noncustodial parent in divorce, are rated particularly poorly by their children. Amato (1987) reported that children rated their mothers similarly in support and punishment regardless of family type. Children in one-parent homes, however, rated their fathers as less supportive and controlling than did children from intact homes.

Glenn and Kramer (1985) suggest that the negative effects of divorce may be long lasting. They found that young adults whose parents had divorced rated their happiness and life satisfaction somewhat lower than adults whose parents had not divorced.

Although the above evidence suggests that single-parent homes may place children at risk, there is considerable evidence that it is the quality of parent-child interaction rather than number of parents that is important for children. When viewed cross-culturally, the one-parent family is not necessarily pathological or inferior (Bilge and Kaufman, 1983). Lamb (1978) maintains that divorce is not necessarily harmful to children's personality development if the parents are willing and able to care for a child.

Recent research suggests that some of the reported differences between children from single-parent and two-parent homes may be spurious because relevant variables have not been controlled (Blechman, 1982; Kanoy and Cunningham, 1984). For example, differences between children from divorced and intact families were reduced substantially when income was controlled (Guidubaldi et al., 1986). Goldstein (1982) found that when parental education and income were controlled, father absence was not related to academic performance. A review of the literature by Wells and Rankin (1985) revealed that the relationship between broken homes and delinquency was weak.

Several scholars have found that it is the amount of parental conflict rather than disruption per se that affects child adjustment. Emery (1982) concluded that much of the association between divorce and child behavior problems may be explained by parental conflict. Luepnitz (1978) maintained that the stress of divorce on children was due more to the turmoil involved in parental conflict than living in a one-parent home. Long (1986) found that self-esteem of daughters was related to parental discord but not to family structure. Parental discord appeared to lower self-esteem while parental separation did not. Other research is consistent with these conclusions (Nye, 1957; Hess and Camara, 1979).

What may be concluded about the effects on children of living in a one-parent home? It appears that living in a one-parent home is not, by itself, detrimental to children; however, children in single-parent homes may be at risk for several reasons. First, parental conflict is often associated with divorce, and severe parental conflict has been shown to be detrimental to children.

Second, raising children is not easy, and having two parents may decrease parental stress and increase the quality of parental monitoring. Kellam et al. (1977) observed that the aloneness of the mother was more important than the absence of the father. Role overload is a common complaint of single parents (Bahr, 1982).

Third, economic problems are associated with marital disruption. Women usually get custody of the children, and a high proportion have only marginal incomes. As noted above, when income is controlled, the negative effects of single parenthood diminish; but the fact is that a large majority of single parents and their children have very low incomes (Weitzman, 1985). Divorce itself may not hurt children, but divorce reduces women's income, and a low income negatively affects children.

Finally, marital disruption may decrease an adult's capacity to parent. Wallerstein (1985) suggests that marital disruption is often followed by less sensitivity, less talk, less play, less supportiveness, and less overall parent-child interaction. This may not be a necessary result of divorce, but Wallerstein found that it is fairly common.

Remarriage

A common occurrence among single-parent families is remarriage. About three-fourths of all divorced persons eventually remarry (Glick, 1984). In 20 percent of currently married couples at least one spouse has been previously divorced. Given that half of current marriages will end in divorce and three-fourths of divorced persons will remarry, we can expect that more than one-third (.5 X .75 = .375) of all persons who marry will experience a remarriage.

Are remarried people as happy as people in first marriages? Does the stress associated with divorce make it difficult for individuals to succeed in a second marriage? Available evidence suggests that remarried persons tend to be as happy and well adjusted as persons in first marriages. Fine et al. (1986) compared individuals in first marriages and remarriages on several measures of well-being, including anxiety, depression, marital satisfaction, and child problems. They found no differences between individuals in first marriages and remarriages on any of the dimensions.

Buehler et al. (1986) made comparisons among four remarriage groups: (1) neither former spouse had remarried; (2) only husband had remarried; (3) only wife had remarried; (4) both former spouses had remarried. They compared the four groups on self-esteem, parental satisfaction, divorce-related stress, and economic well-being. There were no differences among the four groups on any of the variables except economic well-being. Women who had remarried had higher economic well-being than women who had not remarried. Furthermore, women who had remarried, but whose former husband had not remarried, tended to have higher economic well-being than women in the group in which both spouses had remarried. This suggests that remarrying improves the economic situation for women. On the other hand, when the husband remarries, it tends to hurt the economic status of the former wife.

Longitudinal research by Day and Bahr (1986) is consistent with the findings of Buehler et al. (1987). Per capita income of women increased substantially upon remarriage, while the per capita income of men decreased substantially upon remarriage.

Weingarten (1980) found the individuals in remarriages were similar to individuals in first marriages with regard to marital adjustment, parental adjustment, and overall well-being. Albrecht (1979) observed high levels of marital satisfaction among his sample of remarried persons. Using three national surveys, Glenn and Weaver (1977) found no differences in the marital satisfaction of men in first marriages and remarriages. Women in first marriages had somewhat higher marital satisfaction than women in remarriages, although the differences were not large.

The major problems encountered by remarried couples concern children and money (Ihinger-Tallman and Pasley, 1987). In that sense they are no different from individuals in first marriages. Stepparenting and visitation may make child rearing stressful, while distributing resources to both one's former and current marriage is bound to create conflicts.

There is also some evidence that boundary maintenance may be a problem. By boundary maintenance we mean clear definitions of what a family is and whom it includes. Among remarried couples there may be some ambiguity regarding who is the family, since there is a blending of individuals from previous marriages (Ihinger-Tallman and Pasley, 1987).

Another problem of remarried families is loyalty conflicts. Children may feel disloyal to one parent if they side with the other during a conflict. There may also be feelings of loyalty involved in interactions between stepparent and stepchild.

What can be concluded from these studies? Taken together, the research is remarkably consistent in showing few differences between first marriages and remarriages in marital satisfaction and overall well-being; however, the blending of individuals from previous marriages may create some stress.

About one-sixth of all children in the United States live in a remarried family (Cherlin and McCarthy, 1985). About half of all children whose mother divorces will experience the remarriage of their mother within five years (Bumpass, 1984b).

In children's literature stepparents are often viewed in a negative light. For example, the stepmother mistreated Cinderella. How do children feel about stepparents and how do they adjust to remarriages? Fine (1986) compared the views of college students from intact, single-parent, and stepparent homes. He found that stepparents, particularly stepmothers, were viewed less positively among all three groups; however, students from single-parent and remarried families did not view stepmothers as negatively as students from intact families. Fine's research suggests that exposure to stepparents may decrease negative stereotypes and increase appreciation for stepparents.

Available evidence suggests that living in a remarried family is difficult for children. As noted earlier, Kellam et al. (1977) found that children in mother/stepfather families were similar to children in mother alone families and had significantly lower social adjustment and psychological well-being than children in mother/grandmother or mother/father families.

The research by White and Booth (1985) showed that children are a significant stress among remarried couples. Because of the stress, teenagers living in stepfamilies tend to leave the home somewhat earlier than teenagers living with two natural parents. There is also evidence that rates of child abuse are substantially higher in remarried families than in two-natural-parent homes (Wilson and Daly, 1985).

Overall, children in remarried families tend to have somewhat poorer adjustment than children in first marriages. The relationship between stepparent and stepchild is often somewhat strained (Ihinger-Tallman and Pasley, 1987).

Summary and Conclusions

I have made six major points in this paper. Let me summarize them briefly. First, recent research indicates that the effects of family size, spacing, and birth order on the intellectual and social competence of children are relatively small. Second, age and sex composition of the family influences our attitudes and the way family tasks are assigned. Third, the effects of the mother's employment are complex and may be positive, negative, or neutral, depending on the family situation. Increased money and father-child interaction may be benefits. Decreased mother-child interaction is a possible cost. Employment of the mother does not necessarily result in poorer mother-child interaction. Fourth, living in a single-parent home may increase the risk of maladjustment in children because parental conflict, role overload, diminished parenting, and economic problems often accompany single parenthood. Fifth, there are few differences between first marriages and remarriages in marital satisfaction and overall well-being of the partners. Finally, children in remarried families tend to have somewhat poorer adjustment than children in first marriages.

When applying these findings to actual decisions, one should keep in mind that findings from social research are based on general trends and may not always apply to a particular individual or family. In addition, scientifically based conclusions are always tentative and may need to be modified as new evidence becomes available. The research on family size provides a good example of how conclusions change as new evidence accumulates. Until a few years ago, the scientific evidence overwhelmingly showed that large families were harmful to children intellectually and socially. Recent studies have shown that previous research did not adequately control for relevant background variables and that, with appropriate controls, family size has little effect on the overall well-being of children.

The above findings have implications for families, particularly LDS families. The image portrayed in public media is that large families are detrimental to children. The research shows that this is not necessarily the case, and the effects of family size and birth order have been shown to be small. It seems that the critical factor in family interaction is the quality of the relationship between husband and wife and parent and child, and not the number of children that exist. It is also well to remember that in the sociological sense, large families are relatively small groups. On the other hand, the existing research has not examined all facets of family size and how it may affect family interaction. There is no question that raising children takes a tremendous amount of money, organization, and energy, and larger numbers of children increase the money, energy, and organization that parents must contribute. From personal experience I know that it is much more difficult to put four pre-schoolers to bed than one. Parental time, energy, and money are finite resources, and it seems unwise to assume that family size has no effect just because the research has not demonstrated strong effects.

Similarly, the decision to have two parents who are employed is complex and depends on the situation. In some cases, the effect may clearly be negative, while in others, it may have great beneficial effects for children and parents. In still others, the overall effect may be neutral. Each family must decide what is best for them, given their particular situation, personalities, and needs. The examples presented in this chapter show that in some situations mother's employment could clearly hurt the children. In other situations, it appeared to be very beneficial for the children. The research clearly shows that it is incorrect to make a general statement regarding the employment of the mother that applies to all families.

The findings on single-parent families have important implications for the increasing number of single-parent families in our society. Living in a single-parent home may increase the risk of maladjustment in children because parental conflict, role overload, diminished parenting, and economic problems often accompany single-parenthood. Therefore, it is important that single parents receive social and economic support to decrease role overload and economic distress. Separated and divorced parents should be encouraged to keep their children out of their conflicts. Intense parental conflict has been shown to be one of the major risks of a divorce for children. Furthermore, single parents need to be more sensitive and supportive of their children. Diminished parenting is a chief hazard for children of divorce, but it is not inevitable. When single parents are warm, sensitive, and available, their children tend to have normal social and cognitive development (Crouter et al., 1984).

Finally, it is important that couples who remarry take into account the effects of their remarriage on their children. Living in a remarried family is not easy for minor children and may be stressful to the parent but it is particularly so to the children.

References

Albrecht, Stan L. 1979. "Correlates of Marital Happiness among the Remarried." Journal of Marriage and the Family 41: 857-67.

Amato, Paul R. 1987. "Family Processes in One-Parent, Stepparent, and Intact Families: The Child's Point of View." Journal of Marriage and the Family 49: 327-37.

Bahr, Stephen J. 1982. "The Pains and Joys of Divorce: A Survey of Mormons." Family Perspective 16 (4): 191-200.

Bell, Nancy J., and Arthur W. Avery. 1985. "Family Structure and Parent-Adolescent Relationships: Does Family Structure Really Make a Difference?" Journal of Marriage and the Family 47: 503-8.

Bilge, Barbara, and Gladis Kaufman. 1983. "Children of Divorce and One-Parent Families: Cross-Cultural Perspectives." Family Relations 32: 59-71.

Blake, Judith. 1985. "Number of Siblings and Educational Mobility." American Sociological Review 50: 84-94.

Blake, Judith. 1981. "Family Size and the Quality of Children." Demography 18 (4): 421-42.

Blechman, Elaine A. 1982. "Are Children with One Parent at Psychological Risk? A Methodological Review." Journal of Marriage and the Family 44: 179-95.

Buehler, Cheryl, M. Janice Hogan, Beatrice Robinson, and Robert J. Levy. 1986. "Remarriage Following Divorce: Stressors and Well-Being of Custodial and Noncustodial Parents." Journal of Family Issues 7 (4): 405-20.

Bumpass, Larry L. 1984a. "Some Characteristics of Children's Second Families." The American Journal of Sociology 90 (3): 608-23.

Bumpass, Larry L. 1984b. "Children and Marital Disruption: A Replication and Update." Demography 21 (1): 71-82.

Cherlin, Andrew, and James McCarthy. 1985. "Remarried Couple Households: Data from the June 1980 Current Population Survey." Journal of Marriage and the Family 47: 23-30.

Coleman, Marilyn, Lawrence H. Ganong, and Patricia Ellis. 1985. "Family Structure and Dating Behavior of Adolescents." Adolescence 20: 537-43.

Crouter, Ann C., Jay Belsky, and Graham B. Spanier. 1984. "The Family Context of Child Development: Divorce and Maternal Employment." Annals of Child Development 1: 201-38.

Day, Randal D., and Stephen J. Bahr. 1986. "Income Changes Following Divorce and Remarriage." Journal of Divorce 9 (3): 75-88.

Emery, Robert E. 1982. "Interparental Conflict and the Children of Discord and Divorce." Psychological Bulletin 92 (2): 310-30.

Ernst, Cecile, and Jules Angst. 1983. Birth Order: Its Influence on Personality. New York: Springer-Verlag.

Espenshade, Thomas J., Gloria Kamenske, and Boone A. Turchi. "Family Size and Economic Welfare." Family Planning Perspectives 15 (6): 289-94.

Fine, Mark A. 1986. "Perceptions of Stepparents: Variation in Stereotypes As a Function of Current Family Structure." Journal of Marriage and the Family 48: 537-43.

Furstenberg, Frank F., Jr., and C. W. Nord. 1982. "The Life Course of Children of Divorce: Marital Disruption and Parental Contact." Family Planning Perspectives 14: 211-12.

Galbraith, Richard C. 1983. "Individual Differences in Intelligence: A Reappraisal of the Confluence Model." Intelligence 7: 185-94.

Galbraith, Richard C. 1982. "Sibling Spacing and Intellectual Development: A Closer Look at the Confluence Models." Developmental Psychology 18 (2): 151-73.

Glenn, Norval D., and Sue Keir Hoppe. 1984. "Only Children As Adults: Psychological Well-Being." Journal of Family Issues 5: 363-82.

Glenn, Norval D., and Kathryn B. Kramer. 1985. "The Psychological Well-Being of Adult Children of Divorce." Journal of Marriage and the Family 47: 905-12.

Glenn, Norval D., and Charles N. Weaver. 1977. "The Marital Happiness of Remarried Divorced Persons." Journal of Marriage and the Family 39: 331-37.

Glick, Paul C. 1984. "Marriage, Divorce, and Living Arrangements." Journal of Family Issues 5 (1): 7-26.

Goldstein, Harris S. 1982. "Fathers' Absence and Cognitive Development of 12- to 17-Year-Olds." Psychological Reports 51: 843-48.

Guidubaldi, John, Joseph D. Perry, and Bonnie K. Nastasi. 1986. "Long-Term Impact of Divorce on Children: A Report of a Two- and Three-Year Follow-up of a National Sample." Paper presented at the 63rd annual meeting of the American Orthopsychiatric Association, Chicago, April.

Heer, David M. 1985. "Effects of Sibling Number on Child Outcome." Annual Review of Sociology 11: 27-47.

Hess, Robert D., and Kathleen A. Camara. 1979. "Post-Divorce Family Relationships As Mediating Factors in the Consequences of Divorce for Children." Journal of Social Issues 35: 79-96.

Hofferth, Sandra L. 1985. "Updating Children's Life Course." Journal of Marriage and the Family 47 (1): 93-115.

Hofferth, Sandra L. 1984. "Long-Term Economic Consequences for Women of Delayed Childbearing and Reduced Family Size." Demography 21 (2): 141-55.

Hoffman, Lois Wladis. 1984. "Work, Family, and the Socialization of the Child." Pp. 223-82 in R. D. Parke, R. N. Emde, H. P. McAdoo, and G. P. Sackett (eds.), Review of Child Development Research: Volume 7, The Family. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hoffman, Lois Wladis. 1974. "Effects on Child." Pp. 126-66 in Lois W. Hoffman and F. Ivan Nye (eds.), Working Mothers. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.

Ihinger-Tallman, Marilyn, and Kay Pasley. 1987. Remarriage. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.

Kanoy, Korrel W., and Jo Lynn Cunningham. 1984. "Consensus or Confusion in Research on Children and Divorce: Conceptual and Methodological Issues." Journal of Divorce 7 (4): 45-71.

Kellam, Sheppard, Margaret E. Ensminger, and R. Jay Turner. 1977. "Family Structure and the Mental Health of Children." Archives of General Psychiatry 34: 1012-22.

Kidwell, Jeannie S. 1982. "The Neglected Birth Order: Middleborns." Journal of Marriage and the Family 44: 225-35.

Kidwell, Jeannie S. 1981. "Number of Siblings, Sibling Spacing, Sex, and Birth Order: Their Effects on Perceived Parent-Adolescent Relationships." Journal of Marriage and the Family 43: 315-32.

Kidwell, Jeannie S. 1978. "Adolescents' Perceptions of Parental Affect: An Investigation of Only Children vs. Firstborns and the Effect of Spacing." Journal of Population 1: 148-66.

Lamb, Michael E. 1984. "Fathers, Mothers, and Child Care in the 1980s: Family Influences on Child Development." Pp. 61-88 in Kathryn M. Borman, Daisy Quarm, and Sarah Gideonse (eds.), Women in the Workplace: Effects on Families. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex Publishing Corporation.

Long, Barbara H. 1986. "Parental Discord vs. Family Structure: Effects of Divorce on the Self-Esteem of Daughters." Journal of Youth & Adolescence 15: 19-27.

Luepnitz, Deborah Anna. 1978. "Children of Divorce: A Review of the Psychological Literature." Law and Human Behavior 2: 167-79.

Mare, Robert D., and Meichu D. Chen. 1986. "Further Evidence on Sibship Size and Educational Stratification." American Sociological Review 51: 403-12.

Mednick, Birgitte R., Robert L. Baker, and Dennis Hocevar. 1985. "Family Size and Birth Order Correlates of Intellectual, Psychosocial, and Physical Growth." Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 31 (1): 67-84.

Moore, Kristin A., and Isabel V. Sawhill. 1984. "Implication of Women's Employment for Home and Family Life." Pp. 153-71 in Patricia Voydanoff (ed.), Work & Family. Palo Alto, Calif.: Mayfield Publishing Co.

Mott, Frank L., and R. Jean Haurin. 1982. "Being an Only Child: Effects on Educational Progression and Career Orientation." Journal of Family Issues 3: 575-93.

Newcomer, Susan, and J. Richard Udry. 1987. "Parental Marital Status Effects on Adolescent Sexual Behavior." Journal of Marriage and the Family 49: 235-40.

Nye, F. Ivan. 1957. "Child Adjustment in Broken and in Unhappy Unbroken Homes." Marriage and Family Living 19 (November): 356-61.

Parish, Thomas S., and Bruno M. Kappes. 1980. "Impact of Father Loss on the Family." Social Behavior and Personality 8 (1): 107-12.

Price, Gary Glen, Daniel J. Walsh, and William R. Vilberg. 1984. "The Confluence Model's Good Predictions of Mental Age Beg the Question." Psychological Bulletin 96 (1): 195-200.

Rahav, Giora. 1982. "Family Size and Delinquency." Sociology and Social Research 66 (1): 42-51.

Saucier, Jean-Francois, and Anne-Marie Ambert. 1983. "Parental Marital Status and Adolescents' Health-Risk Behavior." Adolescence 18: 403-11.

Sroufe, L. Alan, and Mary J. Ward. 1984. "The Importance of Early Care." Pp. 35-60 in Kathryn M. Borman, Daisy Quarm, and Sarah Gideonse (eds.), Women in the Workplace: Effects on Families. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex Publishing Corporation.

Steinberg, Laurence. 1987. "Single Parents, Stepparents, and the Susceptibility of Adolescents to Antisocial Peer Pressure." Child Development 58: 269-75.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1985. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1986 (106th ed.). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Wallerstein, Judith S. 1985. "The Overburdened Child: Some Long-Term Consequences of Divorce." Social Work 30 (2): 116-23.

Weingarten, Helen. 1980. "Remarriage and Well-Being." Journal of Family Issues 1 (4): 533-59.

Weitzman, Lenore J. 1985. The Divorce Revolution. New York: The Free Press.

Wells, L. Edward, and Joseph H. Rankin. 1985. "Broken Homes and Juvenile Delinquency: An Empirical Review." Criminal Justice Abstracts 17 (2): 249-72.

White, Lynn K., and Alan Booth. 1985. "The Quality and Stability of Remarriages: The Role of Stepchildren." American Sociological Review 50: 689-98.

Wilson, Margo, and Martin Daly. 1985. "Risk of Maltreatment of Children Living with Step-Parents." To appear in R. Gelles & J. Lancaster (eds.), Biosocial Perspectives on Child Abuse. New York: Aldine.

Zajonc, Robert B. 1975. "Dumber by the Dozen." Psychology Today (January): 37-43.

Family Structure Note

---
Notas:
[^1] Money As Security. Those people who identify money with security view it as their safety net in a hostile environment. The larger the net, the safer they feel. They pay bills promptly and rarely use credit beyond what can be repaid in thirty days. They spend cautiously, often with a feeling of guilt or loss. Thus, consumption decisions are made carefully in order to get the most possible for the loss of each dollar. Sales and bargains are important because they add to the illusion of saving money instead of losing it. To such persons, money is for saving, not spending. People of this money-type often come from a background of insecurity, either their own or their parents'. Those with money in short supply as a result perhaps of divorce or a death and those who experienced the Great Depression often fit into this category. The fear that everyone is out to get their money is an extreme expression of the worldview held by persons who see money as security. Need-Driven People: Survivors and Sustainers. People whose economic activities and orientations to money are driven by need rather than choice are known as survivors and sustainers. Incomes are usually below or slightly exceeding poverty levels; many are minorities; most are either young families (often fatherless) or individuals or old people; more are women than men. They make up about 11 percent of the population. Milton Rokeach, Beliefs, Attitude, and Values (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1968).
