Mary E. Stovall, No specific author, Carol Cornwall Madsen, As Women of Faith: Talks Selected from the BYU Women's Conferences ( 1989)

Money, Values, and Family Dynamics

Kay P. Edwards [^1]

Why a discussion about money and values? Because values provide direction for efforts to acquire and use money. In other words, values influence what we will do and what we will not do relative to the acquisition and use of money.

Money is a tool which facilitates economic exchange. According to the traditional economic definition, money is a store of value (expressed in terms of the goods and services it can command), a measure of value (expressed in relationships between goods and services), and a means of exchange (easing the transfer of goods and services from one owner to another). It becomes value-laden only as we, individually or collectively, choose to attach meaning to it. That meaning is dependent on our value system and the role money plays in our own behavior and in our efforts to control the behavior of others.

One of the major societal changes that occur through time is a sometimes slow, sometimes rapid, but always inexorable alteration in the relative alignment of the values, or fundamental beliefs, held by people. This change has been more noticeable in recent years. Considering the major impact this change has had on various segments of personal and social life, it would be unrealistic to ignore its influence on how we view and use money.

Values Defined

Rokeach [^2] recognized that it is difficult to separate values from attitudes. He defined a value as a single belief that guides actions and judgments, across specific objects and situations and beyond immediate goals, to more ultimate end-states of existence. Such beliefs that might affect how money is used include honesty, security, and achievement. These beliefs are values because they influence behavior and judgments in many situations and toward many objects other than just money and its use.

Attitudes, on the other hand, were defined by Rokeach as several beliefs (based on fact and evaluation) that focus on a specific object or situation. When we go into the marketplace to make a purchase with money, we have beliefs about where we should shop, how we should be treated by the salespeople, which brands are the "best," what constitutes an acceptable price range for us, and so on.

Because of the close relationship between beliefs that function as values and beliefs that function as attitudes, Rokeach chose to combine these two concepts and talk about the value-attitude system. He suggested that each of us has two value-attitude systems that operate simultaneously and influence our behavior—one focusing on end-states of existence we think are personally and socially preferable, e.g., comfort, happiness, security, and the other focusing on specific modes of conduct we think are personally and socially preferable, e.g., honesty, obedience, ambition. Once these value-attitude systems are internalized, according to Rokeach's hypothesis, they become a standard for (1) guiding our own actions; (2) developing and maintaining attitudes toward objects and situations; (3) justifying one's own and others' actions and attitudes; (4) morally judging ourselves and others; (5) making comparisons between ourselves and others; and (6) influencing the values, attitudes, and actions of at least some other persons. This last use is illustrated in the socialization process. As parents, we draw upon our own value-attitude systems in teaching our children, hoping they will formulate systems identical to our own, or, if not, at least sufficiently similar that we can continue to interact with them in a productive way.

Our value-attitude systems should not be taken lightly. They are powerful influences on our thinking about ourselves and others and on our behavior. Severe dysfunctions can occur when these deepest and most personal beliefs are violated in our behavior. For example, some people feel very real symptoms of physical illness after making a major financial commitment that conflicts with their values of security or thrift.

From these deep-seated beliefs, we develop specific goals and establish the standards for evaluating their accomplishment. We then proceed to act, interact, and react according to our determination of what is right and appropriate.

Although this has been discussed as a conscious process, in reality we are, for the most part, unaware that values and attitudes are developing. From the moment an infant is born, the process of inculcating him or her with value-attitude systems, goal selection, and prescribed and proscribed behaviors begins. Imagine the opportunity for misunderstanding, conflict, and dissension that exists when two people with well-established and inevitably somewhat different value-attitude systems, goal commitments, and ideas about right and wrong behavior come together as husband and wife to make decisions about the appropriate use of a finite amount of money.

Values and Behavior Related to Money

Values Related to Money.

What does money mean to you? A filmstrip developed by The Learning Seed Company [^3] suggests that people can be divided into four money-types, based on the value-attitudes that have a primary influence on how they use money. None of these types is right or wrong, and any one of them taken to an extreme can produce an unbalanced life-style and personality. The four types identified are those who see money as security, as power, as a means to buy love and acceptance, and as freedom.

Each of these four money-types is based on elements of truth about money and the role it plays in life. An emergency savings account is always recommended by financial advisors; giving gifts is an enjoyable way to express love; money does buy a certain amount of power and control over our environment; and to some extent, freedom can be secured with money. If we look closely, we all will probably find elements of each type in our own attitudes toward money and the use of it, as well as in the attitudes and use of money by family members and close friends.

The challenge is to recognize unhealthy signs of these money-types and to make an effort to resolve underlying deficiencies that may cause undesirable behavior. It is important to find other ways to improve self-esteem, to shore up feelings of inadequate love and support, to provide opportunities for choice, and to be able to allow others appropriate control over their life experiences.

Values related to life-span stage.

In addition to money-type differences, Belk [^5] found evidence to suggest that life-span stage also influences the value of family members and their use of money.

Specifically, according to Belk, the strong interest of young children in money and material possessions seems to decline as they get older. As children enter adolescence, their concern with identity shifts from possessions to activities and their attention becomes more future-directed. The possessions that are important are those that give a sense of independence and accomplishment, such as cars and musical instruments.

Younger adults tend to regard money as a moral evil, while those who are slightly older and have joined the work force see it as a means to achieve comfort and security.

Parenthood seems to be a key life-span event that results in a shift from egoistic concern with self to an altruistic consideration of others. The values of family, happiness, friendship, love, and security seem to peak during middle age.

For older persons, keepsakes and mementos are dearly treasured, and there is a tendency to live vicariously through their children and grandchildren. The most frequently mentioned values in this group are good health and the success of their children.

The extended family is characterized by having individual members in all stages of the life-span. All of their conflicting values have to be realized from the money managed by the family.

Values related to life-style.

Another aspect of values that influences money management behavior is life-style. Daniel Yankelovich [^6] contends that cultural shifts in value-attitude systems and in the life-styles they produce have been occurring in recent years. His research indicates a marked change in the United States from a traditional ethic of self-denial and sacrifice to an ethic of self-fulfillment that denies people nothing. This focus on self-fulfillment comes into direct conflict with an economy that increasingly calls for restraint. Recognition that duty-to-self is not a viable guide to conduct is now pushing us toward an ethic of commitment to altruism that does not require an ever-increasing affluence or prodigal expenditures. As this new ethic takes hold, there will be a significant change in how we view money and, perhaps, a lessening of the role money plays in interpersonal conflict. A heightened recognition of and concern for the values and needs of others broadens perspective and lessens the inclination to see problems as solvable only by doing it "my" way.

Satenig St. Marie, [^7] former vice-president for consumer affairs at J. C. Penney Company, described six new values that more recent Yankelovich research indicates have emerged "which alone, and in combination, are shaping a new agenda for the 80's." They are (1) reciprocity, or fairness; (2) autonomy, which means independence and self-reliance, that is, "standing on your own two feet"; (3) community, or a sharing of common interests; (4) pluralism, which means acceptance of diversity within our society; (5) expressivism, which means the importance of developing new sides of one's potential; and (6) pragmatism, or a practical rather than theoretical approach to life.

Associated with these shifts in ethics and values, SRI International [^8] has identified nine American life-styles that when categorized into three larger groups, describe "a way of life characterized by specific values, needs, dreams, beliefs and points of view."

A very small proportion of this group has sufficient resources and is able to combine the values of achievers and the societally conscious into an integrated life-style that results in individualistic spending.

In general, these various unique life-styles are developmental, and it is unlikely that someone who is need-driven can have any understanding of or feeling for the values, needs, and views of people who have reached the other stages. By the same token, few people adopt an inner-directed life-style unless they have been extensively exposed to the success of outer-directedness.

The corollary of this is that those who have experienced previous stages in the developmental sequence should have some understanding of and feeling for the values, needs, and views of people presently in those stages. Unfortunately, that is not always the case.

Values related to church membership.

One advantage individuals, couples, and families who are members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have is commitment to a shared value-attitude system. The LDS philosophy toward money management is based on the value-attitudes of family, work, honesty, thrift, safety, security, and "sufficiency." [^9] These values can be realized in the acquisition and use of money by following twelve guidelines: (1) teach family members early the importance of working and earning; (2) teach children to make money decisions in keeping with their capacities to comprehend; (3) teach each family member to contribute to the total family welfare; (4) teach family members that paying financial obligations promptly is part of integrity and honesty; (5) learn to manage money before it manages you; (6) learn self-discipline and self-restraint in money matters; (7) use a budget; (8) make education a continuing process; (9) work toward home ownership; (10) appropriately involve yourself in an insurance program; (11) strive to understand and cope with existing inflation (and changes in inflation); and (12) appropriately involve yourself in a food storage program. [^10]

The five desirable behaviors toward money that should result from implementing the Church's value-attitude system in money management are: (1) pay an honest tithing; (2) live on less than you earn; (3) learn to distinguish between needs and wants; (4) develop and live within a budget; and (5) be honest in all your financial affairs. [^11]

By implementing this shared value-attitude system in a family, the value-attitude differences among family members can more easily be reconciled and integrated. Working out value-attitude differences among family members within this shared institutional framework of economic counsel will assure financial well-being and a minimum of conflict about money in family life.

Improving Family Dynamics through Values Clarification

Money management between husband and wife should be on a partnership basis, with both parties having a voice in decisions and in policy making. Furthermore, as children reach the age of accountability, they, too, should be involved in money concerns on a limited partnership basis. [^12] To accomplish this cooperative goal satisfactorily, we should analyze the conflicts and misunderstandings that arise among family members about money matters. Determining differences in value-attitude orientations toward money that are playing a part in the conflicts is an important step in resolving them.

The process of understanding our own and others' values is called values clarification. One approach to clarifying values related to the acquisition and use of money follows.

Values are reflected in choices. Each family member should ask herself or himself, "If only I had more money, I would . . . "; then try to analyze herself or himself relative to her or his money-type and stage in the life-span and the nine life-style groups outlines above. What value-attitudes emerge? Then, examine the differences that exist between or among those in the family. Again, it is important not to view any particular value-attitude orientation or life-style preference as right or wrong. They are simply different; such differences among us can lead either to conflict or to a more stimulating and rewarding existence. By accommodating the diversity of values among family members, the horizons of each individual are broadened, experiences are more varied, and growth occurs in new directions.

Next, look for a solution to the money issue that will satisfy the needs of each person involved. Recognition of the source of the conflict, open and frank discussion, and compromise are required if an acceptable outcome is to be reached. Recognizing where the differences exist should lay the groundwork for the discussion and provide an opportunity to understand one another better. Reaching compromises that recognize the diversity that exists, that do not violate the integrity of anyone involved, and that are acceptable to everyone involved will reduce the conflict that managing money introduces into our lives.

Money, Values, and Family Dynamics Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Money As Security. Those people who identify money with security view it as their safety net in a hostile environment. The larger the net, the safer they feel. They pay bills promptly and rarely use credit beyond what can be repaid in thirty days. They spend cautiously, often with a feeling of guilt or loss. Thus, consumption decisions are made carefully in order to get the most possible for the loss of each dollar. Sales and bargains are important because they add to the illusion of saving money instead of losing it. To such persons, money is for saving, not spending. People of this money-type often come from a background of insecurity, either their own or their parents'. Those with money in short supply as a result perhaps of divorce or a death and those who experienced the Great Depression often fit into this category. The fear that everyone is out to get their money is an extreme expression of the worldview held by persons who see money as security. Need-Driven People: Survivors and Sustainers. People whose economic activities and orientations to money are driven by need rather than choice are known as survivors and sustainers. Incomes are usually below or slightly exceeding poverty levels; many are minorities; most are either young families (often fatherless) or individuals or old people; more are women than men. They make up about 11 percent of the population. Milton Rokeach, Beliefs, Attitude, and Values (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1968).
[^2] Money As Power. For the power brokers, money is a way to obtain superiority, a feeling of importance, and control over people and events. For them, money exists to clear away obstacles that stand in the way of their gaining more power. They believe that everyone has his or her price. More money does not satisfy, because they can never have enough power. For some, the struggle for power is an attempt to compensate for their own lack of self-esteem. A person doesn't have to control millions of dollars to be a power seeker. Control over the family budget, over purchasing decisions, over doling out the money to individual family members can be enough. Outer-Directed People: Belongers, Emulaters, Achievers. Constituting approximately 67 percent of the population, outer-directed people form a large, diverse category of middle-class and hard-driving upper-middle class people who conduct their lives in accordance with what they imagine others will think. Their decisions about the use of money are made in response to what they believe it says about them, not what it does for them. Money and Values, part 1: "The Psychology of Money" (The Learning Seed Co., 1980), filmstrip.
[^3] Money As a Way to Buy Love and Acceptance. Those who find it difficult to achieve love and acceptance by others can be tempted to use money to "purchase" fulfillment of these emotional needs. Parents, otherwise unable to express love and affection to their children, offer gifts and money. The children learn that money equals love, an equation that soon falls, however, from its internal contradictions. According to Belk [^4], money—and to a somewhat lesser degree, goods and information—are generally inadequate substitutes for more direct interpersonal expressions of love. Those who equate love with money are often the most gullible concerning requests for money for whatever purpose. Those who feel unattractive or unlovable may use expensive gifts to attract someone of the opposite sex. This money-type often tries to buy friends, as the power broker buys control, or the security seeker grasps for safety. Inner-Directed People: I-Am-Me, Experiential, Societally Conscious, Integrated. The remaining one-fifth of the population are generally post-World War II babies who grew up in affluent, "achiever" homes. They experiment with opposing values and life-styles and choose nontraditional ways of life. Decisions about money are made to satisfy their own inner priorities and pleasures, rather than responding to the norms of others. Russell W. Belk, "Materialism: Trait Aspects of Living in the Material World," Journal of Consumer Research 12 (December 1985): 265-279.
[^5] Daniel Yankelovich, "New Rules in American Life: Searching for Self-Fulfillment in a World Turned Upside Down," Psychology Today (April 1981), pp. 35-91.
[^6] Satenig St. Marie, "A New Agenda, " Phi Kappa Phi address, Brigham Young University, 24 Feb. 1987.
[^7] "Values and Life-styles: A New Model," FORUM (J. C. Penney Co., Sept. 1983), pp. 4-10.
[^8] D&C 42:32.
[^9] Marvin J. Ashton, "One for the Money," Ensign, July 1975, pp. 72-73.
[^10] N. Eldon Tanner, "Constancy Amidst Change," Ensign, Nov. 1979, pp. 80-82.
[^11] Ashton, pp. 72-73.
[^12] Kay P. Edwards, professor of family sciences at Brigham Young University and former chair of that department, received her Ph.D. from Cornell University. A noted scholar and published writer in her field, she teaches courses in family asset transfers, the family and the law, and financial planning. Dr. Edwards is also a chartered financial consultant and a chartered life underwriter. In addition to service in the auxiliaries, she has been a member of the Gospel Doctrine writing committee for the Church.
