The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the September 2009 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “Prophets Teach Me How to Strengthen My Family” on pages F8 and F9 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Bible prophets teach me how to strengthen my family. Teach that throughout the ages God has called prophets to teach and guide His children. The stories of the first prophets on earth are found in the Bible. Review with the children some of the Bible prophets by singing the first eight verses of “Follow the Prophet” (Children’s Songbook, 110–11) without the chorus. Children could be invited to represent each prophet with a name tag or simple object.

    Help the children understand that even though Bible prophets lived long ago, their teachings still help us today. On separate pieces of paper, write the name of a Bible prophet with a scripture reference for one of his teachings. Examples: Isaiah—Isaiah 54:13 (teach children about the Lord); Malachi—Malachi 3:10 (pay tithing); Enoch—Moses 6:33 (serve the Lord); James—James 1:5 (ask of God). Place the papers around the room.

    Blindfold a child, and have the other children guide him or her to one of the pieces of paper by singing the chorus of “Follow the Prophet.” Instruct them to sing louder when the child gets close to the paper and softer when he or she moves away.

    When the child finds a paper, have the children look up the scripture and read it together. Ask the children how the teaching can strengthen them and their families. Continue until all the papers are found. Bear testimony of a teaching from a Bible prophet that has strengthened you.

2.  I will hear the words of the prophets when I listen to general conference. Tell the children the parable in which a nobleman told his servants to plant olive trees in his vineyard and to “build a tower, that one may overlook the land round about, to be a watchman upon the tower” (see D&C 101:44–45).

    Explain that the watchman on the tower has a better view and can see far off. He can help protect others by warning them when danger is coming. Teach the children that prophets and apostles are our watchmen on the tower. They have been called by the Lord to watch over and protect us. Sing verse nine of “Follow the Prophet” (Children’s Songbook, 110–11).

    Prepare the children to listen to the upcoming general conference by helping them learn the names and recognize the faces of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Play a matching game using individual pictures of each. Have the children look at the pictures and repeat the names. (Pictures can be found in the May and November issues of the Liahona.)

    On one side of the board, list the names of the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles. On the other side of the board, post their pictures in random order. Let the children take turns matching the pictures with the names. Teach and testify that we can trust the living prophets. If we listen to and obey their words, we will be safe.
