Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Acknowledgments

As with other books I have written, I am indebted to many people who have helped me organize my thoughts and ideas to create Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence before Marriage.

First and foremost, I would like to thank my many students at Brigham Young University. Over the years they have shared with me, both in the classroom and privately, their interests, hopes, and concerns regarding sexual behavior. Their comments and observations have given me my main interest in writing this book.

I would like to thank Jay A. Parry, editor of this book, who has dealt with some rather sensitive material while editing this book. The more I write, the more I appreciate the perceptivity and skills of editors such as Jay Parry. In addition, Emily Watts and other editors reviewed the initial draft of this book and gave helpful recommendations for its continued refinement. I also appreciate and give thanks to other individuals at Deseret Book who have worked on this book in some way; these include Sheri Dew, Michelle Eckersley, Devan Jensen, Ronald Millett, and Patricia J. Parkinson.

My thanks to Chanalin S. Prina, a teaching assistant and English major at BYU, who has now assisted in editing the last three books I have written. I appreciate her insightful contributions as she has helped me prepare the manuscript for publication. Thanks also to my other current teaching assistants, Sydney Smith, David Dastrup, and Warren Price, for timely suggestions and comments.

Dr. Terrance D. Olson, chairman of the Department of Family Sciences at Brigham Young University and a personal friend, has again given support and encouragement. Thanks also to JanaLee Romrell and Bea Jasperson, department staff members, for their encouragement as well.

I thank my five children remaining at home, Brian, Jon, Jason, Kristin, and Brandon, who have all been both patient and supportive while the book was being written.

And finally, I thank my wife, Susan, for her practical approach to life and her concern for the well-being, growth, and development of young people. Her common sense, sensitivity, and counsel regarding the creation of a book of this nature have been deeply appreciated.
