Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 1

The Last Days and the Second Sexual Revolution

Most people are aware that during the late 1960s and the 1970s America underwent what has been called the "Sexual Revolution." As the post-World War II Baby Boomers entered the teen years and became young adults, sexual restraint was often set aside. Young people seemed less inclined to wait until marriage for sexual relations. Consequently, once married, fewer saw the necessity of confining sexual activity only to a husband or wife, and extramarital sexual experiences dramatically increased in the years that followed. Homosexual and other sexual activities also became more prominent or open during this same period.

What many may not be aware of, however, is that during the past decade, 1983 to 1993, we have undergone a Second Sexual Revolution in this country. The advent of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) in the early 1980s may, ironically, have been a major contributing factor to the increase of sexual activity, particularly among the teenagers in this country. In our concern to educate young people about the perils of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases, we may have overwhelmed them with a steady flow of sex information without also presenting adequate guidelines or values regarding sexual behavior.

Let's look back a few years to see how we got to where we are now.

A Critical Year

Where were you in 1968? Many of you weren't even born yet. Some were just young children or teenagers. Others were at various stages of life. My wife, Susan, and I had been married three years and had one child, Doug. In July 1968, we strapped him into the backseat of our 1965 Chevy, loaded our luggage, said goodbye to our parents, and drove from Utah to Tallahassee, Florida, where I began my doctoral studies in marriage and family living.

The transition to Florida State University and graduate school was a difficult adjustment for me in more ways than one. I grew up in the small Mormon community of Centerfield, Utah, and had lived in Utah all my life, except for the years of my LDS mission to Scotland and Ireland. I had attended and graduated from BYU and later taught seminary in Kaysville, Utah.

Up until 1968, my whole life—including my studies and my work—had been involved with Latter-day Saints. Now I had some apprehension about moving out "into the world" and studying in a non-LDS setting. What would we find in our movement from Zion to the world? Would we witness all the worldly trends we'd heard about? Or would we find others much like ourselves, with similar concerns and values regarding marriage and family?

Actually, we found both. During my first year at Florida State, I witnessed frequent student protests over the war in Vietnam. Lack of sexual restraint was flaunted both on and off campus. Students were arrested for "streaking" or running naked through the campus. Others were apprehended by campus police for bathing nude in the large fountain pools on campus.

After graduating in 1971, I accepted a position to teach at Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, Illinois. While teaching at both Florida State and Southern Illinois University, I had some interesting experiences in the classroom. Many of my students openly advocated premarital and extramarital sex, along with other "alternative lifestyles." Coarse words referring to sexual activity were sometimes used in class. Student dress standards were "relaxed," to say the least, and were sometimes provocative.

Many other students, graduate students, and faculty, however, were much like myself. They had been brought up with conventional and conservative family values, often as a result of their religious training. They believed in chastity and modesty just as I did. (I'd like to note here that the word chastity is not commonly used by many young people and, when used, means different things to different people. For instance, my dictionary indicates that chastity may mean "purity in conduct," "restraint and simplicity," or "personal integrity." I use the term in its primary meaning: "abstention from unlawful sexual intercourse.")

The Second Sexual Revolution

In some ways, then, I observed firsthand the beginnings of the First Sexual Revolution. The Second Sexual Revolution has been more subtle and is just now becoming evident.

In 1993, two doctors, Samuel S. Janus, Ph.D., and his wife, Cynthia L. Janus, M.D., published The Janus Report on Sexual Behavior (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1993). Some claim it is the most comprehensive study of sexual behavior since the Kinsey reports on human sexuality of the male (1948) and the female (1953).

In the preface to their book they note that "a Second Sexual Revolution has now taken place," which includes "a willingness to engage in a variety of sexual practices, some of which may once have been deemed deviant or at least unacceptable to one's social status." (P. vii.)

This revolution seems to have affected almost all age groups and social segments of our society. But it particularly seems to have influenced our youth. Survey after survey shows the same thing: The youth of America are more sexually active than ever before, and they're starting at a younger age.

According to a cover article in Time magazine, "By the time they are 20, three-quarters of young Americans have had sex." ("Kids, Sex and Values," Time, May 24, 1993, p. 61.)

Unfortunately, religious activity only slightly curtails sexual relationships before marriage. In one 1993 study, only(!) 71 percent of the "very religious" reported sexual relationships before marriage, compared to 93 percent who were "not religious." (The Janus Report, p. 252.)

A 1988 National Survey of Family Growth found that 25 percent of females had had sexual relationships by age 15 and 80 percent by age 19. A 1988 National Survey of Young Men found that by age 15, 33 percent of males had had sexual relationships and by age 19 the number had risen to 86 percent. Thus, according to these two studies, 80 percent of females and 86 percent of males have had sexual intercourse by age 19. (Frank D. Cox, Human Intimacy: Marriage, The Family and Its Meaning [New York: West Publishing Company, 1993], p. 105.)

The Janus Report also observed:

Meanwhile, youngsters were experimenting with their own sexuality at earlier and earlier ages. Barely out of their own childhood, teenagers were producing babies at ever-growing rates. By the 1980s, nearly a million mothers under 18 were giving birth every year. Of these young women, 70 percent were unmarried, up from 30 percent only a decade earlier. Some estimates indicate that as many as 10,000 extremely young women, age 12 or even younger, become pregnant every year. (P. 16.)

Janus and Janus concluded: "Sexual experience comes much earlier today, for more people, than in any previous era of our history." (P. 37.)

Religious Conformity and Sexual Behavior

One of the interesting aspects of The Janus Report was its study on the role of religion and how it affected the sexual behavior of the respondents. "Our observation," reported the two doctors, "is that Americans fit religion into their lives, rather than fitting their lives into the framework created by religion." (P. 389.)

Those who were questioned were divided into two periods of response: 1983-85 and 1988-92. They were then asked: "How important is it that your sexual practices are in harmony with your religious teachings?" Among those who reported between 1983 and 1985, 50 percent of both the men and the women indicated it was "very important" or "important." When the same question was asked of the group reporting between 1988 and 1992, the percentage fell to only 35 percent of the men and 38 percent of the women. Of this trend, the authors reported:

"Organized religions have traditionally had a dominant stake in the sexual lives of their adherents. . . . Our respondents, while increasing a commitment to the importance of religion in marriage, increasingly rejected religious control over personal sexual expression." (P. 389; italics added.)

This trend, if true, gives new insights to the anonymous phone call and the office visit I described in the introduction. It also presents additional challenges to religious denominations such as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and others who still strive to teach sexual abstinence before marriage.

Immorality in the Last Days

It should come as no surprise to us that sexual immorality would reach epidemic proportions in the last days—the Lord's prophets clearly saw that as one of the conditions of the last days. Moroni noted that the Book of Mormon would come forth when there were "great pollutions upon the face of the earth," along with murders, robbing, lying, deceivings, whoredoms, and "all manner of abominations." And those who commit such acts would declare "Do this, or do that, and it mattereth not, for the Lord will uphold such at the last day." (See Morm. 8:31; italics added.)

In speaking of the pollutions that have been prophesied, President Spencer W. Kimball observed:

We talk of pollution with oil slicks, of cans and bottles, of waste paper everywhere, of indestructible plastic, old car bodies, or pesticides and smoke, and industrial wastes; but pollution is not only in the realm of physical. The more serious pollution is in the spiritual and mental phases of our lives. There is lewdness and licentiousness; there is pornography and V.D.; there is pollution growing everywhere in men's minds and their souls are contaminated.

Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not commit fornication. Thou shalt not commit sexual perversions. Thou shalt not be guilty of petting nor do anything like unto it. When a generation lives for sex and translates every message into that language, what can be expected of its people?

The importance and necessity of virtue, real virtue, total virtue, is as old as the inhabited world. If we had the record we would probably find that Cain was promiscuous, for seldom do great crimes travel in single file. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], p. 268.)

Paul Writes about the Last Days

The Apostle Paul had some of the same understandings about the conditions that would exist before Christ's second coming. To Timothy he wrote:

"In the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, . . . without natural affection, . . . incontinent, . . . despisers of those that are good, . . . lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away." (2 Tim. 3:1-5; italics added.)

The word incontinent means "unrestrained or uncontrolled in seeking sexual gratification." The Revised Standard Version of the Bible uses the word profligate, which means "utterly and shamelessly immoral and indifferent to moral restraints." Paul also saw that in our day people would be lovers or seekers of intense pleasure, perhaps in the forms of entertainment and recreation. Regarding all these, Paul wisely counsels, "from such turn away."

Some to Depart from the Faith

The Apostle Paul also wrote: "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot iron; Forbidding [or seeing no need?] to marry. . . ." (1 Tim. 4:1-3; italics added.)

Of this latter passage, President Kimball, again, has noted:

Society has accepted immorality as normal. In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, said Paul. (See 1 Timothy 4:1.) These are the latter times. We are the Latter-day Saints. These are the days when some shall depart from the faith. . . . I think it's not just so much the disbelieving apostate, but more likely this permissiveness. They would give heed to the seducing spirits and doctrines of devils. It seems that the devil has a way of making very attractive the things that he proposes to mankind. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 267.)

Have some members of the Church, young and old, "departed from the faith" by ignoring or not practicing the standards of sexual morality advocated by the Savior, his Church, and its leaders? The scripture in Timothy also notes that in the last days many would forbid or perhaps see no need for marriage, and would have their consciences "seared with a hot iron."

I remember well the day when I was teaching at another university. We had a guest editor from one of the "men's magazines" come to campus and speak. While there, he urged the students to experiment with their sexual passions and inclinations. One student raised his hand and said he feared the guilt that would likely result because of his religious training. The editor replied that perhaps the student shouldn't listen to his conscience so much and do what would bring him pleasure and gratification. Surely we're seeing the fulfillment of prophecy in our own day.

As a Roaring Lion

It seems clear that Satan will work diligently in the last days trying to confuse people as to what is good and what is evil. Why would he do such a thing? He is a miserable person and seeks to make others miserable like himself. (See 2 Ne. 2:27.) He is the father of contention (see 3 Ne. 11:29) and works diligently on Latter-day Saints and others of "the elect" (see Matt. 24:24). He is at war with the Saints and has encompassed us about. (See D&C 76:29.) With his evil ways he will try to convince us he does not exist; he seeks to lull us into a state of pacification where we will say "all is well" so he can grasp us "with his awful chains." (See 2 Ne. 28:21-22.) His persuasive efforts will be very gradual, almost as if we are being led about with a light thread or flaxen cord. (See 2 Ne. 26:22.) He will stalk or seek after us much like a wild animal stalks its prey. Peter admonished, "Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour." (1 Pet. 5:8.)

Satan also has a cunning plan by which he will try to destroy the work of God in the last days. (See D&C 10:12.) Part of this plan is to bombard the Saints of God and others with so much sexual stimuli that we will have a difficult time resisting the temptations surrounding us. I believe Satan is attacking on at least three fronts: (1) He promotes sexual relations both before and outside marriage; (2) He victimizes some with the terrible abuses of sex—child molestation, incest, rape, and other hideous sex acts; and (3) He promotes faulty views of sex through a constant barrage of information about sexuality, sex perversion, and sexually transmitted diseases, utilizing both the mainstream media and various forms of pornography. Once people are married, some will have a difficult time having a natural, normal sex relationship with a spouse partly because of what they have observed or have been taught regarding sexual matters while they were young.

How effective has Satan been with his campaign on these fronts? Very effective! Just watch TV talk shows nonstop for a week. What is the constant theme or topic of interest? Another evidence of Satan's effectiveness is this: President Kimball has observed that sexual incompatibility in marriage is the number one cause for divorce among Latter-day Saints. Likewise, Elder Hugh B. Brown noted that many LDS newlyweds are grossly ignorant on the subject of sex in marriage and many marriages have been harmed because of this misinformation. (See Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 312; Hugh B. Brown, You and Your Marriage [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960], p. 73.]

President Ezra Taft Benson clearly recognized these problems. He wrote:

The plaguing sin of this generation is sexual immorality. This, the Prophet Joseph said, would be the source of more temptations, more buffetings, and more difficulties for the elders of Israel than any other. (See Journal of Discourses, 8:55.)

President Joseph F. Smith said that sexual impurity would be one of the three dangers that would threaten the Church within—and so it does. (See Gospel Doctrine, pp. 312-13) It permeates our society. . . .

Never in this generation of ours have morals been so loose as now. Sex is all but deified, and yet at the same time, it is put before youth in its lowest, coarsest, and most debasing forms. The curtain of modesty has been torn aside. In play, book, movie, and television; in magazine story, picture, and advertisement, immorality stands out in all its vulgarity and rottenness. . . . We must be in the amoral and immoral world, it is true, but not of it. We must be able to drop off to sleep at night without having to first sing lullabies to our conscience. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, pp. 277-78, 285.)

The Most Righteous Reserved for the Last Days

To face this onslaught from Satan, the Lord has reserved many of his most righteous spirits for our day.

In 1993 our family extended another generation, and Susan and I became grandparents. Ryan Douglas Barlow was born on February 28, to his parents Doug and Becky Barlow. As I held my little grandson in my arms for the first time, I was overwhelmed by the experience. I looked into his little eyes and wondered what he was thinking. And since that time I have worried not only for Ryan but also for all the other little children that are being born in these last days. What awaits them?

Our prophets have taught that the Lord has held these valiant spirits back until this time so that they can resist Satan and build the kingdom. For instance, President Benson declared:

"I know that the Lord is sending to the earth some of His very choicest spirits in this day when wickedness is most intense, when the gospel is upon the earth in all its fullness. I am sure He is sending to earth some of His very choicest spirits to help build up the kingdom to prove to those in the world that they should live the gospel, keep the commandments of God, and to be in the world and not partake of the sins of the world." (Ibid., pp. 495-96.)

If, indeed, the best spirits are reserved for the last days, and each generation is potentially more valiant that those preceding it, we now know why this must be so. Let us pray for Ryan Barlow and all the other valiant little children who will be born in these last days. Let us pray for Doug and Becky Barlow and all other parents who are charged to teach their children (D&C 68:25-28) so they will not be devoured by Satan, who will stalk and try to devour them "as a roaring lion." Let us pray for all the youth and Church leaders for their spiritual stewardships and callings in these turbulent last days.

Who will prepare and protect these young children as they grow up? Who will keep them from the grasp of Satan, who will undoubtedly tempt them in ways that previous generations have not known? I like the old saying, "If not me, who? If not now, when?" And just as important, how will we teach them? How can sexual abstinence before marriage be effectively taught so the Lord can "raise up . . . a pure people" that will serve him in righteousness prior to his second coming? (D&C 100:16.)
