Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 2

The Media: What Are They Teaching Our Youth?

I believe that most Latter-day Saints have a true desire to teach morality and chastity to their youth. They understand the vital need for sexual abstinence before marriage and yearn to help their children have the blessings that come with obedience to God's commands.

I also believe that most parents mistakenly feel they (and the Church) are the major source of values for their children. At one time that may have been true. Unfortunately, with the increasing availability of television and other media, that's all changed.

If we're going to be able to give our children a proper understanding of sexual morality, we must know what we're competing against.

The Impact of Television

I had just finished a major writing project and was simply exhausted. So one Wednesday evening I decided to sit down with my family and watch television to unwind. We turned to one channel where a program, entitled something like "Graduation Night," depicted wealthy high-school seniors in California at their last school dance at an expensive hotel. The story seemed to intrigue my family as we watched the program and ate popcorn.

There was much about the program that was disturbing to me, but one plot line was particularly offensive. Almost every one of the senior boys of the graduating class had rented a room at the hotel for the evening to share with his date. One by one, these young men went up to their rooms with their dates. Surely, I thought, there would be some resistance from the young women. But there was none—not one word. Apparently it was just the thing to do. Go to the party. Have a drink or two. Eat. Dance. And then go upstairs and go to bed. What a routine!

As the program concluded I couldn't help but be astounded at how casual the whole episode had been. What a powerful message to young people viewing: Here's what to do at your high school graduation party! And there was not one word said by any student or teacher that such sexual behavior was inappropriate.

During the same week we had been bombarded with TV promotions for another program where Billy and Alyson would "finally get together" and decide to "go all the way." This program was widely viewed by many teenagers and young adults. The promos showed scintillating scenes of Billy and Alyson (whoever they were) in a bedroom embracing, followed by closeups of their clothing as it was removed and dropped to the floor.

I didn't care to watch the episode when Billy and Alyson would make the momentous decision to "get together" on evening television. But I was forming some opinions about the influences television and other forms of media were likely having on many young people in America.

Another program was even more offensive. The promotions teased that the two young lovers would finally decide to "go all the way." And decide they did. For thirty minutes we were given some of the most persuasive reasons I've heard on why eighteen year olds should start engaging in sexual relations before marriage. The show concluded with the big moment, complete with soft lighting and appealing music. I'm sure millions of youth were emotionally drawn to that subtle, powerful scene of immorality.

These examples are just the tip of the iceberg. On the average, TV viewers can watch at least nine thousand scenes of suggested sexual intercourse or innuendo during prime time annually. About 80 percent of these encounters are outside of marriage. ("Children Having Children," Time, Dec. 9, 1985, p. 81.) And those figures were generated in 1985! With the advent of MTV and cable television, those statistics surely have skyrocketed. I fear that in the future there will not only be more frequent sex but also more explicit sex during the prime-time viewing hours of 6:00 to 10:00 P.M. Such fare is already available in many European countries.

Greatest Influence in Lives of Young People?

Not long ago I was asked to speak to the faculty of Northridge Elementary School, which is near my home. During my speech we addressed a critical question: What is the greatest influence on young people today? Latter-day Saints and other family-oriented groups would like to believe that the family has the greatest influence. But what about the schools, public and private? Religious leaders and programs? Peers? The media? Government policies and practices? Of course, all of these areas in some way have impact on the lives of young people. But which one is most influential? Which has the greatest potential for either good or evil?

I had been reading a book entitled Mandate for Change, which includes chapters on the economy, health care, education, gangs and violence, the environment, welfare, and families. In investigating families, the authors made this observation:

"Today, nearly every household has a television set, and the average child spends as much time watching television as with parents and twice as much time as in school. While much research on the impact of television yields murky results, it is fairly well established that educational programming accelerates early learning and that televised violence exacerbates aggressive behavior."

Now note this:

"It is difficult to believe that the accumulated impact of such stimuli on marriage and families is insignificant. Average citizens certainly don't think so. In a 1991 survey, for example, only 2 percent of the respondents thought that television should have the greatest influence on children's values, but fully 56 percent believe that it does in fact have the greatest influence—more than parents, teachers, and religious leaders combined." (See Elaine Cuilla Kamarack and William A. Galston, "A Progressive Family Policy for the 1990s," in Mandate for Change, ed. Will Marshall and Martin Schram [New York: Berkeley Books, 1993], pp. 153-78; italics added.)

That observation, if true, should be of interest not only to educators but others as well. And it has particular significance for young Latter-day Saints—where are they getting their sexual attitudes and practices? (In addition it should, if true, be a major concern of every LDS parent and Church leader!) Just think: Some informed people now believe that the media is more influential in determining young people's values than parents, schools, and religious leaders combined! That may not be so in all cases. I hope it is not in most Latter-day Saint homes. But is it possible we have all underestimated the power and influence of the media on our lives in forming attitudes and/or thoughts that eventually affect behavior?

The Fourth Learning Center

Anyone interested in learning more about the power of the media in our lives should read Learn to Discern, written by Robert G. DeMoss, Jr. (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House, 1992). The author makes this important observation:

There was a time in American history when the primary centers of learning were three in number: the school, the church, and the home. If your child was placed in a suitable school, if he was involved in a good church program, and given the fact that you supervised what was taking place at home, you could rest assured that your bases were covered.

Today, however, there is a fourth center of learning: the world of popular entertainment personified in the chorus of "voices." These voices include the music industry, television and film industries, advertising, comic books, video games, and the news media. Even though they come wrapped in the innocent package called entertainment, all are capable of transmitting values, morals, ideologies, and attitudes about life in bigger-than-life terms. This combination of education and entertainment could be called edutainment. Recent technological breakthroughs—VCRs, Sony Walkman-type portable tape players, cable television, and consumer satellite dishes (all developed within the last two decades)—are now common household items that serve as the message bearers of this fourth center of learning. (Pp. 12-13.)

And what is DeMoss's assessment of the media's impact on the lives of contemporary children? "My experience working with children would indicate that they are frequently more tuned in to these voices than their classroom instruction, the church, or their home." (Ibid.)

Many Latter-day Saints may find this observation difficult to believe. But perhaps we should give it greater attention. Robert DeMoss believes that many parents and youth leaders are unaware of the tremendous influence the media has on us. He explains:

I've noted three possible reasons for our extended nap. First, there's widespread denial that a problem exists in popular entertainment. Although we may concede that things are not perfect, we wrongly assume it can't be much worse than the era of Elvis shaking the nation with his pelvis. Second, we'd like to believe that teens are unacquainted with the excesses of Hollywood, so we hold on to a denial of any awareness. [Third,] for those of us alert enough to recognize that, in fact, a problem does exist and that our children are plugged into their culture, we hope against hope that there is little impact upon behavior—a denial of influence. Satisfied that there really isn't anything to be alarmed about, that our children somehow have a protective bubble which keeps them innocent, and that, in the event they do discover degrading entertainment imagery, no harm is done, we roll over for another snooze. (P. 10; italics added.)

The Power of the Media

Just how powerful is the media anyway? Of course no one really knows. Behavior doesn't come just from a single cause. That is, with human beings you cannot say that "A," all by itself, always causes "X." The behavior of human beings is usually multi-causal. Many factors influence how human beings behave. In essence, "A, B, and C" cause "X." But how much of the influence is "A"? How much is "B"? How much is "C"? And what do we do when "X" is caused by "M" and "T"?

Whenever I have talked about the power of the media, many young people and/or adults just shrug their shoulders, suggesting that they do not believe that television and other forms of media have that much impact on our lives. If that is so, then why will advertisers pay $500,000 to $800,000 for a thirty-second television advertisement during the Super Bowl football game? The answer is simple: (1) the commercials are watched by millions of people worldwide; and (2) the viewers buy the products being promoted. Advertisers know the simple truth: trying to influence people through the media works!

Here are a few questions for you to consider the next time you wonder about the influence of the media (some of these are taken from a few advertisements from past years that you may still remember):

To which fast food restaurant should I go if I really believe I deserve "a break today"?

How do you spell "relief"?

Why, when we hear two non-words "Uh-Huh!" do we want to run to the store to buy Diet Pepsi? Do I "have the right one, Baby"? Why has this commercial made three attractive young women famous as the "Uh-Huh Girls"?

Why have certain beer advertisements tried to convince men that the best moments in life are not with their wife or children but up in the mountains drinking beer with a few buddies? As the voice-over in the commercial says, "It just doesn't get any better than this." (I only wish they would come back a few hours later when the men are all drunk and throwing up!)

Why can my young son, Brandon, repeat some commercials word for word? Why can we go shopping and he's able to tell me by brand name which cereal "we really should buy"?

Why does my young, emerging teenage daughter want to drive the forty miles to certain stores with expensive clothing in Salt Lake City while good—but less known and less expensive brands—are available at the local mall?

For those who are a little older, I ask them to finish these sentences from cigarette commercials aired years ago: "Winston tastes good, like . . ." and "I'd walk a mile for . . ." and "I'd rather fight than . . ." I can still recall certain television (and even radio!) commercials from my youth some forty years ago. And from my teen years, why do I believe (still to this day!) that if I wear Old Spice shaving lotion I am more manly and attractive?

So what's the point of all this? If the media can sell us soap in thirty to sixty seconds (or now even fifteen seconds) it can also sell us a lifestyle.

Of course, all this isn't just my idea. Many others have recognized the problem. For example, one national Christian organization recently boycotted the advertisers of three television shows for the negative values those shows portrayed. The programs? "Married . . . with Children," "Roseanne," and "The Simpsons."

Messages from LDS Leaders

Our Church leaders have clearly expressed their concern about the effects of the media on the morality of Latter-day Saints.

President Ezra Taft Benson warned, "Too often television and movie screens shape our children's values." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 296.) He also noted:

Now, what of the entertainment that is available to our young people today? Are you being undermined right in your homes through your television, radio, slick magazines, and rock music records? Much of the rock music is purposely designed to push immorality, narcotics, revolution, atheism, and nihilism through language that often carries a double meaning and with which many parents are not familiar. . . . The devil-inspired destructive forces are present in our literature, in our art, in the movies, on the radio, in our dress, in our dances, on the television screen, and even in our modern so-called popular music. Satan uses many tools to weaken and destroy the home and the family, and especially our young people. Today, as never before, the devil's thrust is directed at you, our precious youth. (Ibid., p. 322.)

Undoubtedly sensing the power of the media, the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints issued a pamphlet in 1990 entitled For the Strength of Youth. In it they counseled:

Whatever you read, listen to, or watch makes an impression on you. Public entertainment and the media can provide you with much positive experience. They can uplift and inspire you, teach you good and moral principles, and bring you closer to the beauty this world offers. But they can also make what is wrong and evil look normal, exciting, and acceptable.

Pornography is especially dangerous and addictive. Curious exploration of pornography can become a controlling habit leading to coarser material and to sexual transgression. If you continue to view pornography, your spirit will become desensitized, and your conscience will erode. Much harm comes from reading or viewing pornography. It causes thoughts within you that weaken your self-discipline.

Don't attend or participate in any form of entertainment, including concerts, movies, and videocassettes, that is vulgar, immoral, inappropriate, suggestive, or pornographic in any way. Movie ratings do not always accurately reflect offensive content. Don't be afraid to walk out of a movie, turn off a television set, or change a radio station if what's being presented does not meet your Heavenly Father's standards. And do not read books or magazines or look at pictures that are pornographic or that present immorality as acceptable.

In short, if you have any questions about whether a particular movie, book, or other form of entertainment is appropriate, don't see it, don't read it, don't participate. (For the Strength of Youth, pp. 11-12. Used by permission.)

It's not enough simply to teach our children positive values. We must also help them to avoid media that convey negative values. If we teach our children faithfully, but ignore the media they watch and listen to, we may well find that we are losing the war in the battle for their souls.
