Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 3

Abstinence to Avoid Sexually Transmitted Diseases

We're having an epidemic of sexually transmitted diseases in the United States—and in many other nations of the world. President Ezra Taft Benson once observed: "The cause of so much social [venereal] disease and the reason it has become a 'killer-plague' is that so many, in their disregarding of God's truths, have abandoned the law of chastity. If we will live His law of virtue, we will destroy both immorality and its resultant diseases." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 279.)

Sexual Abstinence More Than a Moral Issue

The most critical reasons for sexual abstinence outside of marriage are moral and religious ones. As Latter-day Saints, we want to be morally clean because our Father in heaven has so commanded. To be sexually impure is a sin that can result in loss of the Spirit, loss of Church fellowship or membership, and ultimately even loss of exaltation.

But suppose for a moment there were no God in heaven (which there is!) and no true Church restored in the latter-days (which there is!). Suppose premarital sex were not a sin (which it is!), and men and women were just some higher form of animal life (which we are not!). Would there still be a rationale to teach and advocate sexual abstinence before marriage? The answer is an emphatic YES!

Could you or I go into any public school classroom today and make a strong, sound case for practicing sexual abstinence before marriage—without saying anything about morality? Or, could we attend any monthly public school board meeting and give a strong rationale for sexual abstinence before marriage as an option to the "condom" or "safe sex" approach (e.g., "if you are going to do it, be safe")? Could we make a case, if we had to, for sexual abstinence before marriage without mentioning God, religion, or sin? The answer, again, is yes, and some medical doctors have designed such a program to do so. It all has to do with sexually transmitted diseases.

Medical Institute for Sexual Health

In the early 1990s, a group of physicians in Austin, Texas, organized the Medical Institute for Sexual Health. Their goals include: (1) to warn and inform young single people about the deadly disease of AIDS, (2) to warn and inform young single people about twenty to thirty additional sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) that are growing in epidemic proportions, and (3) to warn and inform young single people (particularly women) about the infertility and even sterility that arises from these diseases.

These doctors are not part of the "safe sex" crowd. They argue that the only way to avoid the consequences of these diseases, including AIDS, is through sexual abstinence before marriage.

Dr. Joe S. McIlhaney, Jr., one of the founders of the Medical Institute for Sexual Health, has written a helpful and informative book called Safe Sex: A Doctor Explains the Reality of AIDS and Other STDs (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House, 1991). In his book, Dr. McIlhaney documents the rise of sexually transmitted diseases during the past thirty years. He notes that prior to 1960, syphilis and gonorrhea were the only major sexually transmitted diseases. In 1976 chlamydia, once a rare disease associated with genital infection, became more common. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the virus the leads to AIDS or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, was identified in the early 1980s. Between 1966 and 1984, herpes became more common and doctor office visits for treatment increased fifteen fold.

By 1990, more women were dying of human papillomavirus (5,000 a year), a genital disease, than were dying of AIDS. By 1990, syphilis was at a forty-year high. Pelvic inflammatory disease infected one million American women. Antibiotic resistant strains of gonorrhea were found in all fifty states. (See Safe Sex, p. 8.)

Dr. McIlhaney gives the following frightening statistics regarding sexually transmitted diseases (STDs):

Â One in five Americans is now infected with a STD.

Â 12 million people annually are new victims of a STD.

Â 35 to 50 different forms of STDs now exist.

Â Most STDs can be detected only with medical tests. (P. 10.)

As reported in a medical symposium on sexually transmitted diseases, "The situation is now nearly out of control." (The Journal of the American Medical Association, June 23/30, 1989, as quoted in Safe Sex, p. 12.)

There are dozens of different kinds of STDs, but here is a summary of those that occur most commonly:

AIDS

The most commonly known sexually transmitted disease today is AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), well known because of all the attention it has received from the media, schools, government, and even church organizations. AIDS is a viral infection caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Technically, no one dies from the disease AIDS. HIV breaks down the immune system of the body, which then becomes susceptible to many other diseases. HIV is usually first contacted through sexual acts, either homo- or heterosexual, through use of dirty, "used" needles associated with drugs, or from tainted blood transfusions. HIV has been known to pass from patient to health-care workers (or vice versa) where exposed blood is present.

A person may be HIV positive for many months and even years and not know he or she has the disease, though it can usually be detected by a blood test in a matter of weeks. Usually, the HIV-positive person can expect some of the signs of AIDS within five to twelve years. He or she then often develops enlarged lymph nodes, usually in the back of the neck and under the arms. Some people have an intermittent fever, weight loss, occasional diarrhea, and candida mouth infections. Other signs of AIDS may include severe fatigue, persistent unexplained coughing, loss of memory, inability to think clearly, loss of judgment, and/or depression.

Once the immune system of the body has been sufficiently weakened, major problems develop and infections that would not normally occur invade the body. About 50 percent of AIDS victims die within a year after these developments. Within three years, the mortality rate is 90 percent. At the present time (1994) there is no known cure for AIDS, and, barring some miracle, all AIDS victims will eventually die from complications of the disease.

AIDS is spreading at an alarming rate in the U.S. The number infected with the disease doubles every 2.8 years, and the even more rapid spread of AIDS in other countries could be a sign of things to come. In some areas in Africa, for example, one in five women delivering babies are found to be HIV positive. Blood tests on all patients in a group of fifteen hospitals in Uganda during a one-week period found 42 percent were HIV positive. (Ibid., pp. 145-55.)

The U.S. Center for Disease Control estimates there are now approximately 350,000 AIDS cases in the U.S. Researchers estimate there are currently an additional 1.5 to 2 million persons who have the HIV virus in their blood but, as yet, show no symptoms of the disease. (Cox, Human Intimacy, p. 377.)

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Infections

HPV infections cause "venereal warts" in the genital area in both men and women. Initially they only cause discomfort, but they are particularly dangerous for women, since they can lead to cancer of the cervix, vulva, or vagina.

The HPV infections are the most rapidly increasing sexually transmitted diseases. By 1990 this infection was killing more than 5,000 women annually, far more women than die each year from AIDS. It is now estimated that up to 30 percent of all sexually active women and men have this virus, with the percentage jumping to 46 percent among sexually active singles. Some 1.5 million new cases of HPV are reported in the United States each year. Some experts claim this infection has reached epidemic proportions. (Safe Sex, pp. 135-43.)

Chlamydia

Chlamydia is an infection that occurs in a woman's reproductive organs. It is contracted only by intercourse; when a woman gets the infection the first time, she has a 25 percent chance of becoming sterile. Each time she contracts the infection her chances of sterility increase 25 percent, until, after the fourth incident, she has a 100 percent chance of being sterile for the rest of her life. Chlamydia infects 20 to 40 percent of all sexually active singles; there are an estimated 3 to 5 million new infections every year. In addition to sterility, chlamydia can cause miscarriages and premature births, and it is a major cause of tubal pregnancies. It can also infect a baby at birth.

The most devastating thing about chlamydia for women is that it can develop into PID (pelvic inflammatory disease) which causes even more pain and expense. There are currently one million new cases of PID each year, which can result in sterility, hysterectomy, ectopic pregnancies, and even death. (Ibid., pp. 100-109.)

Herpes

Herpes is a virus that produces painful blisters and sores in and on the genitals in both males and females. Outbreaks can later appear anywhere on the body. There are 500,000 new cases of herpes reported each year, with the disease infecting from 30 to 40 percent of all sexually active singles. About 20 million Americans are now affected with herpes.

Since the often painful blisters do not appear for two weeks to several years after the first contact, an individual could have herpes and not know it—and can unknowingly pass it on to others.

Herpes is almost always contracted through sexual intercourse or other intimate physical contact. (Ibid., pp. 111-18.)

Gonorrhea

Gonorrhea is caused by bacteria that are almost always transmitted by sexual intercourse. Approximately 1.4 million new cases of gonorrhea are reported each year. And certain new forms of gonorrhea are proving to be resistant to antibiotics.

It is also a highly communicable disease. Just one sexual act with an infected partner brings a 40 percent chance of contracting the disease. To make matters worse, some 80 percent of both men and women infected with gonorrhea do not know it during the early stages, yet they can infect others. Gonorrhea can cause a pus-like discharge from the sex organs, a burning sensation during urination, a high fever, and skin rash. If untreated, or treated too late, gonorrhea can lead to other complications such as sterility for women. (Ibid., pp. 119-25.)

Syphilis

The incidence of syphilis has increased dramatically in recent years, much to the alarm of health officials. The incidence of syphilis is now at a forty-year high, with 130,000 new cases reported each year. Since the latter part of the 1980s, syphilis has increased 30 percent—but the increase among women is up 60 to 75 percent!

Over 50 percent of people who have intercourse just once with an infected partner will get syphilis. The first symptom is a lesion or sore that appears, usually within three weeks, at the place where the disease entered the body. Within six weeks to six months, additional symptoms appear: headache, fatigue, low-grade fever, skin rash, and enlarged lymph nodes. Infectious, oozing growths may develop on the skin. After the secondary syphilis stage has passed, a latent period follows, lasting anywhere from several months to twenty years.

The standard treatment for syphilis is penicillin, which is 100 percent effective in killing the disease. But if the disease is not diagnosed and treated early, during the latent period it will work its silent destruction in the victim's body day after day, year after year. The result can include irreversible damage to the bones, liver cells, heart valves, blood vessels, and the central nervous system. (Ibid., pp. 127-34.)

Hepatitis B

Hepatitis B is a virus that causes serious damage to the liver, often to the point of death. It can be transmitted through blood transfusions, through contaminated intravenous needles, and through sexual intercourse. Like many of the other STDs noted, a person may be a carrier of this disease for many years and not know it. Some 300,000 new cases of hepatitis B are reported each year. If a pregnant woman has the disease she can pass it to her children; about half of all babies born with hepatitis B will develop cancer of the liver. Many others will have severe liver disease.

There is no known cure of hepatitis B but most people recover from the infection. Rest in a supportive environment is the best known care. Symptoms include jaundice, tiredness, and nausea. (Ibid., pp. 157-60.)

Vaginitis

The most common type of vaginitis is caused by a parasite that is spread only by sexual intercourse. It causes a vaginal discharge, a foul-smelling odor, and an itching that sometimes seems intolerable. Trichomoniasis vaginitis is now known to be one of the most common STDs in the world. It infects millions each year and is present in 10 to 20 percent of women of reproductive age. (Ibid., pp. 161-65.)

Avoiding the Epidemic

By now I hope it's clear that there are some real health concerns that come with sexual relations outside of marriage. We're in the middle of an epidemic of sexually transmitted diseases that can lead to body sores, foul odors, itching, cancer, liver damage, and much more, including death. If a person is sexually active outside of marriage, the odds are great that he or she will become another victim of the epidemic.

Certainly there are benefits that come from obeying the law of chastity, regardless of our motivation. For instance, we will receive real blessings if we abstain simply to avoid the epidemic! I hope the information just presented will help the youth of the Church make an informed choice about the health consequences of sexual relations outside of marriage—and I hope they will choose to abstain.

But then I hope they will seek a higher motive—to live the law of chastity because they love God and want to please him. Such a motivation is the source of the greatest blessings.

Here is the conclusion Dr. McIlhaney reached in Safe Sex:

It bears repeating, I am convinced, that avoiding sex until marriage is the only wise course. In my desire to convince you of that fact, I have been greatly encouraged during the past two years. During this time I have had a large and ever-growing number of patients who are virgins or who have stopped having intercourse and plan not to resume sexual activity until marriage.

I know these women are going to experience happier and healthier lives than they would have otherwise. I am excited about this trend because I also believe that these women will gradually convince men that sex is safest and best enjoyed in marriage. . . .

I think this trend points to a new enlightenment whereby people are allowing their morality and their faith to direct them, instead of blindly responding to their physical urges and the pressuring of so-called friends.

Perhaps in the 1990s we will not only see new political freedom burst forth all over the world, but we will also see authentic sexual freedom reign in people's lives as they seek and find the joy of sex in marriage alone. (Ibid., pp. 96-97.)

President Ezra Taft Benson has also noted:

The world is already beginning to reap the consequences of their abandonment of any standards of morality. As just one example, the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services in the United States warned that if a cure for AIDS is not quickly found, it could become a worldwide epidemic that "will dwarf such earlier medical disasters as the black plague, smallpox, and typhoid."

As the world seeks solutions for this disease, which began primarily through widespread homosexuality, they look everywhere but to the law of the Lord. There are numerous agencies, both public and private, trying to combat AIDS. They seek increased funding for research. They sponsor programs of education and information. They write bills aimed at protecting the innocent from infection. They set up treatment programs for those who have already become infected. These are important and necessary programs and we commend those efforts. But why is it we rarely hear anyone calling for a return to chastity, for a commitment to virtue and fidelity? (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 410.)
