Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 4

Perspectives on Self-Stimulation

When we speak of sexual abstinence outside marriage, we generally refer to an avoidance of fornication and adultery. But it is also important for us to avoid masturbation, or self-stimulation. While sexual sin with others is clearly of much greater consequence, it still is true that masturbation is a sin. Those who wish to enjoy the blessings of purity must be pure in all ways.

I have two primary cautions for parents, teachers, and youth leaders when they are discussing self-stimulation with young people. First, when discussing masturbation, we should not make it worse than it is. Though masturbation truly is a transgression, it is not as serious as fornication or adultery.

Second, we should not treat masturbation lightly, as something that is not a sin, or as a sin of no consequence. The potential harmful effects of self-stimulation are real. This is particularly true if it occurs over an extended period of time, is practiced frequently, and leads the participant in the path of social alienation or even sex addiction. Simply stated, self-stimulation can cause a person to seek sexual satisfaction alone, and, when added to mental fantasies, it can alienate him or her from others, making sexual fulfillment with a marriage partner less attractive. Imagination is often greater than reality.

Self-Stimulation a Common Practice

While different studies on self-stimulation or masturbation report various findings on the practice, almost all report that (1) the vast majority of young men (85-95 percent) engage in the practice at some point in their life, and (2) a lesser percentage, though a majority (50-75 percent), of young women do likewise. (For example, see Cox, Human Intimacy, p. 354.)

The Janus Report (1993) on sexual behavior found that 43 percent of the men and 18 percent of young women acknowledged masturbating at least "weekly." (Pp. 30-31.) And it is evidently occurring at a fairly early age. Seventy-two percent of the males and 44 percent of the females involved in the report had commenced the practice by age thirteen. Only about 5 percent of the males and 11 percent of the females in all age groups in this recent study indicated they had "Never" practiced self-stimulation. (P. 78.)

In his book Christian Counseling: A Comprehensive Guide (Waco, Texas: Word Books, 1980), Gary R. Collins notes: "Research studies generally conclude that about 95 percent of males, and a lower percentage (50 percent to 90 percent) of all females, have masturbated to the point of orgasm at least sometime in their lives. The frequency of masturbation declines following adolescence and after marriage, but it does not disappear. Apparently most married men and many married women continue to masturbate at times throughout their lives—and regular church attenders masturbate as much as the nonattenders." (P. 295.)

President Spencer W. Kimball has observed that "most youth come into contact early with masturbation" (Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], p. 77) and called the practice "a rather common indiscretion" (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 282). Of course, he also pointed out that just because the practice was prevalent or common, it still was not acceptable.

Three Common Beliefs

It is evident to me that there are now, or have been, several common beliefs regarding self-stimulation:

Belief #1: Self-stimulation is a serious sexual sin, on the order of fornication, adultery, or homosexuality.

Belief #2: Self-stimulation causes physical and mental impairments.

Belief #3: Self-stimulation is a normal act in sexual development and should be neither encouraged nor discouraged.

Let's examine each of these beliefs in greater detail.

Common Belief #1: Self-stimulation is a serious sexual sin, on the order of fornication, adultery, or homosexuality.

The belief that self-stimulation is a serious sexual sin arises out of early Christian history and thought. Early Christians were influenced by Augustine's belief that concupiscence (strong desire)—and particularly concupiscence associated with sex—was the result of and the means of transmission of original sin. Therefore, Augustine taught, the only use of sex that could be justified was for the purposes of procreation. Later theologians rejected his teachings but taught instead that any sexual release outside marital intercourse, including masturbation, was wrong and a serious sin.

About 1750, S.A.D. Tissot of France wrote his Onana, a Treatise on the Diseases Produced by Onanism, and described the viciousness of "self-abuse," attributing most medical disorders—including consumption (a disease like tuberculosis), epileptic seizures, gonorrhea, and insanity—to the practice of masturbation. It was Tissot who introduced the fatuous and totally unscientific idea that the loss of one drop of seminal fluid causes more bodily damage and weakness than the loss of forty drops of blood. (See James Leslie McCary, Human Sexuality [New York: D. Van Nostrand Company, 1973], pp. 156-57.)

Various scriptures in the Old Testament have been used to condemn masturbation. The first is in Leviticus 15:16, which states, "And if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even." While some theologians believed this passage referred to masturbation, others believed it referred to an act of intercourse (see v. 18) or to nocturnal emissions. This latter group of theologians cited Leviticus 12:2 where a woman who just gave birth was pronounced "unclean" and had to go through seven days of purification. (See vv. 3-8.) Women were also deemed to be unclean for one day following sexual intercourse. (Lev. 15:18.) Women were, in addition, believed to be unclean for seven days after their menstrual cycles and likewise had to go through a purification process. (See Lev. 15:19-33.) (See Clifford and Joyce Penner, The Gift of Sex [Dallas: Word Publishers, 1981], p. 232.)

The primary passage of scripture used to condemn masturbation is Genesis 38:8-10, which is the story of Onan. He was commanded by the Lord to go to his deceased brother's widow and "raise up seed to thy brother." Onan knew that the children would not be his own, and after going to his brother's wife "he spilled it [his seed] on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother."

What Onan did has become known as "Onanism" in some religious circles, and it is considered by them to be a serious sexual sin. After all, they argue, the Lord slew Onan for his actions.

But the real cause of the Lord's anger was Onan's defiant refusal to have children with his brother's widow. First Corinthians 3:16-17 has also been used in conjunction with Genesis 38:8-10 to imply that God will destroy those who defile the body, which is compared to a temple of God.

Common Belief #2: Self-stimulation causes physical and mental impairments.

In times past some authorities, including those in the medical profession, taught that self-stimulation or masturbation led to such dire results as mental insanity, physical impairment, and sometimes death. Few, if any, would entertain such beliefs today. Others have noted additional myths regarding the consequences of masturbation. These range from: "stooping shoulders to damage to the genitals, and have included insanity, paralysis, acne, excess growth of hair, loss of hair, epilepsy, fatigue, impotence, stomach ulcers, insomnia, weak eyes, skin rashes and loss of weight." (Towards a Quaker View of Sex: An Essay by a Group of Friends [London: Friends Home Service Committee, 1966], p. 18.)

Common Belief #3: Self-stimulation is a normal act in sexual development and should be neither encouraged nor discouraged.

Some believe that masturbation is a natural part of life. Following is a statement typical of those who advocate this belief:

"Masturbation is a perfectly normal, healthy act in boys and girls and in men and women, young and old. Nevertheless, it has long been a subject of great contention, and discussions of it are often rife with ignorance, misinformation, superstition, and shame. It is hence scarcely surprising that many people, especially the naive, come to believe that masturbation is an evil, abnormal, or at best, infantile practice." (McCary, Human Sexuality, p. 156.)

According to this way of thinking, the best method for parents, teachers, and religious leaders to discourage the act, if that is their goal, is to remain neutral. Do not pay excessive attention to it in the first place, and in time the youth will turn from the practice to other pursuits. (See Hugo G. Beigel, Sex from A to Z: A Modern Approach to All Aspects of Human Sex Life [New York: Stephen Daye Press, 1961], p. 209.)

Gospel Insights about Masturbation

Opposing these common beliefs about masturbation are gospel insights as given by our latter-day prophets. Self-stimulation is a sexual sin, and while it is not on the order of fornication, adultery, or homosexuality, still it can cause the loss of the Spirit, self-confidence, and focus in life.

President Spencer W. Kimball has noted:

"Many would-be authorities declare that it [masturbation] is natural and acceptable, and frequently young men I interview cite these advocates to justify their practice. To this we must respond that the world's norms in many areas—drinking, smoking, and sex experience generally, to mention only a few—depart increasingly from God's law. The Church has a different, higher norm." (Miracle of Forgiveness, p. 77.)

He also stated:

"Masturbation, a rather common indiscretion, is not approved of the Lord nor of his church, regardless of what may have been said by others whose 'norms' are lower. Latter-day Saints are urged to avoid this practice. Anyone fettered by this weakness should abandon the habit before he [or she] goes on a mission or receives the holy priesthood or goes in the temple for his blessings." (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 282.)

On still another occasion, President Kimball observed:

All sex activity outside marriage is sin. The early apostles and prophets mention numerous sins that were reprehensible to them. Many of them were sexual sins—adultery, being without natural affection, lustfulness, infidelity, incontinence, filthy communication, impurity, inordinate affection, fornication. They included all sexual relations outside marriage—petting, sex perversion, masturbation, and preoccupation with sex in one's thoughts and talking. Included are every hidden and secret sin and all unholy impure thoughts and practices. (Ibid., pp. 264-65.)

And finally, A Parent's Guide, published by the LDS Church in 1985, says: "The sin of masturbation occurs when a person stimulates his or her own sex organs for the purpose of sexual arousal. It is a perversion of the body's passions. When we pervert these passions and intentionally use them for selfish, immoral purposes, we become carnal. Masturbation is not physically necessary." (A Parent's Guide [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], p. 37.)

Young people often want to know how serious masturbation is. President Kimball gives us the answer: "While we should not regard this weakness [self-stimulation] as the heinous sin which some other sexual practices are, it is of itself bad enough to require sincere repentance." (Miracle of Forgiveness, pp. 77-78.)

Reasons to Avoid Self-Stimulation

All sins have consequences. There are at least six consequences that come with masturbation:

Â Loss of confidence before God.

Â Loss of proper focus.

Â Improper acceleration of sexual desire.

Â Lessened control of sexual impulses.

Â Possible habituation and addiction.

Â Loss of the Spirit.

We should avoid all sin because we love God and desire to please him. But in addition, we can legitimately desire to avoid the consequences of sin. Let's look at each of these, seeing them as reasons to avoid masturbation.

Reason #1: To keep a high level of confidence before God.

Latter-day revelation admonishes us to "let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly" and the promise is, "then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God." (D&C 121:45.) Those who are called to do the Lord's work in these latter days often face challenging situations where great confidence is needed. The Lord informs us that having virtuous thoughts helps bring and retain that confidence as it is needed.

Reason #2: To keep a proper focus.

Becoming unduly obsessed with sexual stimuli or pleasure can also cause one to lose the proper focus in life. The Apostle Paul admonished "whatsoever things are honest . . . are just . . . are pure . . . are lovely . . . of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things." (Philip. 4:8; italics added.) The Thirteenth Article of Faith urges us to "seek after" these things.

If we allow ourselves to continually think about or be obsessed with thoughts regarding inappropriate sexual behavior, our focus becomes distorted and we begin to think that that is the most important thing in life. The current media, in the form of advertising, movies, videos, and magazines, contribute to this perspective. Ancient scriptures note that thoughts usually precede acts: "As [a man] thinketh . . . so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) This affirms the modern wisdom that "we become what we think about." Focus in life, therefore, is critical because it involves choices we make constantly, every minute of every day.

Reason #3: To avoid the acceleration of sexual desire.

Almost all men and women have a natural and normal attraction for members of the opposite sex. That attraction is God-given and God-ordained, but it must be acted upon only within the bonds of marriage. Because of this strong attraction, young people (including Latter-day Saints) sometimes find their sexual impulses difficult to control before marriage. Yet the Lord expects us to do so and will help us in the process. (See 1 Ne. 3:7; 1 Cor. 10:13.)

Some have naively believed that self-stimulation before marriage will reduce sexual drive. In actuality, masturbation can accelerate the sexual desire, making it even stronger and more urgent.

Reason #4: To keep control of sexual impulses.

The admonition of the prophet Alma to "bridle all [our] passions" (Alma 38:12) was meant for both young and old, married and single. Sexual restraint is necessary throughout our entire lives and must begin when we are young and the desire is strong. Part of this restraint is the avoidance of self-stimulation.

Many single students at BYU are surprised when I suggest that some of their greatest sexual temptations will come not before marriage but afterward—with far more serious consequences. This is evidenced by the large number of husbands and wives in the United States who commit adultery. Unfortunately, even some Latter-day Saints who do not "bridle their passions" give in to this extremely serious sin. Learning to control or "bridle" our sexual impulses and passions, therefore, is something that is best learned in our youth (Alma 37:35), then continued throughout our entire lifetime.

Reason #5: To avoid possible habituation and addiction.

One of the most serious consequences of self-stimulation is that it can become a habit. From there it can also eventually lead to an addiction, which can lead a person from love, or genuine feelings, to lust, which is little more than physical gratification. Love usually focuses on other people. Lust often centers on one's self or on objects.

Regarding the gradual increase of lust within us, President Ezra Taft Benson noted:

Recently, a young man commented that if he quit reading books, watching television, seeing movies, reading newspapers and magazines, and going to school, there was a chance he might live a clean life. This explains, in large part, the extent to which the insidious evil of sexual promiscuity has spread, for the world treats this sin flippantly. These evil forces build up your lust and then fail to tell of the tragic consequences. In so many movies the hero is permitted to get away with crime so long as he can joke about it, or explain he was powerless to do anything, or else at the close of the movie show forth one minimal virtue that is supposed to cover over the grossest of sin. Many of our prominent national magazines pander to the baser side, but then try to cover themselves by including other articles, too. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, pp. 409-10.)

Psychologists have noted a consistent pattern in sex addiction, where the addict gradually desires ever more explicit or deviant material—and eventually may end up acting out what he or she has seen.

The pattern begins with exposure to pornography or undesirable behavior. The next step is addiction, where the person simply "has to have it," and keeps going back to experience new sexual highs. Step three is escalation—previous sexual highs become more difficult to attain and addicts begin looking for more exotic forms of sexual behavior to bring them greater stimulation. The next step is desensitization—what was once initially shocking becomes routine and is no longer avoided. The final step involves the acting out of fantasies—sometimes even deviant or criminal ones. (See Kenneth Kantzer, "The Power of Porn," Christianity Today, Feb. 7, 1986, p. 18. Also see Victor B. Cline, "Another View: Pornography Effects, The State of the Art," in Victor B. Cline, ed., Where Do You Draw the Line? [Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1974], pp. 203-44.)

Reason #6: To avoid the loss of the Spirit.

The Lord has clearly told us that the "Spirit shall not always strive with man" (D&C 1:33; Moses 8:17), and if we continue in sin without repentance, the Spirit will surely leave us. Paul wrote in Galatians 5:16-26 that if we participate in lustful acts we will not have the Spirit with us. Self-stimulation can be one of these acts of lust. Paul wrote: "Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would." (Gal. 5:16-17.) Among the "works of the flesh" identified are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, and lasciviousness [or excessive lust], and other uncontrolled and unruly acts. (See vv. 19-21.) Latter-day revelation also warns that lust can cause the loss of the Spirit. (See D&C 42:23; 63:16.)

For two years I had the opportunity to serve as a branch president at the Missionary Training Center in Provo. While in that position, I interviewed hundreds of missionaries, discussing their concerns and apprehensions about missionary work. Occasionally they would want to talk about feelings of lack of worthiness. Often they would talk about masturbation, wondering why it was so inappropriate.

The best answer I could give them was that as missionaries—and as God's children in any capacity—they needed the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Without that, they would fail.

For example, we read together the words of the Lord when he said, "Verily I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way? And if it be by some other way it is not of God." (D&C 50:17-18; italics added.)

Then we turned to various scriptures in modern revelation that help us understand how to gain and keep the Holy Ghost in our lives—or how to lose it. By having virtuous thoughts unceasingly, for instance, we are promised the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost. (See D&C 121:46.) And we read the words that say, "The Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach." (D&C 42:14; italics added.)

I explained to the missionaries that self-stimulation truly was an act of lust and, as such, could result in our losing the Spirit. Obviously, other more serious sexual sins would do much the same with greater effectiveness and intensity.

On this subject President Ezra Taft Benson noted:

No sin is causing the loss of the Spirit of the Lord among our people more today than sexual promiscuity. It is causing our people to stumble, damning their growth, darkening their spiritual powers, and making them subject to other sins.

A reason for virtue—which includes personal chastity, clean thoughts and practices, and integrity—is that we must have the Spirit and the power of God in our lives to do God's work. Without that power and influence we are no better off than individuals in other organizations. That virtue shines through and will influence others toward a better life and cause nonmembers to inquire of our faith. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, pp. 278-79; italics added.)

It is important not only for full-time missionaries to have the Spirit with them in their lives, but full-time members need that influence as well. In a great sermon, Nephi emphasized the need to be guided by the Spirit in all things: "Feast upon the words of Christ," he said, "for behold the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do. . . . Again I say unto you that if ye will enter in by the way, and receive the Holy Ghost, it will show unto you all things what ye should do." (2 Ne. 32:3, 5.)

The Lord desires to bless us with gifts and guidance all through our lives—but we can receive these things only if we have the Spirit. This great gift of the Holy Ghost comes to us only through righteous living and avoiding all acts of lust, through prayer, and by worthily partaking of the sacrament "that [we] may always have his Spirit to be with [us]." (D&C 20:77.)

Self-stimulation and other acts of lust serve to drive the Spirit away. Repentance and worthiness help to bring the Spirit back.

Stopping the Habit

Latter-day Saints who become involved in self-stimulation and want to stop the habit should realize that the Lord and the gospel can help them in a variety of ways.

First, the Lord has promised he will assist with any weakness we have. He has declared, "My grace is sufficient for all men [and women] that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Eth. 12:27.)

Second, the sexual stimuli available in magazines, books, videos, television, movies, and other media are so strong that many people believe they are not able to resist the temptation to masturbate. But we must remember that the Lord has promised he will not allow Satan to tempt us beyond our ability to resist. This is because "with the temptation [the Lord will] also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it." (1 Cor. 10:13.) In this case, the escape will often come as he helps us learn to avoid inappropriate media in the first place. It is comforting to know that the redemptive powers of Christ are always greater than the tempting powers of Satan—and we can choose who will be our master.

Third, those trying to stop the habit should realize that Christ really wants to help us win the moral battles we face in life. Nephi testified we should rely "wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save. Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ [reading scriptures, listening to prophets, and following the Holy Ghost], and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Ne. 31:19-20; italics added.)

Fourth, latter-day revelation declares: "Pray always, that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work." (D&C 10:5.) Prayer can both help prevent the habit and overcome it if it has found place in one's life.

Fifth, those who can learn to control their thoughts can also control their deeds, including masturbation. Christian writer Norman Vincent Peale said, "Change your thoughts and you change your world." As in all things, Jesus Christ should be our model. The Lord said to Isaiah, "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:8-9.)

Sixth, scripture, both ancient and modern, encourages us to forget "those things which are behind" (Philip. 3:13) and "let not [our] minds turn back" (D&C 67:14). Not dwelling on past sins, mistakes, or inability to control the habit will be helpful in overcoming it.

Seventh, we should remember that all our sins will not only be forgiven but also forgotten by the Lord if we truly repent of them. "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more." (D&C 58:42.) Sometimes openly communicating the problem with your bishop or stake president may help diffuse its destructive impact and set your feet more firmly on the path to repentance.

For Those Who Need Help

Dr. David Seamons is an LDS psychologist who has also served many years as a bishop, a stake president, and a regional representative. He has counseled numerous youth on masturbation both in his private practice and in his church callings. Over the years, Elder Seamons has shared some of his ideas with other LDS church leaders who similarly interact and counsel with LDS youth. Here are some of his valuable insights and suggestions on this subject.

Scriptural Perspectives

Steps to Overcoming a Habit of Masturbation

Start by making a plan—you must be proactive! Fortify yourself with an arsenal of alternatives and options designed to prevent, distract, or interrupt sexual impulses which may lead to masturbation.

A plan to overcome a masturbation habit ought to focus on breaking the cycle of behavior. That cycle looks like this:

Stimulus leads to . . .

Thoughts, which lead to . . .

Emotions, which lead to . . .

Behavior, which leads to a desire for

additional stimulus.

Let me describe each of these elements in the cycle—and suggest how one can deal with them.

Breaking the cycle: Avoid stimuli that excite or arouse sensual impulses, such as movies, videos, television shows, music, pornography, and so forth. If sexually related stimuli are avoided, thoughts are much easier to control.

Breaking the cycle: If you find that your thoughts are sexually arousing, you must immediately stop them. Distraction of undesired thoughts becomes one of the tools of a well-disciplined mind. Replace inappropriate thoughts with positive and wholesome ones. This can be done by praying out loud, reading the scriptures out loud, reading other good books out loud, singing uplifting songs, reciting poetry out loud, and so forth.

Another strategy found helpful by some has been to take the current sexual fantasy and exchange it for a more wholesome fantasy, one you've already selected and prepared. Such wholesome fantasies might include a detailed fantasy in which you see yourself successfully overcoming this challenge; or you can fantasize yourself as a successful and happy husband or wife, father or mother; or you can see yourself succeeding as president of the United States, a famous athlete, or an astronaut walking on the moon. The idea is to distract yourself and to replace inappropriate thoughts or fantasies with appropriate ones.

Breaking the cycle: If you have become emotionally aroused, changing your thoughts may not be enough. Try to assess how you are feeling. Take a paper and pencil and write in a column your feelings at that moment (i.e., confused, discouraged, frustrated, excited, hopeless, and so forth). Then write in an opposing column how you would like to be feeling (i.e., clarity of thought, encouraged, peaceful, under control, full of hope, and so forth). The identification of current and desired feelings can provide an additional distraction that will allow you to regroup, refocus, and avoid a potential masturbation episode.

Breaking the cycle: It now becomes necessary to get up and do something. If trying to control your thoughts and emotions has not worked, get up and go talk to someone—a roommate, a friend, or a family member. You need not tell them what you're struggling with, just talk about anything uplifting. Physical exercise can be helpful. Some have found success in taking a cold shower. Whatever you do, exert energy as a form of distraction. Remember that sexual arousal is mainly psychological in nature. If you can change the stimulus, thought patterns, and emotions, the physiological element of arousal will disappear.

In summary, masturbation is a result of a consistent sequence of events: first stimuli, then thoughts, then emotions, and finally behavior. It would be helpful if you could identify the way that sequence works in your own life, and then break the cycle however possible.

Generally, masturbation occurs in predictable circumstances. Perhaps the most common times for masturbation temptations are late at night while preparing to sleep, early in the morning while awakening, or while in the bath or shower. Individuals could observe the cycle that most affects them and make a plan to avoid succumbing to temptation during these critical periods. For example, prior to going to bed, they could have a light on near the bed and read from the scriptures until going to sleep. In the morning, they could avoid lying in bed and get up immediately after awaking and go about the day's activities. They could also be on alert for problems that may occur during daytime naps. It is also helpful to avoid spending excessive time in the bathroom while showering or bathing. A constant fortification of personal prayer, scripture reading, fasting, and service to others provides a shield of protection against these temptations. (Note: It has been found that talking excessively about this problem with peers or friends can perpetuate it rather than help in overcoming it.)

We must also remember that males will sometimes awaken with an erection, which should be considered normal. Some may also have an erection during the night as part of the sleep cycle. Nocturnal emissions ("wet dreams") are nature's way of emptying the prostate gland. This may occur during the sleep stage or while waking up, and it is not considered masturbation unless the individual consciously adds stimulation to the process.

For those who have earnestly tried all of the above with little or no results, do not give up hope. The problem of masturbation can become an addiction, but it is one that can be overcome, though in some cases professional counseling may be needed. This may particularly be the case when the inability to conquer masturbation is linked with depression or other psychological or physiological problems. (Dr. David T. Seamons, Helping LDS Youth Overcome Masturbation, excerpts from unpublished manuscript. Used by permission.)

A Caution for Those with Little Children

Before we leave this important subject, I'd like to give a caution to LDS parents with young children. We should remember that "little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin." (Moro. 8:8.) Further, we read:

"Little children need no repentance. . . . Little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world. . . . Wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation. . . . Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy." (Moro. 8:11-12, 17, 19.) Because of these truths, parents should be encouraged not to overreact if a small child becomes involved in self-stimulation in some way.

Dr. Lynn Scoresby, an LDS psychologist, has noted that self-stimulation is common in young boys and girls and often has no sexual overtones or intent. He observed:

Most children stimulate their genitals, usually before going to sleep when they turn on their stomachs and place their hands between their legs, or during bathing, or diaper changing. Occasionally, children will engage in prolonged stimulation. Girls, for example, will stimulate themselves with their hands or the corner of the bed or some other piece of furniture. Boys will stimulate themselves while going to the bathroom or while outside playing. In most cases with children under eight years of age, it is advisable simply to remove their hands without saying anything, or if that does not succeed, to talk with them about not touching themselves. Usually, the less said and done, the better, because too much attention could aggravate a situation that would have soon disappeared on its own. (Bringing Up Moral Children [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989], p. 105.)
