Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 5

It Matters How We Teach Sexual Abstinence

It's clear from modern-day revelation that Latter-day Saint parents and Church leaders have the responsibility to teach young people gospel truths. (See D&C 68:25-28 and 93:41-42, 47-48, 50.) That certainly includes the importance of sexual abstinence before marriage and sexual fidelity after marriage.

How do we teach these vital truths about sexual morality? Our methods matter. One day our children are single, when sexual relations are taboo; the next day they are married, and sex is suddenly both acceptable and important. Will our teachings help them to stay morally clean during their growing years—and at the same time help them to make the transition to healthy married life? Or will we somehow convey false understandings that will linger with them throughout their lives?

The Most Important Things in Our Lives

Elder Bruce R. McConkie is well remembered for his comprehensive knowledge of the gospel and the valiant testimony of Christ that he bore. Considering all he knew and taught about the restored gospel, I have always been impressed with an observation he made regarding marriage. He said:

"The most important things that any member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ever does in this world are: (1) To marry the right person, in the right place, by the right authority, and (2) to keep the covenant made in connection with this holy and perfect order of matrimony." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 118.)

That being so, and I truly believe it is, how we teach our children and prepare them for temple marriage is of vital importance. In this age of easy divorce, we must seek to help them establish a marriage that will last for eternity.

What does this have to do with the teaching of sexual morality before marriage?

Some years ago President Spencer W. Kimball noted: "If you study the divorces, as we have had to do in these past years, you will find there are one, two, three, four reasons. Generally sex is the first. They did not get along sexually. They may not say that in the court. They may not even tell that to their attorneys, but that is the reason." (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 312.)

More than thirty years ago Elder Hugh B. Brown similarly observed: "Many [LDS] marriages have been wrecked on the dangerous rocks of ignorant and debased sex behavior, both before and after marriage. Gross ignorance on the part of newlyweds on the subject of the proper place and functioning of sex results in much unhappiness and many broken homes. Thousands of young people come to the marriage altar almost illiterate insofar as this basic and fundamental function is concerned." (You and Your Marriage, p. 73.)

I often read these quotes to my students at BYU and then ask why it is that so many LDS couples have a problem, as President Kimball noted, with sexual compatibility in their marriages. Why is there, as Elder Brown observed, "gross ignorance on the part of newlyweds on the . . . proper place and functions of sex"? The students respond with answers that are interesting, revealing, and sometimes startling.

Some students say we don't talk much about sex in our homes. When we do, the mothers usually talk to the daughters and the fathers talk to the sons. Others suggest that those who practice sexual abstinence before marriage begin their married life relatively ignorant and uninformed in regard to sexual matters. And some emphasize that how we are taught about sex while we are young either helps or hinders the transition into marriage. It appears that some teachers or parents, though well meaning, have approached the topic of sexuality in ways that do damage as well as good. Here are some approaches that concern me:

Comparisons and analogies. Comparing something known and understood with something less known is a teaching technique used by the Lord. (See D&C 88:46, 51.) Some parents and teachers in the Church have used the same approach in teaching chastity to youth, but their comparisons are not always appropriate. For example, many youth have seen the analogy of the crushed rose: the person who has remained sexually pure is compared to a beautiful rose, while the person who has sinned sexually is compared to a crushed rose, whose beauty and desirability no longer exist. Similar lessons have been given using chewed-up bubble gum and handfuls of cake topped with icing passed from one class member to another (the cake is desirable and looks delicious, but when it's been handled, no one wants it).

Many of these teaching techniques arose years ago when relatively few LDS youth were sexually indiscreet. It was an attempt to "keep the pure pure." But real care must be exercised in using such analogies at the present—teachers will likely have one or more young people in their classes who have already been immoral.

What does it feel like to be a "crushed rose" anyway?

Another technique used widely in teaching sexual abstinence involves a board, a hammer, and a nail. The nail is hammered in the board, representing sin, and then the nail is pulled, representing repentance. The hole left in the board supposedly represents lost virtue that can never be regained. What would this demonstration mean to a young man or woman who had recently engaged in intimate relationships? Would it give them hope to repent? Or despair?

Excessive guilt. Once young people are properly counseled, cautioned, or warned about their sexual sins, we should not use excessive guilt as a means to turn them away from their errant behavior. Guilt is excessive when it causes one to feel the sinful behavior is even worse than is truly the case. If we teach young people to pray, the Holy Ghost and the Light of Christ will likely act as the "buffeter" to turn them to the paths of righteousness. The use of excessive guilt would also be questionable with mentally unstable young men and women, particularly when it comes to dealing with self-stimulation or masturbation. Excessive guilt with such individuals may just prolong the behavior. They may feel that because they have sinned there is no hope, so they may as well keep on sinning.

An opposite problem is feeling no guilt. Guilt is one of God's gifts to help us come to repentance. Unfortunately, some people don't feel guilt for their sins. The scriptures warn that in the last days many would have a conscience "seared with a hot iron." This implies they would fail to listen to their conscience as a guide for proper moral behavior, including sexual behavior. Paul noted some people would also "kick against the pricks" of conscience, comparing us and the Lord to a man driving an ox with a long crooked stick. (See Acts 9:5; 26:14; D&C 121:38.) Teachers, leaders, and parents need to take care that they don't put too much guilt on their youth—or too little.

Excessive fear. Scriptures, both ancient and modern, teach that we should "fear the Lord." (For instance, there are more than sixty references to "Fear of God" in the Topical Guide in the Bible.) We read in Psalms 2:11 the injunction to "serve the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling"; and in Psalms 112:1 we read the promise, "blessed is the man that feareth the Lord."

But "fear" in the scriptures often does not mean "afraid." In the footnotes fear is often used interchangeably with obedience, reverence, and worship. We should be respectful with the Lord; we should be reverent. But he does not want the righteous to be afraid of him.

Is fear of punishment or God's anger an effective means of teaching sexual abstinence? Perhaps some fear of the consequences of sin is necessary. But excessive fear may make sex even more forbidden and therefore more intriguing and inviting for young people. Excessive fear should be used with caution when teaching sexual abstinence.

I remember attending an unusual stake Aaronic priesthood meeting when I was a young boy. The meeting was on sexual purity and one of the older leaders used "fear" as a motivator in his talk. He described in detail the depths of a burning hell that awaited the fornicator and the adulterer. He rehearsed what it would be like to stand before the Lord as an unclean, unrepentant sinner. He described a giant movie screen where all our sins during mortality would be reviewed, not only by us and the Lord but also by anyone else who wanted to watch. He had all of us shivering in our seats. But in hindsight I wonder if his "fear" tactics really were effective—and I wonder if his sermon had any harmful effects in later marriages of those who heard him.

As I noted concerning the AIDS crisis during the past decade, fear has not been an effective deterrent to sexual promiscuity. In fact, as I discussed earlier, some feel that all the attention devoted to AIDS, without any guidelines for behavior, may have actually contributed to the increase of sexual behavior before marriage.

Once impure, always impure. I once had two teachers who approached the topic of sexual abstinence in very different ways. One teacher implied that once we have "lost our virtue" it cannot ever be totally regained. He cited the parable of the prodigal son and suggested that though he repented and was forgiven, he would never attain the stature and degree of exaltation received by the son who remained faithful. (See Luke 15:11-32.)

The second teacher suggested that, through genuine repentance, purity and virtue could be regained—completely.

I personally feel there is real spiritual danger in implying to young people that virtue and purity cannot be regained once lost. While many young people today wrongly think the process is easy and simple, they must know that the door is open for a complete return. If young couples truly believe that virtue has been lost with no way to regain it, they may become unduly discouraged. In their discouragement, they may turn from the Savior (who, they've been falsely taught, cannot fully save them) and follow Satan even more. In an effort to emphasize sexual morality, we must not place limits on the depth, breadth, or power of the atonement of Jesus Christ. We must not say that he will not forgive and heal and make new when he has invited all to come to him to receive these very blessings. (See 3 Ne. 9:13-14; Alma 5:33-35; 42:27.)

This testimony given by President Benson should help us all to understand this truth:

Yes, one can repent of moral transgression. The miracle of forgiveness is real, and true repentance is accepted of the Lord. But it is not pleasing to the Lord to sow one's wild oats, to engage in sexual transgression of any nature and then expect that planned confession and quick repentance will satisfy the Lord. . . . The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "God does not look on sin with allowance, but when men have sinned, there must be allowance made for them" ([Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith], pp. 240-41). That is another way of saying God loves the sinner, but condemns the sin. . . .

Remember that through proper repentance, you can become clean again. For those who pay the price required by true repentance, the promise is sure. You can be clean again. The despair can be lifted. The sweet peace of forgiveness will flow into your lives. In this dispensation the Lord spoke with clarity when he said, "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more" (D&C 58:42). (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, pp. 70, 284; italics added.)

Better dead than immoral. Once I counseled with a BYU student in her middle twenties. She had just broken up with her fiancÃ© after having sexual relations with him. She was very distraught, questioning whether or not she would ever find anyone else to marry. She wondered out loud if life was still worth living; after much discussion she admitted she had seriously considered taking her own life.

I told her I understood the seriousness of the offense, as well as the pain of her broken heart, but I assured her that the pain would pass, and she could find forgiveness for the sin through repentance. Taking her own life would only make things worse. (I also referred her to the campus counseling center, where she could get help with her suicidal thoughts.)

She wasn't sure she accepted my argument. She was a convert to the Church, and she'd been taught a lesson on morality shortly after her conversion. Her teacher had told her about an LDS father whose son was about to leave home. The father had warned the young man about the perils of the world, and had informed his son that he (the father) would rather see his son return home dead in a coffin than to return home sexually impure.

If it is better to be dead than impure, this young woman said, then I might as well take my own life.

I tried to convince her otherwise, and once again bore testimony of the possibility of repentance and forgiveness.

I fear that those who tell such stories to young people do them a real disservice. They eliminate the possibility of repentance and, in the process, discount the power of the Savior and his atonement.

Emotional voyeurism. Youth leaders have the opportunity to teach sexual morality during interviews. But in doing so, they should use careful discretion. In the current temple recommend book, bishops are discouraged from asking personal questions regarding intimate sexual behavior between a husband and a wife. Perhaps that same discretion should be used with youth and young adults, particularly when men are interviewing young women. I have sat on several disciplinary counsels in the Church and felt the questioning by a few, perhaps for reasons of personal curiosity, sometimes went far beyond propriety. LDS bishops and stake presidents have a spiritual mandate to know enough of the details to help the young woman or young man repent of the sins. But care should be used by them and others not to ask detailed or unnecessary questions that could add additional pain or embarrassment to young members. And always, confidences should be maintained "that the church may not speak reproachfully of him or her." (D&C 42:92.)

Sex is dirty and evil. You may have heard the admonition: "Sex is something dirty and evil; save it for someone you love." While we might smile at the paradox of such a statement, we also realize that this is often the message we give young Latter-day Saints regarding sex and sexual restraint. If such is the message with which we constantly bombard our young people, it is little wonder that many Latter-day Saints, as President Kimball observed, later have sexual problems in their marriages.

To make matters worse, the message that "sex is evil and dirty" is not conveyed only by insensitive teachers. It is communicated almost daily by the media. You don't believe it? Do an experiment. For just two or three days review the local newspaper or watch the nightly newscasts, national or local. Make careful notes of any incident regarding sexuality and write down how it happened. Was it incest? Child molestation? Rape? Murder and/or violence? Homosexuality? Child sexual exploitation by a youth or church leader? Listen to the jokes told by comedians. Watch the TV talk shows. When you have finished your experiment, see if what you have seen and heard has left you with any good feelings about sex.

Historically, some religious leaders have also implied that sex was just a necessary evil by which children were conceived. Some members of our Church may share similar views.

Is sex really that evil? Is God using a devilish means to accomplish divine purposes? Could he not have devised some other method so that sex, with all its supposed evils, could have been avoided by mortals? President Kimball answered this question by saying:

When the Lord organized his world and established his policies, he could have filled the earth with physical bodies in some other way than that which he designed—perhaps some kind of an incubator process. But it seems that merely filling the earth with humans was not the great objective of our Lord. In order to properly people the world it was necessary that every child born into this world should have two parents, a father and a mother, to teach him, to train him, to love him, that that child should be made aware of what was expected of him.

Rather than devise some incubator process for bringing children into this world, God created the human bodies. (Gen. 1:27-28.) . . . [His plan] required both a man and woman to reproduce through sexual relations and to also care for, rear, and teach the child gospel truths once he/she was born. . . . This process of reproduction was designed before this world was organized: "Wherefore, it is lawful that he [man] should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh [or relate sexually], and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation; And that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made." (D&C 49:16-17.) ("Marriage Is Honorable," Speeches of the Year: BYU Devotional and Ten-Stake Fireside Addresses, 1973 [Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1974], p. 256.)

Elder Parley P. Pratt similarly noted:

The fact is, God made man, male and female; he planted in their bosoms those affections which are calculated to promote their happiness and union. That by that union they might fulfill the first and great commandment, viz: "To multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it." From this union of affection, springs all the other relationships, social joys and affections diffused through every branch of human existence. And were it not for this, earth would be a desert wild, an uncultivated wilderness. (Writings of Parley Parker Pratt, ed. Parker Pratt Robison [Salt Lake City: Parker Pratt Robinson, 1952], pp. 53-54.)

From these scriptures and insights, it is clear that the sexual relationship between a husband and a wife is of divine origin and should serve divine purposes. Without it, the earth would be wasted and the purposes of God would be thwarted. Such is the importance of sex for married Latter-day Saints. We should, therefore, heed the warning of Mormon: "Wherefore, take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil." (Moro. 7:14; italics added.)

Sex Has a Divine Origin and Purpose in Marriage

It's clear that there are questionable ways to approach and teach about sexuality—but how might it be done appropriately and effectively? How can Latter-day Saint parents, teachers, and youth leaders approach the topic in a way that (1) will encourage sexual abstinence before marriage, and (2) prepare young people for future sexual relations in marriage? The prophets of the Lord and other Church leaders give us an approach that can help.

The approach is this: We should teach that sexual relations are good and wholesome and pure in the right time and place (meaning, in marriage). Knowing that reserving sex for marriage brings the greatest happiness, a loving Heavenly Father has commanded his children to wait for the bonds of marriage to enjoy the intimacy of sex relations.

President Kimball has written: "Husband and wife . . . are authorized, in fact they are commanded, to have proper sex when they are properly married for time and eternity. That does not mean that we need to go to great extremes. That does not mean that woman is the servant of her husband. It does not mean that any man has a right to demand sex anytime that he might want it. He should be reasonable and understanding and it should be a general program between the two, so they understand and everybody is happy about it." (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 312.)

President Kimball also said: "In the context of lawful marriage, the intimacy of sexual relations is right and divinely approved. There is nothing unholy or degrading about sexuality in itself, for by that means men and women join in a process of creation and in an expression of love." (Ibid., p. 311.)

In a general conference address, President Kimball quoted Billy Graham as saying: "The Bible celebrates sex and its proper use, presenting it as God-created, God-ordained, God-blessed. It makes plain that God himself implanted the physical magnetism between the sexes for two reasons: for the propagation of the human race, and for the expression of that kind of love between man and wife that makes for true oneness. His command to the first man and woman to be 'one flesh' was as important as his command to 'be fruitful and multiply.' " ("Guidelines to Carry Forth the Work of God in Cleanliness," Ensign, May 1974, p. 7.)

President Benson gave us similar teachings. He said: "The natural [sexual] desire for men and women to be together is from God. But such association is bounded by His laws. Those things properly reserved for marriage, when taken within the bonds of marriage, are right and pleasing before God and fulfill the commandment to multiply and replenish the earth. But those same things when taken outside the bonds of marriage are a curse." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 279.)

President Benson also observed: "God created sex, but not for self-indulgence. Men are not animals, left only to their instincts and self-indulgence. We are offspring of God. God Himself has set the boundaries of this sacred act. Sex outside of marriage is wrong. Every form of homosexuality is wrong. Through His Prophets He has declared and reiterated, 'Thou shalt not commit adultery.' " (Ibid., p. 280.)

Finally, President Benson said, "Sex was created and established by our Heavenly Father for sacred, holy and high purposes." (Ibid., p. 409.)

This, then, provides a sound basis for our teachings of sexual abstinence to contemporary young Latter-day Saints:

Sex is not something we avoid because it is evil.

Sex is something we wait for because it is good!
