Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 6

Seventeen Strategies for Teaching Sexual Abstinence outside Marriage

Since it matters how we teach sexual morality, in this chapter I will share with you seventeen strategies that have worked for me. But first we should ask, Who should do the instructing or teaching?

For decades there has been a public discussion about who should teach young people about sexual matters. That debate has been fueled by the spread of AIDS. Who should teach the youth? The parents? School teachers? Religious leaders or instructors? Community or government leaders? Peers? The media? In actuality, all give information of one kind or another to young people—but often the information is either too bland to be helpful, too complex to be understood, given too late to be of any use, or contradictory with other information received.

The 1993 Janus Report on Sexual Behavior revealed some interesting insights on where young people today get their information about sexuality. In response to the question "I learned about sex from . . . ," 53 percent of the men stated "Streets/Peers," 25 percent indicated "Home," 20 percent stated "School," and only 2 percent indicated "Church." Among women, 40 percent said they learned about it from "Home," 30 percent indicated "Streets/Peers," 28 percent listed "School," and, again, only 2 percent listed "Church." (Pp. 96-98.)

These numbers change for those who termed themselves "very religious." Among that group, 45 percent said their primary sources of sex information were either home or church. (Pp. 257-58.)

I think this study has tremendous implications for Latter-day Saints. It would be interesting to ask active young Latter-day Saints today what their primary source of sex information is. The results may be similar to the "very religious" youth just cited.

But what of the 60 or 70 percent who are not receiving their information from home or church? Peers, schools, community programs, and now the media are left to fill in the void.

As I indicated earlier, I am particularly concerned about the influence of the media on our youth. The numbers are frightening. How many suggestive commercials will a young person see at home, how many immoral television shows, how many provocative videos, how many suggestive magazines? How much questionable music will he or she hear? The influence of the media, and the media culture, is often greater than all other influences combined. As President Benson warned, "Too often television and movie screens shape our children's values." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 296.)

Ultimately, parents are in the best position to teach their children. The Church can help, sometimes appropriate community programs can help, but in the end the responsibility belongs to the parents. President Benson said:

Parents should give their children specific instructions on chastity at an early age, both for their physical and moral protection. Years ago, President David O. McKay, God bless him, read a statement written by Mrs. Wesley to her famous son John. I commend it to you as a basis for judgment pertaining to the matter of chastity. "Would you judge of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of pleasure? Take this rule: Now note, whatever weakens your reason, impairs the tenderness of your conscience, obscures your sense of God, takes off your relish for spiritual things, whatever increases the authority of body over the mind, that thing is sin to you, however innocent it may seem in itself." (Ibid., p. 278.)

A resource to LDS parents desiring educational materials for instructing young children on sexual matters is A Parent's Guide, published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1985. The manual contains units on teaching children about sexual matters from ages 1 to 3, 4 to 11, and 12 to 18. There is also a unit on teaching young adults about intimacy in marriage.

New Approaches Needed

If we Latter-day Saint parents are going to have any major impact on our children's understanding of sexual things, we will likely have to try some new approaches. In the past, we have often tried to "make information safe for children." We have tried to evaluate the television programs and movies our children watch. Some parents have gone to the public schools and critiqued in advance the sex-education programs that were to be presented to sons and daughters. We have wanted to know something about the teachers who would be presenting the material. We have been concerned about books available in public libraries. Some have confronted and boycotted businesses that sell questionable magazines and videos.

We should continue doing all these things, where appropriate and possible. But it is now evident to me that we, as parents or youth teachers or leaders, can no longer totally control what others (including the media) teach our young people about sexual relationships. It appears to be time for a new approach: "We should make children safe for information." That is, we should acknowledge the fact that at some place and some time our sons and daughters are going to see, read, or be taught something about sex and morality that is inconsistent with our own values. (It likely has already happened.) We must prepare them for such occasions by having ongoing discussions of what they have seen, read, or heard. We should continually teach and remind them of sexual values we wish to convey and also teach "correct principles" on sexual matters as made known through the scriptures and Church leaders.

Seventeen Strategies for Teaching Sexual Abstinence

While there have undoubtedly been many successful ways to teach sexual abstinence to Latter-day Saint youth, let me share with you some that have been particularly successful in my classes at BYU. Here are some of the strategies that have worked for me:

Strategy #1: Teach that sexual abstinence before marriage and sexual fidelity after marriage have been and are today commandments of the Lord. (See Exod. 20:12; Deut. 5:18; Matt. 19:18; Rom. 8:12; 13:9; Mosiah 13:22; Acts 15:20; 21:25; 1 Cor. 6:9; 6:13; 10:8; Gal. 5:19; 1 Thess. 4:3; D&C 42:24; 59:6; 66:10.) Like other commandments the Lord gives, he will prepare the way for us to live them if we make an effort to do so. (See 1 Ne. 3:7; 1 Cor. 10:13.)

Strategy #2: Teach of the great sexual sin the Lord foresaw, and revealed, concerning the latter days. Certainly those who want to align themselves with the Lord, rather than with Satan, will not want to be part of those trends. (See chapter 1.)

Strategy #3: Teach that modern prophets have warned that sexual impurity would be one of the great dangers that would threaten the Church from within in the last days. Those who are faithful will want to avoid being part of that threat. (See chapter 1.)

Strategy #4: Teach about the Second Sexual Revolution and the trends of sexual behavior among young people: (1) over 80 percent are sexually active by age 20; (2) sexually active young people now have a larger number of sexual partners; and (3) young people are becoming sexually active at a younger age. These are not trends that one would want to be part of. (See chapter 1.)

Strategy #5: Teach about the power the contemporary media can and often does have in shaping our attitudes, values, and even behavior in regard to sexual behavior. Do we want to be guided by the media or by the Lord and his prophets? (See chapter 2.)

Strategy #6: Teach about the rapid increase, even to epidemic proportions, not only of AIDS but of twenty to thirty other sexually transmitted diseases. Teach that some physicians suggest the only way these diseases will be controlled is through sexual abstinence or sexual restraint before marriage. (See chapter 3.)

Strategy #7: Teach (perhaps in private consultation or in small same-sex groups) the trends (and myths) regarding self-stimulation (masturbation). Indicate that even though it is common, there are many reasons why Latter-day Saints should not participate in this practice. (See chapter 4.)

Strategy #8: Teach that sexual abstinence before marriage does not limit freedoms but actually increases them.

Many young people are extremely sensitive about anyone—including parents, the government, teachers, or even Church leaders—suggesting rules or limitations of behavior. Having taken their cue from the "do your own thing" generation of the 1960s, many youth in the 1990s want to experiment and learn on their own and then decide what is best for them.

I saw this ideology firsthand while I was serving as a branch president at the Missionary Training Center in Provo. The recently called missionaries would arrive and kiss their loved ones good-bye; then the following night we would meet with them in their first branch meeting. By then they had received what came to be called the "White Bible," which had all the rules and guidelines for missionary conduct, not only while they were at the MTC but after they left for their various missions as well.

Upon receiving the White Bible some missionaries were upset. Why did they have to stay with their companions at all times? Why did they have to go to bed by 10:30 P.M. and get up at 6:00 A.M.? Why couldn't they wear sunglasses at the MTC, wear red suspenders (for the men), or multiple earrings (for the sisters)? (One sister at the MTC was particularly upset because she had just dyed her hair a strange color before arriving and had to have it re-dyed before she was allowed to continue on to her mission.) Why couldn't they call home whenever they wanted or have just a few guests while at the MTC? Why couldn't missionaries go down to the mall on their first "preparation day," and what was wrong with ordering a big pizza late at night for their district if they wanted one? Their complaints at times seemed endless. Some weren't ready for the rules or restrictions they were asked to follow.

Frankly, I got tired of trying to respond to their complaints while defending the White Bible. So I beat them to the punch and developed a little talk about "rules" which I gave the first night we met in branch meeting. I wrote on the board the following:

Rules are not given to limit our freedoms.

Rules are given to protect us from consequences.

I told them the White Bible was the culmination of many years of missionary experiences and they could learn from OPE (Other People's Experiences). They could learn the wisdom of the rules by trial and error—but if instead they would simply follow the rules and suggestions of those who supervised them, they would have a much more enjoyable mission.

Some young Latter-day Saints today likewise question the limitations and restrictions that are placed on their sexual behavior before marriage. We might appropriately say to them:

Commandments are not given to limit our freedoms.

Commandments are given to protect us from consequences.

In answer to the question "Why standards?" the First Presidency has noted:

Standards are rules or guidelines given to help you measure your conduct. Why has the Lord given standards? He wants all his children to return to live with him one day. However, he knows that only those who are worthy will be able to live with him. Standards help you know how well you are preparing to live with your Father in Heaven. Your entire lives on earth are intended to give you the opportunity to learn to choose good over evil, service over selfishness, kindness and thoughtfulness over self-indulgence and personal gratification. By comparing your behavior and thoughts with your Father's standards, you are in a better position to govern yourselves and make the right choices. God's commandments (standards) are constant, unwavering, and dependable. As you adhere to them, you will receive countless blessings from heaven—including the gift of eternal life. (For the Strength of Youth, p. 6. Used by permission.)

Strategy #9: Teach that all our behaviors during our lives have consequences.

These consequences may be positive or negative, immediate or delayed. What's more, we seldom act in isolation, and the consequences of our behaviors almost always have an impact—good or bad, immediate or delayed—on the lives of other people.

Several years ago I was teaching at a large university where none of my students was a Latter-day Saint. One day in class a student asked me if I had ever committed adultery. I said no. He then asked why. It was a good question and at first I wanted to say that it violated one of the Ten Commandments and was a sin. But then I decided I wanted to give an answer that went beyond my religious values. So I wrote the following definition of maturity (which I made up on the spot) on the chalkboard:

MATURITY=The ability to anticipate specific consequences of specific behaviors.

I suggested that young children live for the day and have little interest in (or even knowledge of) "tomorrow" or the future. If you ask a young child to choose between having $1 today or $5 tomorrow, almost always he or she will choose the $1 for immediate use—there is no tomorrow. It is only as we get older that we understand some of the benefits of delayed gratification.

Like young children, the less mature young adult will often live for the moment. Because they are less mature, they are often unable to anticipate tomorrow's consequences of today's behaviors. People who gamble will go for the momentary thrill of winning and not understand they can lose a day's, month's, year's, or even a lifetime of earnings in just one brief evening. Cigarette smokers will enjoy the momentary high of nicotine in their systems, not accepting the fact that dangerous diseases, cancer, and even death can result in the future from the temporary pleasure of smoking. I explained to my students at the university that if I were to commit adultery, I would bring some serious consequences into my life, all of which I wanted to avoid. And I didn't have to experience adultery to know what the consequences would be. (I am a pretty good observer and learn from OPE—Other People's Experience.) I told my students that if I had sexual relationships outside of marriage I would likely have painful consequences in at least four areas of my life—physical, social, mental, and spiritual. If we are mature and observant, we can anticipate what some of these consequences will be without having to have the experience.

Strategy #10: Teach the physical consequences of sexual behavior outside of marriage.

First, to be honest and realistic, we must admit that there can and likely will be (1) some momentary pleasure and (2) some momentary peer acceptance from participation in such acts. The human body has the capacity to respond to sexual stimulus in a variety of ways because of the hedonistic ("it feels good") nature of sex. The media often depicts the pleasure associated with sexual relationships and passions, and I believe Satan uses such devices to try to draw us into illicit practices and behaviors. Many passionate moments are depicted in steamy bathroom scenes, bedrooms, or on the beach. But the media seldom shows the resultant consequences of the sexual acts.

The pleasure, as noted, is usually only momentary, often lasting just a few minutes. In fact, there are few other acts of a shorter duration that have greater impact in our lives! For just a few minutes (literally) of pleasure and thrill we can sometimes endure a lifetime of pain.

I told the students if I committed adultery I could father a child out of wedlock. Again, I didn't have to have the experience to anticipate the consequences. At that point, some people would contemplate abortion, which has its physical, social, mental, and spiritual ramifications as well.

Or I could become infected with a sexually transmitted disease, which could result in discomfort or even death.

Any or all of these painful consequences could have a lifelong effect. Is it worth it for a moment's pleasure?

Strategy #11: Teach the social consequences of sexual behavior outside of marriage.

Since we do not live in isolation, we will also likely experience social consequences of our behavior. Yes, there can be temporary social acceptance from indulging in sexual acts. But the desired attention soon fades if sexual pleasure was (as it often is) the only intended outcome of the experience.

Sexual acts outside of marriage are seldom, if ever, kept secret, at least not indefinitely. Someday the secret gets out, and those involved can experience varying degrees of social exclusion.

I told my students if I ever committed adultery, I would suffer social consequences in my relationships with my wife and children. I could anticipate in advance (with some maturity and insight) having to explain to Susan and our children what I had done. There could be a divorce, and the separation from both my wife and children would greatly affect all of us. If I weren't married, and became engaged, I might lose my fiancÃ©e if she wanted to marry a virgin and my past were ever discovered.

My students at this university were interested to know that I could be released from my Church calling if I committed adultery. I told them I was then serving as assistant to the minister in our congregation. (I was in the bishopric at the time.) They were amazed at that social consequence they had never imagined.

For Latter-day Saint youth there are many other social consequences that result from sexual experiences before marriage. A mission call may be delayed a year or more, depending on the frequency and nature of the sexual infraction. Or, if the sin is serious enough, there could be no mission call at all. Temple marriage can likewise be postponed for an indefinite period of time if Latter-day Saints choose to engage in sexual relationships prior to marriage.

Strategy #12: Teach the mental consequences of sexual relationships outside of marriage.

I told my non-LDS students at the university if I committed adultery I would probably experience great guilt over the act. One student suggested that I paid too much attention to my conscience. An editor from a "men's" magazine had recently visited campus and encouraged the students to experiment with sexual behavior. He also advised them "not to feel guilty"—they had been reared, he claimed, in a sexually repressed society.

While it is true that too much guilt is damaging and detrimental, too little guilt is deadly to our spirits. Remember, the scriptures prophesy that in the last days "many will have their conscience seared with a hot iron" (1 Tim. 4:2), suggesting that they will become immune to the whisperings of their conscience.

Imagine yourself driving down the freeway and a light on your dashboard starts blinking. It has "water" written across the light, indicating your car is low on or out of water. You proceed a little farther and the light marked "oil" starts blinking, indicating your automobile also needs oil. You pay no attention to the blinking lights on your dashboard and just drive heedlessly on. Soon many lights are blinking—your car really needs attention. You can do one of two things: (1) stop the car and give it the service attention it needs, or (2) decide you don't like blinking lights on the dashboard, take a hammer, and knock them all out.

Your conscience could be compared to the lights on the dashboard. When it alerts you, something needs attention. You can choose to ignore it, or you can take the necessary actions and make the changes necessary.

The conscience can be a true guide in our lives. Mormon wrote: "It is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night. For behold, the Spirit of Christ [which speaks through the conscience] is given to every man, that he may know good from evil." (Moro. 7:15-16.) Latter-day Saints also have the gift of the Holy Ghost or the Comforter, who "shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance." (John 14:26.)

Hopefully, Latter-day Saints will pay attention to these blinking "spiritual lights" as they appear in our lives. If we fail to do so, if we fail to forsake our sins and accept Jesus Christ and His atonement, we might pay the ultimate price in mental suffering and anguish. How severe will it be? The Lord revealed:

"Therefore I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your suffering be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not.

"For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

"But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I." (D&C 19:15-17; italics added.)

Strategy #13: Teach the spiritual consequences of sexual relationships outside of marriage.

With the increase of sexually transmitted diseases we should fear for our health, and even our very lives, when we engage in sexual relationships outside of marriage. As much as these deadly diseases are to be feared, however, physical death is not the greatest thing we should fear during mortality. The Lord has said, "Care not for the body, neither the life of the body; but care for the soul, and for the life of the soul." (D&C 101:37.) The destruction of the soul, or spirit, is of much greater consequence than the destruction of our physical bodies. And sexual behavior outside of marriage can greatly harm the health of our spirits. As we read in Proverbs 6:32, "Whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul."

We sometimes wonder why a transgressor must wait a year or so before going to the temple or returning to the temple after committing acts such as fornication or adultery. Wouldn't the Lord want us to return as soon as possible?

The answer is no. By participating in unholy acts, we become unholy—and the Lord has revealed that "no unclean thing shall be permitted to come into [my] house to pollute it." (D&C 109:20; also see D&C 97:15-17.) When we commit serious sin, it usually takes time to become clean again.

It seems that sexual acts outside of marriage are so damaging to our spirits that they can't be healed quickly. If we beat our physical bodies with a baseball bat, they would be black and blue for several days or weeks, as they slowly recovered. Maybe such sexual acts have similar effects on our spirits, requiring a recovery time before we go (or return) to the temple, there to make covenants with the Lord to live righteous and pure lives.

Strategy #14: Teach that the pleasure from sex outside marriage is only temporary, while the pain often endures for some time.

Satan clearly seeks to induce youth, including Latter-day Saints, to engage in premarital sexual relations by placing great emphasis on the pleasure (however temporary) that comes with these experiences. Advertisements, magazines, videos, and movies portray such sexual experiences as something very desirable to do. Of course, those who put together such depictions are very good at what they do.

To counter the massive "sex-brings-pleasure" campaign that has been launched, Latter-day Saint parents and youth leaders can renew their own campaign that "fornication-brings-pain," emphasizing the pain that always follows inappropriate sexual experiences outside of marriage. If we hope to succeed, we have to "teach . . . diligently" (D&C 88:78) and be as skilled and effective in teaching as is our adversary.

Strategy #15: Teach the many personal benefits and blessings that come to those who wait until marriage for sexual relationships.

We previously noted that all behavior has consequences and outlined many of the painful physical, mental, social, and spiritual consequences that are experienced by those who do not sexually abstain until marriage. We should also teach the many positive consequences of waiting for marriage to have these intimate experiences. They include:

Â Retaining your membership in Christ's restored church and enjoying the blessings that come with that membership, including partaking of the sacrament, paying tithing and fast offerings, and enjoying fellowship with the Saints.

Â Having the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost in our lives.

Â Experiencing no delay in a mission call or temple marriage.

Â Having the confidence that comes from having virtuous thoughts. (See D&C 121:45-46.)

Â Not having to worry about sexually transmitted diseases for yourself, your spouse (if he/she sexually abstained), and your children.

Â Enjoying the strength of character and the spiritual development that comes from living God's commandments.

Â Standing as candidates for entering the celestial kingdom after death if we continue to prove ourselves faithful.

Â Having the happiness and peace of mind that come from observance of God's laws. (See Mosiah 2:41.)

Â Being able to learn about sexual intimacy with only one person—your husband or wife, within the marital relationship.

One married student I taught at BYU, Chanalin Prina, wrote concerning the blessings of sexual morality:

Sex is a powerful thing. It has the power to unite two people in the most beautiful and complete way, while at the same time it has the power to destroy marriages and individuals completely. I think a lot of the problems young people have today in regard to sex are from improper examples and the lack of teaching the appropriateness of a sexual relationship. Somewhere in all the media the beauty of sex has been lost. It cannot be conveyed over a movie screen, in magazines, TV, or in pop rock. I think the beauty of sex can only be experienced in a proper marriage relationship where respect, love, and the Lord are the foundations. It should be taught in the home rather than in public places. And some parents are not taking the responsibility to teach their children appropriately. They leave those sacred teachings to others, where they are twisted and incorrectly perceived. . . .

The sexual desires we have are God-given and should always be regarded as such. Sex (when experienced appropriately in marriage) is not dirty, nor is it wrong. Unfortunately, some LDS youth grow up believing [otherwise]. I believe it is because we are always told what not to do, without much explanation why. Until recently, most of us have never been taught that sex is a beautiful union between husband and wife and that this [union] will only be enhanced by waiting until marriage.

I think it is important to focus on the benefits of waiting when teaching young people. If we can see how beautiful it can be, and how much more we will be able to cherish it, we will be more likely to wait, and less likely to be scared or have misconceptions about our future sexual relationships with our spouses.

Somehow we must help our youth understand that the benefits of delayed sexual gratification until after marriage far outweigh the temporary pleasure of sexual indulgence while single!

Strategy #16: Share the teachings of the latter-day prophets. Our apostles and prophets speak in behalf of the Lord, giving us guidance as they are inspired by God. Their words can be powerful aids as we seek to teach the youth of the Church.

President Ezra Taft Benson noted the predictable pain that will always follow sexual immorality. He said:

Some would justify their immorality with the argument that restrictions against it are merely religious rules, rules that are meaningless because in reality there is no God. This you will recognize is merely an untruthful rationalization designed to justify one's carnal appetite, lust, and passion. God's law is irrevocable. It applies to all, whether they believe in God or not.

Everyone is subject to its penalties, no matter how one tries to rationalize or ignore them. Immorality always brings with it attendant remorse. A person cannot indulge in promiscuous relations without suffering ill effects from it. He cannot do wrong and feel right—it is impossible.

Anytime one breaks a law of God, he pays a penalty in heartache, in sadness, in remorse, in lack of self-respect, and he removes himself from contact with the Spirit of God. Is it any wonder that those who indulge in sex relations outside of marriage deny God. (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 281; italics added.)

President Benson also warned:

"If you fail as young people to properly restrain yourselves [sexually] you will pay the penalty in heartache, disappointment, and loss of self-respect. Do not reach out too eagerly for the excitements and thrills of life or they will turn to ashes in your hands. They will come in their own due time in the sacred bonds of marriage." (Ibid., p. 286.)

He similarly noted:

Do not be misled by Satan's lies. There is no lasting happiness in immorality. There is no joy to be found in breaking the law of chastity. Just the opposite is true. There may be momentary pleasure. For a time it may seem like everything is wonderful. But quickly the relationship will sour. Guilt and shame set in. We become fearful that our sins will be discovered. We must sneak and hide, lie and cheat. Love begins to die. Bitterness, jealousy, anger, and even hate begin to grow. All of these are the natural results of sin and transgression. (Ibid., p. 285; italics added.)

On the topic of the consequences of sexual sin, President Kimball noted:

There are many causes for human suffering—including war, disease, and poverty—and the suffering that proceeds from each of these is very real, but I would not be true to my trust if I did not say that the most persistent cause of human suffering, that suffering which causes the deepest pain, is sin—the violation of the commandments given to us by God. There cannot be, for instance, a rich and full life unless we practice total chastity before marriage and total fidelity after. There cannot be a sense of wholeness and integrity if we lie, steal, or cheat. There cannot be sweetness in our lives if we are filled with envy or covetousness. Our lives cannot really be abundant if we do not honor our parents. If any of us wish to have more precise prescriptions for ourselves in terms of what we can do to have more abundant lives, all we usually need to do is to consult our conscience. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 155; italics added.)

In 1990 the First Presidency gave the following admonitions to the young people of the Church:

You are not just ordinary young men and women. You are choice spirits who have been held in reserve to come forth in this day when the temptations, responsibilities, and opportunities are the very greatest. You are at a critical time in your lives. This is a time for you not only to live righteously but also to set an example for your peers. . . .

Your Father in Heaven is mindful of you. He has given you commandments to guide you, to discipline you. He has also given you your agency—freedom of choice—"to see if [you] will do all things whatsoever [He] shall command" (Abraham 3:25). Freedom of choice is a God-given, eternal principle that carries with it moral responsibilities for the choices made. We counsel you to choose to live a morally clean life. The prophet Alma declared, "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). Truer words were never spoken!

You cannot do wrong and feel right. It is impossible! Years of happiness can be lost in the foolish gratification of a momentary desire for pleasure. Satan would have you believe that happiness comes only as you surrender to his enticement to self-indulgence. We need only to look at the shattered lives of those who violate God's laws to know why Satan is called the "father of all lies" (2 Nephi 2:18). (For the Strength of Youth, pp. 3-5. Used by permission.)

Strategy #17: Finally, teach Doctrine and Covenants 100:16-17. It states:

"For I will raise up unto myself a pure people, that will serve me in righteousness;

"And all that call upon the name of the Lord, and keep his commandments, shall be saved."

Each time I give a lecture or talk at BYU on sexual behavior, I conclude by reading these verses. The Lord revealed that in the last days, prior to his second coming, people would generally be unrestrained when seeking sexual gratification. It appears we are now at that point. The Lord needs a people who will not join in such sexual sin, "a pure people," who will serve him in righteousness and help with his latter-day work with virtuous hearts and minds. (Also see D&C 43:14.)

Despite all our mortal imperfections, Latter-day Saints are that people! He is depending on us to help him build his kingdom. To be able to do so, we must keep ourselves pure and removed from worldly trends and wickedness. (For the importance of personal purity in the last days, see D&C 35:21; 38:8; 50:28-29; 56:18; 88:84; 97:16, 21; 112:28; 121:42; 124:54; and 136:11.)

In addition to these things, we must have the Holy Ghost in our lives, as we have discussed. To receive that great blessing, we must love God, "and purify [ourselves] before him." (D&C 76:116.)

The blessings of sexual abstinence before marriage are very great indeed. The consequences of sexual sin also are great. If we can help our youth to understand both blessings and consequences, we can go far toward teaching them to obey this most important commandment of the Lord.
