Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 7

Special Difficulties during Engagement

We have already discussed how a high percentage (86 percent male, 80 percent female) of young single people in the United States have had sexual relationships by age nineteen. To turn those figures around, only 14 percent of men and 20 percent of women have sexually abstained up to that point in their life.

But that's only part of the story. The median age for marriage in the United States is currently about twenty-four for women and twenty-six for men. Since the above study deals only with the teen years, we need to realize that these nineteen year olds have, on average, another five to seven years before marriage. During these years, many men and women continue to have many opportunities to make choices about sexual abstinence.

It has been my observation while teaching at three major universities besides BYU that many young people have been taught to wait until marriage to engage in sexual relationships—and they fully intend to do so. Unfortunately, fewer and fewer actually make it to marriage without having had these experiences.

Among students who come from a religious background, many practice sexual abstinence during casual dating or the early part of the relationship. The difficulty comes when couples become serious, particularly if they decide to marry. After the official engagement, their desire to abstain sexually is challenged in new and powerful ways. There are, indeed, substantial difficulties during engagement.

Commitment Promotes Intimacy

There is a phenomenon noted in most college textbooks on marriage called the commitment/intimacy continuum. It is this: "The more committed we become in a relationship, the more likely it is that greater intimacy will occur." Let me explain.

When couples begin dating each other they have minimal commitment. They may go on one date and that's the end of it. Or, if they like each other, they may go on a second or third date. Perhaps they'll even continue dating until they are going steady and stop dating other people. Next, they may become engaged, with marriage following soon after. As their relationship develops, they go from minimum commitment (first date) to the maximum commitment of marriage.

The intimacy continuum progresses in the same way. They start with minimum intimacy, which usually begins with hand-holding. Next come arms on each other's shoulders or around the waist. Somewhere along the way, kisses, first of appreciation and then of affection, become part of the relationship.

Such exchanges of intimacy are appropriate. But some couples unwisely proceed to caressing or stroking various parts of the body (petting), which induces greater sexual pleasure, kissing parts of the body besides the mouth, touching each other below the waist, and finally sexual intercourse. On this continuum they start with minimum intimacy (hand-holding) and proceed to the maximum intimacy of full sexual relationships.

Some sociologists note that the two trends usually occur together. The more committed a couple become to each other, the more likely it is that greater intimacy will occur. In essence, commitment promotes intimacy.

Unaware of this trend, many engaged couples, including some Latter-day Saints, end up becoming more intimate with each other than they anticipated. Part of the reason is the "love makes it right" (or less wrong) ideology. I caution engaged students in my classes, telling them that if they want to wait until marriage for full intimacy they will have to be on guard, adjusting their behavior accordingly. During the engagement period many couples sometimes unknowingly overstimulate each other sexually. Frank discussions and appropriate adaptations should consequently follow.

A Needed Warning

I remember so well the day Susan and I became engaged. It was December 31, 1964. (We were married five months later, on June 5, 1965, in the Manti Temple.) For our engagement I took her to Temple Square and we stood between the Handcart and Seagull monuments, where I gave her an engagement ring. The next day we announced our engagement to our friends and classmates. It was a time of joy and excitement. The following Sunday, we went to church and announced our engagement to ward members and our bishop, T. Darrell Bushnell. He graciously congratulated us on our engagement and then invited us to a monthly meeting he held for all newly engaged couples in the ward. The meeting was held the following Sunday evening.

There were two or three other newly engaged couples who met with Susan and me and Bishop Bushnell. He again congratulated us on our engagements and then gave a rather stern warning about the sexual temptations that awaited us as we prepared for our wedding day. At first I was shocked at his firm warning. Up to that point in our relationship we were physically attracted to each other but had been able to live the standards set by the Church. But once people become engaged to be married, values start doing crazy flip-flops as new temptations are faced.

Bishop Bushnell told us he had been the bishop of a BYU singles ward for some time. Many couples, he said, naively went into their engagements unaware of the new situation they were in. Temptations would increase, he said. The adversary would work overtime to prevent our temple marriages. We might find it easy to make excuses for behavior that earlier would have been out of the question.

He reviewed with us the questions we would later be asked in our temple recommend interviews. He also invited us to meet with him as often as needed to help us stay on track. He was, indeed, a wise bishop, and now, when I meet Bishop Bushnell in Provo where he still lives and works, I thank him for that frank talk and warning he gave Susan, me, and others that night in January 1965, just five months before our wedding.

Virtue Versus Purity

A few years later, after we were married and had started our family, Susan and I took the children to the movie Pinocchio one evening. In the movie, Jiminy Cricket and Pinocchio have a discussion on what is right and what is wrong. Jiminy Cricket says that "sin is something wrong that seems right at the time." I have used that quote often with engaged couples I've dealt with, trying to warn them of the temptations that await them. I have found that many LDS couples experience minimal temptations prior to their engagement. But after the engagement the temptations usually increase for all. Couples must take care that they don't do "something wrong" together, even if it "seems right at the time."

Sometime later I read a book by Elder Hugh B. Brown called You and Your Marriage. Elder Brown made the point that most people can be virtuous if they are never tempted. But it is only after we resist temptation that we actually become pure. He observed:

"There is a distinction between innocence and purity. One is passive and the other active. Someone has paraphrased one of Ella Wheeler Wilcox's poems as follows:

It's easy enough to be virtuous When nothing tempts you to stray, When without and within no voice of sin Is luring your soul away; But it's only a negative virtue Until it is tried by fire And the soul that is worth the blessing of earth Is the soul that resists desire. (You and Your Marriage, p. 67.)

I suggest to single Latter-day Saints that they should never marry someone to whom they are not physically attracted. The vast majority of them are sexually attracted to their chosen mate. Because of this, I guarantee that almost all engaged couples will, as Elder Brown noted, be "tried by fire," the fire of desire. Hopefully, during this difficult time, they will also be among the souls that resist desire.

Love and Sex

While I was teaching at Southern Illinois University, one of the students in a class made an interesting observation. She said, "Men give love to get sex. And women give sex to get love." While that may or may not be the case after marriage, I can assure you that trend is in operation among many single people today. After much discussion in class, most of the two hundred students decided they agreed with her statement. Many single males do make statements of love as a means of enticing single women into a sexual relationship. And many single women engage in sexual relationships to seek to bring a single man into a love relationship.

One thing I learned from this experience is that, in the minds of many young women today, "love somehow makes it [sexual relationships] right." Or, if love doesn't make sex right, in some mysterious way it at least makes it "less wrong." I also learned from some of the single men in the class (most of whom admitted to experimentation with premarital sex) that they had specific ways or techniques of trying to convince young women they were "loved," hoping to increase the likelihood of sexual intimacy. Some claimed they could do so in just weeks or even, in a few cases, just days. I would hope that we wouldn't find such behavior among Latter-day Saints, but, unfortunately, I know of a few instances in which it has happened.

Genuine Love

The incidents just cited involved young couples who frequently had no intention of marriage. But what about the young couple who genuinely love each other and do intend to marry? They are also sometimes caught in the same philosophical shift and start believing that "love makes it right . . . or less wrong." This way of thinking appears to be a common trend among many young adults, including some Latter-day Saints.

Of course, such thinking is false and reflects a philosophy that Satan would have us embrace. I caution young couples that they need to resist such thoughts, to avoid all temptation to believe them, and certainly never to act on them.

Suggestions for Sexual Control during Engagement

When teaching at BYU about sexual abstinence before marriage, I give my students ten suggestions to help them avoid the added sexual temptations during the critical weeks or months of their engagement:

It is most important that those preparing to go to the temple not second-guess their bishops about their worthiness and the repentance process. Those who have committed a sexual transgression should get complete clearance from their bishop before sending out wedding invitations announcing marriage in the temple. No one should go to the temple unworthily—even if clearance takes a long time. The Lord has made it clear that he simply "will not be mocked" (D&C 63:58; 104:6; 124:71) by people lying or misrepresenting themselves in interviews with Church leaders.

How long is too long? I believe that once a couple decides to marry, they should marry as soon as possible. This implies that they have been careful in the first place in deciding to get married—the process of coming to a decision may take several months. But once the decision of who to marry is made, the when should generally follow quickly. Granted, it can take several months to plan a wedding. So an engagement of five or six months may be warranted. But beyond that, I believe young couples are setting themselves up for problems.

Bedrooms clearly have a sexual connotation; by avoiding them one can also lessen temptations.

Why would an engaged couple go into a bedroom? Some may innocently want to take a short nap on the bed, rather than lying on the front room floor or couch. Every year at BYU I have students tell me they often cannot get into their bedroom because roommates are in there "napping" with a boyfriend or girlfriend, planning a wedding, or doing any of a number of other things. Some of these activities may be appropriate in the living room, but it is my feeling that, for single people, no activity is appropriate in the bedroom. It's just too dangerous.

There is another caution I need to give. In recent years I've noticed an increase in what I call "sleep overs." A boyfriend will drive a long distance to date a young woman at BYU, and at the conclusion of the date he will end up sleeping in her front room. The excuse is that the weather is bad, it's too late to drive safely, and the young man has nowhere else to spend the night. Unfortunately, such situations are often just the beginning of future sexual interludes. Remember, Satan likes to lead us "carefully" to destruction. (2 Ne. 28:21.)

The first time or two the boyfriend will sleep on the couch, get up early the next morning, and leave. Next, he may sleep on the bed with his girlfriend, but both remain fully clothed. Nothing happens sexually for a time or two. Then, one evening all the other roommates are gone, and the couple retires to the bedroom. Only this time the clothing is removed, and you can guess the rest.

It is wise counsel to stay out of bedrooms for any reason. It is also wise to avoid these "sleep overs" at all costs. Surely the young woman knows of some other appropriate place where her date could spend the night.

It's true that sexual stimuli can come unsolicited to almost everyone in our sexually oriented society. But as one of my lifelong friends, David Despain, has noted, "Just because a bird flies over your head, you don't have to let it build a nest in your hair." Modern revelation admonishes us to "let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God." (D&C 121:45; italics added.) Constantly allowing our thoughts to wander or dwell on sexual stimuli during the engagement period only increases the sexual pressure that many couples already feel.

Most couples can initially share appropriate types of affection such as holding hands and kissing and still stay well within the bounds of propriety. They often do not understand, however, that if they move to new levels of intimate behavior the circumstance becomes proportionally more difficult to control. Erotic kissing and caressing various parts of the body only lead to greater levels of intimacy. If such behavior occurs frequently and with great intensity, it is not a matter of if, but only a matter of when they will progress to sexual intercourse. Some engaged couples naively see how close to the edge of the cliff they can get without actually going over.

Other couples will become involved in what has become known as "technical virginity." They will not engage in sexual intercourse, hoping that they thereby can pass their temple recommend interview. But they will become involved in other types of inappropriate sexual behavior—including heavy petting with clothing removed or even oral sex—and yet believe they "technically" are virgins. The Church now gives local leaders the understanding that oral sex is a serious sin, and instructs those leaders to deal accordingly with single members engaging in such behavior.

Latter-day Saint students often ask in class, "Where do you draw the line when it comes to sexual intimacy before marriage?" I write on the board "Twelve Stages of Physical Intimacy" and then draw "The LDS Line":

Twelve Stages of Physical Intimacy

The LDS Line

(Adapted from Desmond Morris, Intimate Behavior [New York: Random House, 1971], pp. 71-78.)

Stages 1 to 8 are entirely appropriate for LDS engaged couples, but care should be taken in proceeding past the line. Those who do cross that line are putting themselves at great risk—and if they do so frequently and intensely they will almost certainly progress to the point of sexual intercourse.

I suggest in my marriage classes that bishops should be seen as allies and not enemies when it comes to temple worthiness. When a Church member desires to enter the temple, he or she must receive the endorsement of two elders of Israel (usually the bishop and stake president), signifying his or her worthiness to enter. I encourage newly engaged couples to meet with their bishop soon after their engagement. Ask him to review the temple recommend questions. Also ask him to help define the appropriate boundaries for affection during the engagement period.

If a couple feels unduly tempted, fearing they are "approaching the edge of the cliff," they should meet with their bishop as soon as possible; doing so may help them to avoid transgression. Bishops and stake presidents are experienced in dealing with such situations and couples should take advantage of their expertise and spiritual help for precautionary purposes.

When Susan and I became engaged while attending BYU, a General Authority gave a devotional address that discouraged engaged couples from praying together in intimate settings. He particularly suggested that engaged couples not go into bedrooms to pray. Furthermore, he noted that prayer can help create added intimacy between a man and a woman and is encouraged with married couples for that reason. But engaged couples should pray together only with caution.

I believe it may be appropriate for a couple to pray together at the beginning of a date or the beginning of a long trip. But extended prayers in isolation, particularly late at night, should be avoided by LDS engaged couples striving for sexual abstinence prior to marriage.

Prepare and Prevent

During our struggles to live the law of chastity during the engagement period we should keep in mind that (1) temptations and problems are common to all; (2) Heavenly Father will never allow us to be tempted beyond our capacity to withstand temptation; and (3) he will help provide means whereby we can overcome our temptations in life.

Paul wrote: "There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it." (1 Cor. 10:13; see also 1 Ne. 3:7.)

President Ezra Taft Benson gave some valuable counsel on chastity that has specific relevance for engaged couples who are preparing for a temple marriage. He said, "When it comes to the law of chastity, it is better to prepare and prevent than it is to repair and repent."

He then gave a few suggestions to help single people avoid sexual transgression. Engaged couples who follow them will surely reach their goal of a worthy temple marriage. President Benson said: "Decide now to be chaste. Control your thoughts. Always pray for the power to resist temptation. . . . For those who are single and dating members of the opposite sex, carefully plan positive and constructive activities so that you are not left to yourselves with nothing to do but share physical affection." (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, pp. 284-85.)
