Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 8

For Those Who Have Sinned

All who become disciples of Jesus Christ have to reconcile their past sinful behavior with their present desire to become righteous, "for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God." (Rom. 3:23.)

All have sinned, but there is hope. John taught: "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he [Christ] is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." (1 John 1:8-9.)

When we get discouraged because of our sins, we must remember that the Lord is eager for us to repent and be forgiven. Even many of his valiant disciples had to repent of a sinful past before they could move ahead as servants of the Lord. Let me give you some examples.

Most are aware of the conversion of Alma the younger and the four sons of Mosiah, who, before their repentance, "were the very vilest of sinners" (Mosiah 28:4) and even sought to destroy the church (Mosiah 27:10; Alma 26:18). Alma the elder also had an unrighteous past prior to his conversion. He wrote:

"Remember the iniquity of king Noah and his priests; and I myself was caught in a snare, and did many things which were abominable in the sight of the Lord, which caused me sore repentance;

"Nevertheless, after much tribulation, the Lord did hear my cries, and did answer my prayers, and has made me an instrument in his hands in bringing so many of you to a knowledge of his truth." (Mosiah 23:9-10.)

Even mighty Nephi lamented his sins. He wrote:

"Notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord, in showing me his great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth: O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities.

"I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me.

"And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins; nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted." (2 Ne. 4:17-19.)

The Apostle Paul was deeply concerned about the sins he'd committed before he was converted to Jesus Christ. He had witnessed and consented to the stoning and death of Stephen and "made havock of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women committed them to prison." (Acts 8:1-3; also see Acts 7:54-60.) On several occasions he was active in the persecution of the Saints and did many things "contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth." (Acts 26:9-10; also see Gal. 1:13.) After acknowledging his past persecutions of the church (Philip. 3:6), he did the only thing one can do who has sinned and desires to serve the Lord:

"This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus." (Philip. 3:13-14; italics added.)

In modern times we have similar examples of those who were anxious to be forgiven of past sins. Though the youthful sins of young Joseph Smith are not identified, he wrote of his youth:

"I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which, I am sorry to say, led me into divers temptations, offensive in the sight of God. In making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been." (JS-Hist. 1:28.)

Of the night when the angel Moroni first appeared to Joseph Smith, Joseph wrote: "I often felt condemned for my weakness and imperfections; when on the evening of the above-mentioned twenty-first of September, after I had retired to my bed for the night, I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him." (JS-Hist. 1:29.)

As others joined the Church after the restoration, they likely had similar concerns about past sins. The Lord frequently revealed that if they would go forth to preach the gospel they would bring salvation to their own souls (see D&C 4:4; 11:3; 12:3; 14:3) and would be forgiven of their previous sins (see D&C 31:5; 62:3; 84:61).

If Sexual Transgressions Have Occurred

The ideal pattern would be for all young members of the Church to follow the Lord's admonition to wait until marriage for sexual relationships. Many do. Some don't. And if Latter-day Saints follow current trends, an increasing number will fall into the category of those who have not waited. What might be done or said to those who have sinned? Is all hope lost for forgiveness? Can they repent? Can they become virtuous again? Can they even go forth and teach the laws of chastity to others when they, themselves, were not able at first to abide by the teachings of the Lord?

The answer lies in the story of Corianton. Corianton committed the great sin of going in to the harlot, Isabel—and he did so while he was on his mission! His father, Alma the younger, confronted him, saying, "Thou didst do that which was grievous unto me; for thou didst forsake the ministry, and did go over into the land of Siron among the borders of the Lamanites, after the harlot Isabel. Yea, and she did steal away the hearts of many, but this was no excuse for thee, my son. Thou shouldst have tended to the ministry wherewith thou wast entrusted." (Alma 39:3-5.)

The sinful behavior of Corianton hindered the missionary endeavors of his father, who further counseled: "Suffer not yourself to be led away by any vain or foolish thing; suffer not the devil to lead away your heart again after those wicked harlots. Behold, O my son, how great iniquity ye brought upon the Zoramites; for when they saw your conduct they would not believe in my words." (Alma 39:11.)

Often our understanding of Corianton's life stops there. But we should read on. Alma counseled Corianton to "turn to the Lord with all your mind, might, and strength" and return to the Zoramites and "acknowledge your faults and that wrong which ye have done." (Alma 39:13.) Then, after teaching Corianton pertinent gospel concepts (Alma 40-42), Alma told his son to go forth on his mission: "And now, O my son, ye are called of God to preach the word unto this people. And now, my son, go thy way, declare the word with truth and soberness, that thou mayest bring souls unto repentance, that the great plan of mercy may have claim upon them." (Alma 42:31.)

Apparently Corianton followed the counsel of his father, repented of his sins, went on his mission, and remained faithful to the Lord's teachings. At the end of the book of Alma we read: "And [Shiblon] was a just man, and he did walk uprightly before God; and he did observe to do good continually, to keep the commandments of the Lord his God; and also did his brother." (Alma 63:2.) Since Shiblon's older brother, Helaman, had already died (Alma 62:52), it seems likely that the righteous brother described in this verse is Corianton (also see Alma 49:30; 63:10).

The Past, Present, and Future

While I was serving as a branch president at the Missionary Training Center in Provo, Utah, I interviewed an elder who doubted his ability to be a worthy missionary. He said he had committed many sexual sins in his life, all of which he had confessed to his bishop and stake president. Some of his sins were serious enough that his mission call was delayed while he further confessed to a General Authority of the Church. Finally, he was cleared for missionary service.

Even though he had confessed and forsaken his sins (see D&C 58:43), he was still worried about his ability to be an effective missionary. I suggested he become a modern Corianton. At first he was shocked at the suggestion. Like many others, he was familiar only with Corianton's escapade with Isabel, not with his subsequent repentance and service. We read together Alma's call for Corianton to return to the Lord with all his "mind, might and strength" and to go forth preaching the gospel. We read the other scriptures that indicated Corianton's response as he became a faithful missionary and disciple.

During the course of our lengthy discussion that night I suggested that the present is more important than the past. All we can do about our past is turn from it, repent, and learn from it. (See D&C 67:14.) I also stated my belief that, in some ways, the future is more important than the present. All of us can "become," and choose to travel in new, more worthy paths than we have taken in the past.

The elder left that night still not certain he could overcome a riotous past and serve a faithful mission. Later, when he arrived in the mission field, he wrote me a letter and thanked me for our discussion while he was in the Missionary Training Center. He said he was trying to become a modern Corianton and thanked me for the thought written at the bottom of his letter:

"What we are is more important than what we have been;

And what we can become is more important than what we are."

I believe this insight is still significant for many other "Coriantons" who have sinned, have genuinely repented by confessing and forsaking their sins, and now have a true desire to serve the Lord.

Once Lost, Can Virtue Be Regained?

Young Latter-day Saints who have had sexual experiences prior to marriage may wonder if they can become virtuous again. If they repent can virtue be regained completely or just partially? It is a good question that deserves some attention.

When I was a young boy growing up in the Church I once had a sobering lesson on chastity. For a visual aid, the teacher brought to class a board, a nail, and a hammer. During his lesson he hammered the nail into the board and said, "That is sin." Then he pulled the nail out of the board and said, "That is repentance." Finally, he drew our attention to the hole that remained in the board and said that even though we repented there would always be a hole in the board. We could not, he suggested, totally regain our virtue.

That was a powerful lesson to a group of young Latter-day Saints in their early teens. I left his lesson that day fully believing that once you had "lost your virtue" you could never totally regain it.

A few years later we had a similar lesson from another teacher. She, too, brought the board, hammer, and nail, but she also brought a can of wood putty. She hammered the nail in the board, pulled it out, and then gave a magnificent lesson on the atonement of Christ. She put the wood putty in the hole to symbolize that once we sin, we can, through proper repentance, become totally virtuous again. She concluded her lesson with a quotation from Isaiah: "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." (Isa. 1:18.) I've always been grateful for that can of wood putty our teacher brought to class. But now I understand that when we truly repent, the power of the atonement is so great it doesn't just cover over our sins—it's as though the Savior gives us a new board!

Our prophets have clearly taught about the power of Christ to cleanse us. President Ezra Taft Benson said:

There may be some for whom the counsel to prepare and prevent is too late. You may already be deeply entangled in serious sin. If this is the case, there is no choice now but to repair your lives and repent of your sins. To you I would suggest five important things you can do to come back to a state of moral purity: (1) Flee immediately from any situation you are in that is either causing you to sin or that may cause you to sin; (2) Plead with the Lord for the power to overcome; (3) Let your priesthood leaders help you resolve the transgression and come back into full fellowship with the Lord; (4) Drink from the divine fountain and fill your lives with positive sources of power; and (5) Remember that through proper repentance, you can become clean again. For those who pay the price required by true repentance the promise is sure. You can be clean again. The despair can be lifted. The sweet peace of forgiveness will flow into your lives. In this dispensation the Lord spoke with clarity when he said: "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more" (D&C 58:42). (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 284; italics added.)

Second Virginity

During the past few years a term has been coined to describe an admirable trend. It is called "Second Virginity." Some young people who have had sexual experiences, and then experience the remorse and other consequences that follow, suddenly realize that sexual abstinence is best after all. They then choose to enter into what is called a "Second Virginity," where they practice and advocate sexual abstinence prior to marriage.

Of course, for Latter-day Saints it is not enough simply to change behavior. Forgiveness and cleansing come only when we truly repent.

Young people who choose to enter their Second Virginity should be careful, because once a person has become involved in sex it is much easier to become involved the second time. I have noticed in my counseling of many young people that the temptation is much greater (perhaps seven times!) the "second time around" because of patterns of behavior that have now been learned. (See Matt. 12:43-45.) Greater care, caution, and concern must be exhibited by one who desires to remain abstinent after having been involved in inappropriate sexual behavior.

In some ways the Second Virginity philosophy is commendable and is undoubtedly experienced by some Latter-day Saints. There is a danger, however, for young Latter-day Saints to believe they can sin sexually and then merely enter the Second Virginity stage with little or no consequences.

I recently became aware of a young Latter-day Saint couple who seemed to emphasize the letter rather than the spirit of the law of chastity. They drove to another state where they were married in a civil ceremony. Following the ceremony they spent a three-day honeymoon in a local motel. Then they went through the appropriate legal channels, had their marriage annulled, and returned home.

Had sin been committed? They were "legally" married during the days they engaged in sexual intimacy. But was their conduct inappropriate? Their weekend escapade became known to their bishop. What should he have done?

Should he have held a disciplinary council? If the naive young couple later desired to be married to others in the temple, should recommends be granted? Should any repentance or period of probation be required before going to the temple?

When We Sin Knowingly

People who sin unknowingly or ignorantly will not be judged as harshly as those who have been taught otherwise. Alma noted that "good and evil have come before all men; he that knoweth not good from evil is blameless." (Alma 29:5.)

But those who sin knowingly (as did the young couple in the above example) will have to answer for their actions. Nephi, who witnessed the fall of the Nephites prior to the visitation of the Savior, wrote of them: "Now they did not sin ignorantly, for they knew the will of God concerning them, for it had been taught unto them; therefore they did willfully rebel against God." (3 Ne. 6:18; also see 4 Ne. 1:38; Morm. 1:16.) James likewise noted: "To him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin." (James 4:17. Used by permission.)

In 1990 the LDS First Presidency expressed similar concerns:

Some people knowingly break God's commandments. They plan to repent before they go on a mission or receive the sacred covenants and ordinances of the temple. Repentance for such behavior is difficult and painful and may take a long time. It is better to not commit the sin. Certain sins are of such gravity that they can put your membership in the Church and your eternal life at risk. Sexual sins are among those of such seriousness. (For the Strength of Youth, p. 17. Used by permission.)

But if we have sinned, we must not think all is lost. The First Presidency reminds us of the blessing of repentance:

Where choices have already led to sexual impurity, repentance is the way back. Talk to your parents and your bishop. They love you and will explain to you how to repent and put your life in order again. Follow their counsel.

The miracle of forgiveness is real, and true repentance is accepted by the Lord. Full repentance of some sins requires that we not only confess and resolve them with the Lord but that we also do so with the Church. The bishop and stake president have been appointed by revelation to serve as judges in these cases.

Only the Lord can forgive sins, but these priesthood leaders can assist the transgressor in the process of repentance. In serious cases of transgression, Church disciplinary action could be required and disfellowshipment or excommunication could result. These actions are taken only when they are necessary in the repentance process. If you have sinned, the sooner you begin to make your way back, the sooner you will find the sweet peace and joy that come with the miracle of forgiveness.

As you follow these guidelines, you will feel and experience the power of the Spirit of the Lord, you will come to know the truth, and you will gain confidence in yourself and the Lord. The Savior taught, "The truth shall make you free" (John 8:32). As you grow in that truth and freedom, you will experience the peace of the Lord Jesus Christ, a peace that brings great strength. (For the Strength of Youth, pp. 17-18. Used by permission.)

Satan Dwells on Our Past

It has been my observation that once we have repented, Satan wants us to continue to pay a great amount of attention to our sinful pasts. He does this, I believe, to prevent us from concentrating on current opportunities to mature and grow, and to love and serve others. Remember, Satan is a miserable person who wants to make others miserable like unto himself. (See 2 Ne. 2:27.)

Not long ago I had a conversation with a woman who was serving as Young Women's president in her stake. She was a beautiful woman and was doing a wonderful job in her calling. But she confided that she was sometimes uncomfortable in her service because of sexual sins she had committed as a young woman growing up in the Church. These sexual experiences constantly returned to her mind as she was serving in her current Church calling, and she couldn't get rid of them. She asked me for advice.

I suggested to her that we often get into the saint/sinner mentality in the Church, thinking that others are either all saint or all sinner. Of course, we all are a mixture of both. And what of the sinner in us? I recalled a quotation I had learned on my mission, penned by the Scottish poet Robert Burns. He observed that "Saints are just sinners who keep on trying."

Anyone who goes into a helping profession—whether it be in a career, as a church leader, or as a community worker—has to deal with the reality of his or her own imperfections. I told the woman that when I got into marriage counseling I occasionally felt I couldn't help others because of my own imperfections. But one of my teachers at Florida State University (a former Methodist minister) gave me both comfort and encouragement. He emphasized again and again: "One imperfect person can help another imperfect person."

The Young Women's president was encouraged as I had been. Even though we are all imperfect human beings, we can learn to "bear one another's burdens, [and] comfort those that stand in need of comfort." (Mosiah 18:8-10.) As parents, teachers, and even leaders, our weak traits or characteristics can become our strengths—if we will learn to come unto Christ, be humble, have faith, and receive his grace. (See Eth. 12:27.)

Go in Peace

Finally, I suggested that this Young Women's president go home and reread Luke 7:36-50. To me, this is one of the most inspiring and sensitive accounts in scripture. It is almost like a short one-act play with three people: A Pharisee named Simon, a woman identified as a "sinner," and Jesus. Simon had invited Jesus to come to his home and eat with him. After Jesus sat down, the woman, "a sinner," began to anoint his feet with ointment. As she did so she wept, washing his feet with her tears, then wiping them with the long hair of her head. Simon was offended, and said "within himself" that Jesus obviously wasn't really a prophet—if he were, he would know the woman was a sinner and would not allow her to touch him.

Jesus apparently perceived Simon's thoughts, and gave unto him a parable:

"There was a certain creditor which had two debtors; the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him the most?" (Vv. 41-42.)

Simon thought it over and said "I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most." Jesus answered, "Thou hast rightly judged." (V. 43.)

Then, while Simon seemed to want to dwell on the woman's sinful past, Jesus shifted focus, pointing out her present commendable acts. He noted that she had washed his feet and kissed them, and had anointed them with oil. Simon, on the other hand, had failed to give Jesus water for his feet, had given him no kiss of greeting, and had not honored Jesus by anointing his head with oil.

Jesus then said: "Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much; but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little. And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven." (Vv. 47-48; italics added.)

His final words to the woman were, "Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace." (V. 50; italics added.)

There is a magnificent lesson in this biblical episode, particularly since, as we noted in the beginning of this chapter, "all have sinned." We, too, must become like the woman in Simon's house, put our sins behind us through proper repentance, and then "go in peace" and no longer be troubled by our sinful past.

Perhaps some young Latter-day Saint men and women have not yet accepted a mission call because they have sinned and have not yet confessed, repented, and forsaken the sin. They should do so now—and then "go in peace."

Maybe others are putting off a temple marriage because of a sinful past. They should repent by confessing and forsaking their sins, meet all the requirements given by their bishop and stake president, and then do as Paul did: "[Forget] those things which are behind." (Philip. 3:13.) Having gone through the process of repentance, they should go worthily to the temple—and they should "go in peace."

Maybe there are those who are being taught the gospel by the missionaries and are hesitant to proceed because of a sinful past. Some may feel unworthy to be baptized and then serve in a Church calling. Male converts may feel uncertain about receiving the priesthood because of sins they have committed. Such potential members should likewise properly repent by confessing and forsaking their sins, and then go forth to be baptized, symbolically washing away their sins and enabling them to start anew. (D&C 20:37.) Then, after being baptized and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, these new members should remember that the Lord forgets their sins—and so should they. (See Isa. 1:18; D&C 58:42-43.) With these blessings, they can move forward in newness of life—and as they progress, they should "go in peace."

So with all of us. The Lord abhors sin, but he forgives those who are truly penitent. And then, even though our past sins may be "as scarlet," we can "go in peace," for the Lord, in his love, will make them "white as snow."
