Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 9

Common Questions and Answers

After we have discussed strategies for sexual abstinence before marriage, I typically give my students at BYU the opportunity to ask questions about sexual matters. Here are some of the questions they most frequently ask:

Sexual relationships in marriage are indeed sacred, and traditionally they have been kept secret as well. We have been clear about the "shalt nots" of sex, but have not said so much about the "shalts." But there is so much information on sexuality now available in the world that it seems wise for us to go on the offensive, to present a gospel view of healthy sexuality. "Ignorance is not bliss," and "What you don't know, can hurt you." Remember the statement by President Kimball that sexual incompatibility is, in his opinion, the main cause of divorce among Latter-day Saints. (See Chapter 5 for further discussion on the importance of having adequate information about sex both before and after marriage. Also see Brent A. Barlow, "They Twain Shall Be One," Ensign, Sept. 1986, p. 49.)

This is an excellent question and one that frequently arises in my classes at BYU. I believe there are at least three elements in a relationship before marriage that can indicate the degree of sexual compatibility afterward: (1) The couple should be comfortable touching each other (holding hands, arms around each other, embracing, and so forth) during the dating and engagement period; (2) The couple should feel comfortable sharing appropriate kisses of affection before marriage; and (3) The couple should anticipate and genuinely look forward to becoming more sexually intimate with each other once they are married. When any of these conditions are not met prior to marriage, I seriously question whether the couple is ready to marry, speaking in terms of sexual compatibility.

Whenever I teach classes that have a large number of engaged couples, the question of love versus lust always arises. To be honest, most of us have some experience with lust as we are growing up. It is an intense sexual passion or attraction to some person or object (including picture or video), with little or no sentiments of love. It is a fantasy or desire for sex simply for sex's sake.

In the vast majority of cases at BYU, young couples do love each other and experience genuine feelings of attraction and admiration. But because sexual feelings are also involved, engaged couples ask time and time again, "What is it we are feeling? Is it love or is it lust?"

My answer is that it could be either, or a combination of both.

I have had some interesting discussions with other professional people about whether or not it is possible for a married husband and wife to "lust" after each other. If lust is defined as an intense sexual passion or attraction to some person or thing, with little or no sentiments of love, then yes, lust can occur in marriage. But I would like to think that much of the physical attraction that married people have for each other is based on the element of love.

The same must be said of most engaged couples. I believe that most relationships are based on genuine love—but couples still need to exercise restraint and control to keep themselves morally pure until the marriage has occurred.

A scripture that sometimes causes concern for many young people is found in Matthew 5:28: "Whosoever looketh on a woman [or man] to lust after her [or him] hath committed adultery . . . already in his [her] heart." If a young person is physically attracted to another person or even "lusts" after them, is he or she the same as the adulterer or one who acts out the thought? Or suppose a young boy or girl has fantasized during self-stimulation, as apparently many have. Is he or she then in the same category as fornicators or adulterers?

President Joseph F. Smith once noted there are differing degrees of sexual sins. He observed:

There are said to be more shades of green than of any other color, so also we are of the opinion there are more grades or degrees of sin associated with the improper relationship of the sexes than of any other wrongdoing of which we have knowledge. They all involve a grave offense—the sin against chastity, but in numerous instances this sin is intensified by the breaking of sacred covenants, to which is sometimes added deceit, intimidation or actual violence.

Much as all these sins are to be denounced and deplored, we can ourselves see a difference both in intent and consequence between the offense of a young couple who, being betrothed, in an unguarded moment, without premeditation fall into sin, and that of the man who having entered into holy places and made sacred covenants, plots to rob the wife of his neighbor of her virtue either by cunning or force to accomplish his vile intent." (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 388-89.)

If, as with the reasoning of President Joseph F. Smith, adultery is more serious than fornication, and adultery committed by those who have been through the temple far more serious than those who have not been there, then it seems that thoughts or feelings of lust, though sinful, are not as serious as the acts.

There are several key areas regarding sexuality that require discussion by an engaged couple prior to marriage:

a. Ask if you are physically attracted to each other, as discussed in question #2 above.

b. Have a long, serious discussion about children, including how many are desired, when to start having them, and how close together they should be born.

c. If you decide that you do not want to have a child immediately (e.g., a honeymoon pregnancy), you will have to make appropriate plans before the wedding.

d. If you don't want your honeymoon to overlap with the onset of the new wife's menstruation, you'll need to plan accordingly.

e. If either of you have questions that require medical skills or advice, schedule premarital exams with a competent physician. Many couples desire to see an active LDS physician so questions asked during the exam might be answered within the gospel framework. Many couples arrange for a premarital exam at the same time as a blood test if they are to be married in a state that requires one.

As one prepares for marriage, there is a natural inclination to want to know whether or not your partner has been sexually involved with others. I typically advise young people not to share their sexual pasts with each other. Most young people are not mature enough to handle that kind of information early in the relationship. And unfortunately, the confessed sexual past can later be used as a weapon in arguments on other subjects. Certainly all sexual transgressions should be confessed to priesthood leaders, but I believe that couples should be obligated to share such information with each other only if the transgression took place after they started dating each other.

If either party insists on knowing about sexual pasts, it is better to discuss them long before the marriage date, rather than waiting.

The possibility of being required to reveal your sexual past is, all by itself, a major reason to practice sexual abstinence before marriage. I have known some instances where the marriage was canceled after such information was exchanged.

I do need to give a warning, though. If the errant party has confessed and forsaken the sin, and has been forgiven by both the Church and the Lord, there is great danger in judging him or her harshly. Latter-day revelation declares: "Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord: for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (D&C 64:9-10.)

This commandment applies to all forms of offenses against us—including sexual transgressions committed with others.

While it is generally my advice to keep past offenses in the past (except in confessing to priesthood leaders), the whole advent of AIDS has, in some cases, changed things. Now it can literally be a life-and-death matter whether your intended husband or wife has abstained from sexual contact outside of marriage. If there is any possibility that either partner has been exposed to the HIV virus, proper medical testing should be obtained, and concerns should be discussed openly and forthrightly long before the marriage is scheduled.

Of course, it is not legally required to reveal past sins to a prospective spouse. But in many states, it is required that you disclose (1) a previous marriage, (2) bearing or fathering a child out of wedlock, (3) a past criminal record or imprisonment, and (4) having a communicable disease or (5) having been addicted to drugs and not giving evidence of a cure. All of these, in some states, are justification for annulment if they are discovered after the marriage has been performed.

Some young Latter-day Saints have naively believed that they could simply sin, quickly repent, and then, soon after, go on missions or get married in the temple. This, of course, is a misunderstanding. Church leaders are not trying to keep Latter-day Saints who have sinned out of the temple. They just want to make sure they are repentant and ready to make serious temple covenants with the Lord—including a covenant of chastity. Usually the period of waiting is several months and can last a year or even longer depending on the circumstances.

There are several factors that contribute to the length of time that must pass before a transgressor may go on a mission or enter or return to the temple: (1) The degree of sincere repentance, (2) whether or not a male holds the Melchizedek Priesthood, (3) whether or not the erring person has previously been through the temple, (4) whether or not similar sins have occurred in the past, and how often, and (5) whether or not the offending party is a Church officer or leader.

Without question, there are serious consequences of sex outside of marriage, as noted in Chapter Six. The degree to which sex before marriage can or will affect a marriage depends on (1) how many times it occurred, (2) how many sexual partners there were, and (3) with whom it occurred, meaning, did it happen with the person he/she eventually married? If a young couple had a sexual relationship with each other just once prior to their marriage, it would have far less effect on their marriage than if one or both had sexual relationships several times with several partners prior to marriage. In such cases, it is often very difficult for the transgressors to remain true in marriage—unfortunately, habituation often continues well into the marriage. This is another good argument for sexual abstinence before marriage: so a couple can learn about intimate matters in marriage only with each other.

According to my understanding, victims of sexual assault or sexual abuse are not, in that thing, guilty of sin. Instead, they are victims both of criminal acts and of sins, rather than participants in them. Elder Rex D. Pinegar of the First Quorum of the Seventy wrote an important article on this topic entitled "Let God Judge between Me and Thee." (See Ensign, Oct. 1981, pp. 32-35.) In the article he quoted Deuteronomy 22:25-26, noting that men who commit rape should be held accountable according to the laws of the land. But the same scripture notes "but unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing. There is in the damsel no sin." (P. 34.)

Elder Pinegar also notes: "[We must] realize that the innocent victim of a crime is still acceptable before the Lord, that she may still have faith in him, that his concern for her has not lessened, and that her standing in the Church has not diminished." (P. 35.)

On a similar note, a LDS clinical psychologist at BYU, Maxine Murdock, has observed: "Virtue is something that cannot be taken away from anyone; it can only be given up voluntarily. If, for example, a person is robbed, does that make him or her a thief? Or if someone takes your life, are you therefore guilty of murder? Certainly not. And of course the same is true of rape: the guilt lies with the perpetrator, not with the victim." ("When It Happens to One Among Us . . . ," Ensign, Oct. 1981, p. 39. See entire article, pp. 36-41.)

Those Latter-day Saints who lived the law of chastity before marriage will experience some natural anxiety and nervousness prior to the marriage. But if the anxieties are severe and one does not look forward to the experience, then perhaps professional counseling should be sought several months before the marriage. This would be true particularly for anyone who may have been a victim of incest, sexually molested as a child, or raped.

A wedding day is one of the happiest, yet most hectic, days people will experience in life. Some couples are so exhausted at the end of the day that neither one is ready for intimacy shortly after arriving at the motel or hotel. Sometimes relaxing, talking, cuddling, or even a short sleep will do wonders for the initiation of the sexual experience. If sexual relationships are not desired by one partner later that night (or morning) or on the honeymoon at all, but are anticipated by the other person, serious problems could result. This is definitely one area of the relationship that needs thorough discussion before the marriage and honeymoon.

We should also remember that the first two qualities of love mentioned in the scriptures are patience and kindness. (1 Cor. 15:5; Moro. 7:45.) Certainly these two attributes should be present during this sensitive time of the honeymoon.

I have always been impressed with the statement in Genesis 2:25 that Adam and Eve were naked and "not ashamed." Being patient and kind on a honeymoon, not proceeding too quickly, and having a little sense of humor can do much to alleviate embarrassment.

In addition, there are many informative books a couple can read just a few weeks before the marriage that will give some insight into what awaits them. Such books include The Act of Marriage: The Beauty of Sexual Love (Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan, 1976), by Tim and Beverly LaHaye, who are Christian writers; Sensible Sex (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1968), by Lindsay Curtis, an LDS physician; and Just for Newlyweds (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), by the author. (And may I also add that having the room pitch black, with all the lights out, will do a great deal to alleviate some of the initial embarrassment or anxiety. . . .)

A few Latter-day Saints have been reared with or taught the philosophy that "sex is evil/dirty" and have a difficult time with the relationship after marriage. This may also be true in regard to sex on Sunday, which is supposed to be a day of rest, relaxation, and spiritual refinement. Some biblical readers find sexuality at odds with spirituality (see Gal. 5) and cannot reconcile the two in their minds. Many Latter-day Saints, on the other hand, feel Sunday is an ideal time for sexual relationships, since rest and relaxation are essential for harmonious sexual relationships in marriage.

In a large group of several hundred Latter-day Saints, one young wife asked about the appropriateness of sexual relationships on fast Sunday, stating that when we fast we are supposed to concentrate on spiritual things rather than physical gratification. She quoted 1 Corinthians 7:2-5 as the basis for her question. President Joseph F. Smith suggested that "the law [of the fast] to the Latter-day Saints, as understood by the authorities of the Church, is that food and drink are not to be partaken of for twenty-four hours, 'from even to even,' and that the Saints are to refrain from all bodily gratification and indulgences." (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 305-6; italics added.) Some have interpreted President Smith's remarks to include sexual relationships.

In a letter dated October 10, 1988, the First Presidency said: "Church members who have been clothed with the garment in the temple have made a covenant to wear it throughout their lives. This has been interpreted to mean that it is worn as underclothing both day and night. This sacred covenant is between the member and the Lord. Members should seek the guidance of the Holy Spirit to answer for themselves any personal questions about the wearing of the garment."

Many young Latter-day Saints become aware long before they are married that there are many ways to bring about sexual stimulation, some of which may not be appropriate in an LDS marriage. The most basic general guideline is that there should be no force, coercion, or manipulation to entice a partner to participate in any sexual act. Sexual acts should be freely and spontaneously expressed in a marital relationship. Any sexual act should therefore be of mutual consent between the participating parties.

I do need to add, however, that two adults could mutually consent to a sexual act that may be (1) illegal, or (2) spiritually demeaning. Such acts should be avoided.

There are several ways a husband and wife can help enhance the sexual satisfaction in a marriage, but this requires adequate communication and a willingness to discuss intimate things.

Some young single LDS people have mistakenly believed that "oral is moral" and, along with other sexual acts, is not wrong as long as sexual intercourse does not occur. Such a belief might be called "technical virginity." The Church teaches that oral sex by single adults is a serious sexual sin, and individuals engaging in such practices will be dealt with accordingly by Church leaders.

Following is the statement on birth control from the LDS General Handbook of Instructions:

"Husbands must be considerate of their wives, who have a great responsibility not only for bearing children but also for caring for them through childhood. Husbands should help their wives conserve their health and strength. Married couples should seek inspiration from the Lord in meeting their marital challenges and rearing their children according to the teachings of the gospel." (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1989, p. 11-4.)

Also, an article by Dr. Homer Ellsworth, an LDS physician and gynecologist, has been both helpful and informative to many Latter-day Saints. Dr. Ellsworth carefully notes the importance for LDS couples to have children. But he also observes that

if for certain personal reasons a couple prayerfully decides that having another child immediately is unwise, the method of spacing children—discounting possible medical or physical effects—makes little difference. Abstinence (rhythm method), of course, is also a form of contraception, and like any other method it has side effects, some of which are harmful to the marriage relationship. ("I Have a Question," Ensign, Aug. 1979, pp. 23-26.)

Most couples have their own unique preferences or patterns. The "best time" for sexual relationships in a marriage is when the couple is ready and anticipating it.

Daily and monthly peaks: There is some evidence that men peak sexually about every forty-eight hours. It has also been established that many women have sexual peaks about the time of ovulation (usually 13-15 days before the onset of menstruation), when estrogen is at its highest level in the hormonal system.

Lifetime peaks: Males are generally in their sexual prime during their late teens and early twenties. Most females reach sexual maturity in the late twenties or early thirties.

In females, estrogen—and often sexual energy—decreases after a hysterectomy, where one or both ovaries are removed, and just before and after menopause. In these cases, female sexual energy can be restored through estrogen replacement therapy or hormonal replacement therapy.

There is some evidence that many males experience "viropause," where the level of testosterone decreases. During this time, which occurs for most men in the mid-fifties and early sixties, an erection takes more time to obtain and is more difficult to maintain. Though this is sometimes called the period of "sexual slowdown," most men continue to be sexually active, though with less frequency.

The answer for the vast majority of "aging" couples is yes, they still do have sexual relationships, although the frequency may decline somewhat due to the aging process.

Some married couples, through mutual consent, decide not to have sexual intercourse due to accidents, illnesses, or injuries that make the act difficult and painful, if not impossible. Such couples then make other efforts to be intimate with each other; these include, but are not limited to, physical passion.
