Brent A. Barlow, Worth Waiting For: Sexual Abstinence Before Marriage ( 1995)

Chapter 10

Maintaining Vision and Control

I would like to conclude with two stories that I hope will reinforce the things we've talked about in this book.

No Control, No Vision

When I was a ten-year-old boy growing up in Centerfield, Utah, I had an experience that gave me some noticeable scars on my left arm—scars that are still there. It's quite a story about how I got those scars.

When I was growing up, my father, Alvin Barlow, ran a small grocery store and gas station in Centerfield. It was called Barlow Service. Dad later claimed he was years ahead of the "gas and groceries" concept that caught on later with several national chain stores. As a young boy I spent a great deal of time in the grocery store working with my father, my grandfather Altheron Barlow, my Aunt Erma (Brough), and my Uncle Lloyd (Schow), all of whom worked at the store at different times.

One of my jobs as a ten year old was to walk two blocks over to the Centerfield Post Office where Dean Malmgren, the postmaster, would put the mail for the store in a large paper sack I took with me. I would then return and give the mail to my father. After several weeks of going for the mail I got bored with walking and asked my older sister, Jane, age fourteen, if I could borrow her new blue bicycle and ride it the two blocks to pick up the mail. She had reservations at first (typical of sisters). After all, the bicycle was hers, and it was brand new. After constant begging and, as I recall, some kind of bargaining, I finally got Jane to agree. Before she let me take it, she gave me a strict lecture on being careful not to mar or scratch her new bicycle. I nonchalantly agreed and took off.

After a few weeks of riding Jane's bike for the mail, I got bored again. So I decided to get even more daring and create a little more excitement and thrill for myself. I practiced riding the new blue bike without my hands on the handlebars. I got pretty good at it, too. After a few weeks of practice I could ride the entire two blocks without holding onto the handlebars. (I should add that I had to pass through an intersection!) So back and forth I went, day after day, riding Jane's bike to pick up the mail with no hands on the handlebars.

But guess what? After a while that also got tedious and boring for a ten-year-old country boy, so I decided I needed more of a challenge. What would add a little more intrigue and zest to my life? I finally decided I would practice riding the bicycle with no hands on the handlebars—and my eyes shut!

Very few people had done that (now I know why!), but few also know a young boy's thrill of riding down a country sidewalk on a bicycle with little control and no vision. It was a sensational experience! I got so good at it that I could ride the entire two blocks, pass through the intersection (I would listen for cars, pickups, or tractors), pick up the mail from Brother Malmgren, and then ride back to the store—all with eyes closed and no hands on the handlebars. I did this for several days, unbeknown to either my sister or my dad.

If you ever happen to drive through Centerfield, Utah, today, traveling on highway 89, you'll notice a sheep pasture on the east side of the road, about midway through town. You'll also see a barbed-wire fence around it. That pasture and that fence were also there when I was a boy, owned at the time by Chris Sorenson. At one time, that barbed wire fence was indented. I put that dent there—with my sister's new blue bicycle.

One morning my dad asked me, again, to go for the mail. I got on Jane's bike and took off, with no hands on the handlebars and eyes shut. I was getting good at this. I rode through the intersection, got the mail, and started back on the sidewalk—little control and no vision. What a momentary thrill! But this time, as I passed Chris Sorenson's sheep pasture, the front bike tire hit a stone on the sidewalk. I felt the sensation of the bike tipping over, but it was too late. I could not get control of the bicycle in time. I landed on the barbed wire with my left arm and cannot describe the painful sensation. The new bike followed and got all scratched up.

I left Jane's bike all tangled up in the fence, picked up the paper sack filled with mail, and ran crying to my dad. I will never forget the moment I found him. I held up my bleeding arm to him, tears streaming from my eyes, expecting some words of comfort. (Not only was he my dad, but he was my bishop at the time.)

"What happened, son?" he asked, as he examined my arm.

"I was riding Jane's bike on the sidewalk without holding onto the handlebars," I confided. "And," I added, "I had my eyes shut."

Dad paused for a moment and then said something I needed to hear. With all the wisdom and insight of a concerned father and bishop, he muttered, "YOU BIG DUMBBELL!" He then suggested I go home and ask mom to patch up my arm, which I did.

Does this story have application to our discussion on sexual abstinence before marriage? I think so. And I hope each reader will remember it. When it comes to sexual behavior, I believe many young Latter-day Saints today are riding down the pathway of life with little or no control—and with their eyes shut. Few are aware of the potential harm and pain that such actions can bring to their lives. But such harm and pain will surely come. All it takes is some brief moment when a small rock on the sidewalk throws them into circumstances they had not anticipated and cannot control.

Like myself on the bicycle, they may have some momentary pleasure and sensation, with little or no vision of what could eventually happen. But remember the biblical admonition that "where there is no vision, the people perish." (Prov. 29:18.) To such young people may I suggest you open your eyes and take note of where you are—and, if necessary, get control of the situation! The Lord has indicated we will never be tempted beyond our ability to resist, because he will help us. But we must take advantage of his help. (See 1 Cor. 10:13.) However wicked and perverse the world becomes, young Latter-day Saints can face the future with confidence: The Lord always stands ready to help us. The Lord has commanded and warned that we should wait until marriage to experience sexual relations. Like Nephi of old, we too should be willing to "go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for . . . the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Ne. 3:7.)

And to those who give no thought to sexual abstinence before marriage, to those who desire the temporary sensations of pleasure with little or no regard to the potential pain, I simply reiterate what my father said to me when I injured my arm.

Amnon and Tamar

The second story I would like to tell happened to someone else. It is a biblical account that occurred thousands of years ago, yet it is contemporary and modern in application. Apparently many young people in all ages (and old people, for that matter) can confuse lust and love. When our hormones are operating at full force we may feel attracted to someone and initially think it is love. And it could indeed be love. Or it could be just plain lust.

In my Preparation for Marriage classes at BYU we talk about the Blocked-Sex Theory of Love Development. I explain it like this: When we are physically or sexually attracted to someone and the feelings are "blocked" or not acted upon, tensions arise, and these tensions are often identified as love. The blocking or lack of action comes from a variety of sources, including religious restraints, family and personal values, unpleasant sexual experiences from the past, or the unwillingness of a partner to cooperate.

If the sexual attraction is great, and the blocking is in operation, the tensions will usually be high. At that point we may think we "really are in love." By the same reasoning, when the attraction is great, and the "blocks" are ignored (e.g., sexual relationships are experienced), the tension is thereby reduced and what one or both once thought was love vanishes away. During my nearly twenty-five years of working with more than fifteen thousand young people, many of whom were Latter-day Saints, I have seen this phenomenon occur again and again. A couple was physically attracted to each other, the "blocks" were there (religious, family, or personal), and the sexual tension was mistakenly identified as love when, in reality, it was mostly lust. At some point, the sexual experience occurred, the tension was reduced, and what was identified as love then disappeared. Sometimes it disappeared immediately.

Nowhere is this occurrence more dramatically illustrated than in the Old Testament story of Amnon and Tamar. (She is identified as his "sister," but it appears she was a half-sister. See 2 Sam. 13:1-17.) The account states that Amnon loved Tamar so much that he was sick, but he was also "vexed" because she was a virgin and he didn't want to do anything sexually with her. (Vv. 1-2.)

But now comes the peer influence. Amnon had a friend named Jonadab who the scripture states "was a very subtil man." (V. 3.) Jonadab asked Amnon why he was sick and losing so much weight, to which Amnon simply replied, "I love Tamar. . . ." (V. 4.) Sensing Amnon's sexual frustration, Jonadab, in essence, suggested he need not wait and encouraged Amnon to go into his bedroom and pretend he was sick. Then he should ask if Tamar could bring food to the bedroom, where Amnon could enact his sexual desires. (V. 5.)

So Amnon followed the suggestion of his "subtle" friend, "made himself sick," and requested that Tamar come to his bedroom with food. Tamar, unaware of his intentions, prepared some food for Amnon and took it to his home. After she arrived, Amnon sent everyone in the household away so they could be alone. (Vv. 6-9.) Amnon then asked her to come into his bedroom to help him eat (an insight to stay out of bedrooms). Tamar unwisely obliged and went into his bedroom, where he took hold of her and gave the age-old invitation, "Come lie with me." (Vv. 10-11.)

Tamar resisted his advances, saying, "Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel; do not thou this folly. And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? And as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel." (Vv. 12-13.) She argued that they should marry first—then they could lawfully engage in sexual relations.

Now follow the precipitous act and consequences (remember the Blocked-Sex Theory of Love Development):

"Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice; but, being stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her." (V. 14.)

And what was the immediate consequence? Did Amnon really love Tamar? Or did he confuse love with lust, as so many have done before and since? Read the tragic conclusion to the episode:

"Then [immediately] Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred with which he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her, Arise, [get out of bed,] be gone." (V. 15.) Now notice what Amnon does next. Not only has he committed a sexual sin, but he then abandons Tamar as well. She pleads, "There is no cause; this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her. Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her." (Vv. 16-17.)

"Bridle All Your Passions"

I can't think of a better story with which to conclude, as I repeat my plea for sexual abstinence before marriage. Let's return one more time to the scripture quoted at the beginning of this book: "See that ye bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love." (Alma 38:12.) When sexual passions are not bridled, they can overpower or distort a relationship as happened with Amnon and Tamar. By "bridling our passions" before marriage, we can focus our attention on other important aspects of the relationship that will be crucial to a successful, stable, satisfying marriage. People can be "in lust" rather than "in love" and fool themselves into believing that the resulting tension is love. In fact, people can be physically attracted to individuals they not only don't love, but don't like! That is why Alma's admonition to "bridle our passions" is still relevant. When the sexual aspect of a relationship is not controlled, we have little opportunity to learn about ("be filled with") other important aspects of love.

If the reader chooses just one part of this book to remember or review when contemplating the reasons for sexual abstinence before marriage, I hope it will be this account of Amnon and Tamar. It is an ancient story with a modern application. Hopefully, we too can "liken the scriptures unto ourselves for our own profit and learning." (1 Ne. 19:23.) As I previously noted, we can learn from OPE (Other People's Experiences). Maybe young Latter-day Saints can also understand early in life why "wickedness never was happiness," as the errant Corianton learned "by sad experience." (See Alma 41:10; D&C 121:39.)

Will parents, youth, and youth leaders be able to meet the challenges in the future? Will each generation help the next be ready for what lies ahead in the last days as we prepare for the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ?

In 1990 the First Presidency of the Church gave us this needful challenge: "We pray that you—the young and rising generation—will keep your bodies and minds clean, free from the contaminations of the world, that you will be fit and pure vessels to bear triumphantly the responsibilities of the kingdom of God in preparation for the second coming of our Savior." (For the Strength of Youth, pp. 4-5; italics added. Used by permission.)

May all Latter-day Saints, young and old alike, strive to become the "pure people" the Lord is trying to raise up in righteousness before him in the last days. (D&C 110:16.)

For if not us, who? And if not now, when?
