“I testify that our prayers, offered in humility and sincerity, are heard and answered. It is a miraculous thing, but it is real.”
President Gordon B. Hinckley, “An Humble and a Contrite Heart,” Liahona, Jan. 2001, 103; Ensign, Nov. 2000, 89.

June 1, 1801: Brigham Young, second President of the Church, was born in Vermont. He died at the age of 76 in Salt Lake City, Utah.

June 19, 1836: Lorenzo Snow, fifth President of the Church, was baptized near Kirtland, Ohio, when he was 22 years old.

June 27, 1844: The Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum were killed at Carthage Jail, in Illinois. John Taylor, third President of the Church, said their martyrdom would remind the world that “the Book of Mormon, and this book of Doctrine and Covenants of the church, cost the best blood of the nineteenth century” (D&C 135:6).

June 18, 1850: President John Taylor (1808–87), then of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and other missionaries arrived in France to open the French Mission.

Two dozen youth from the Dundee Second and Dundee Bingham Wards in the Dundee Scotland Stake took part in the first-ever Lord Provost of Dundee Youth Parade. More than 1,000 young people participated in the event, which was held to recognize the outstanding young people of Dundee, their talents, and their service to the people in the city.

After the parade through the town, the lord provost (mayor) addressed the crowd. Following this, some of the youth groups demonstrated activities such as soccer, hockey, cheerleading, tae kwon do, and baton twirling. The Dundee young men and young women were excited for the opportunity to represent the Church on this historic occasion and plan to take part in the event every year.

Have you ever read Jacob 5? We mean really read it? If you look closely you’ll find that this longest chapter in the Book of Mormon—a parable about the Lord of the vineyard, his servant, and olive trees—contains some valuable lessons on leadership. Read Jacob 5 again looking at the example of the Lord of the vineyard. See what kind of leader he is. Notice his patience, his willingness to listen to counsel, his love for those around him, and you will have begun to learn some of the lessons you can learn from the Lord of the vineyard.
