Match each person below with their story.

1.  God warned me He was going to flood the earth. He told me to build a huge ship called an ark so my family and the animals could survive.

2.  We were on a boat with Jesus when a storm came. Jesus calmed the wind and the waves.

3.  My brother and I built ships to travel to a promised land. I asked God to make stones glow to give us light in our ships.

4.  Our boat couldn’t land because the harbor was frozen! I led our group in prayer asking God for help. The ice broke long enough for our boat to pass through.

- Noah

- Jesus’s disciples

- The brother of Jared

- Lucy Mack Smith

Use this script to act out parts of 1 Nephi 17.

Narrator: After Nephi’s family traveled through the wilderness, they came to an ocean. The Lord told Nephi to make tools and build a ship.

[Nephi is building. Laman and Lemuel walk onto the scene.]

Nephi: Brothers, come help me build our boat!

Laman: No! You don’t know how to build something like that.

Lemuel: You are foolish, like our father.

Nephi: The Lord will lead us to a promised land, just like He led the people of Moses. I’m sad you don’t believe God’s promises.

Laman: [angrily turning to Lemuel] Let’s throw him in the ocean!

[Laman and Lemuel try to grab Nephi, but Nephi steps back.]

Nephi: I can do anything God commands me to do.

[Nephi stretches his hand toward Laman and Lemuel. They start shaking and fall on their knees.]

Laman: I felt the power of the Lord!

Lemuel: I did too! It made me shake!

[Nephi helps them to their feet.]

Nephi: I hope you will believe in God. Now let’s finish this boat together.

Narrator: Nephi and his family finished their ship and sailed to the promised land.

Here are ideas for making different kinds of boats. What ideas can you come up with?

- Use the skin of half an avocado as the main part of a ship.

- Glue or tape craft sticks together to make a floating deck.

- Fold a boat out of paper.

- Use sticks and paper to decorate a sailing sponge.
