Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

Book the Eighth

NOW shone the morning star in bright array, To vanquish night, and usher in the day: The wind veers southward, and moist clouds arise, That blot with shades the blue meridian skies. Cephalus feels with joy the kindly gales, His new allies unfurl the swelling sails; Steady their course, they cleave the yielding main, And, with a wish, th' intended harbour gain.

The Story of Nisus and Scylla

Mean-while King Minos, on the Attick strand, Displays his martial skill, and wastes the land. His army lies encampt upon the plains, Before Alcathoe's walls, where Nisus reigns; On whose grey head a lock of purple hue, The strength, and fortune of his kingdom, grew. Six moons were gone, and past, when still from far Victoria hover'd o'er the doubtful war. So long, to both inclin'd, th' impartial maid Between 'em both her equal wings display'd. High on the walls, by Phoebus vocal made, A turret of the palace rais'd its head; And where the God his tuneful harp resign'd. The sound within the stones still lay enshrin'd: Hither the daughter of the purple king Ascended oft, to hear its musick ring; And, striking with a pebble, wou'd release Th' enchanted notes, in times of happy peace. But now, from thence, the curious maid beheld Rough feats of arms, and combats of the field: And, since the siege was long, had learnt the name Of ev'ry chief, his character, and fame; Their arms, their horse, and quiver she descry'd, Nor cou'd the dress of war the warriour hide. Europa's son she knew above the rest, And more, than well became a virgin breast: In vain the crested morion veils his face, She thinks it adds a more peculiar grace: His ample shield, embost with burnish'd gold, Still makes the bearer lovelier to behold: When the tough jav'lin, with a whirl, he sends, His strength and skill the sighing maid commends; Or, when he strains to draw the circling bow, And his fine limbs a manly posture show, Compar'd with Phoebus, he performs so well, Let her be judge, and Minos shall excell. But when the helm put off, display'd to sight, And set his features in an open light; When, vaulting to his seat, his steed he prest, Caparison'd in gold, and richly drest; Himself in scarlet sumptuously array'd, New passions rise, and fire the frantick maid. O happy spear! she cries, that feels his touch; Nay, ev'n the reins he holds are blest too much. Oh! were it lawful, she cou'd wing her way Thro' the stern hostile troops without dismay; Or throw her body to the distant ground, And in the Cretans happy camp be found. Wou'd Minos but desire it! she'd expose Her native country to her country's foes; Unbar the gates, the town with flames infest, Or any thing that Minos shou'd request. And as she sate, and pleas'd her longing sight, Viewing the king's pavilion veil'd with white, Shou'd joy, or grief, she said, possess my breast, To see my country by a war opprest? I'm in suspense! For, tho' 'tis grief to know I love a man that is declar'd my foe; Yet, in my own despite, I must approve That lucky war, which brought the man I love. Yet, were I tender'd as a pledge of peace, The cruelties of war might quickly cease. Oh! with what joy I'd wear the chains he gave! A patient hostage, and a willing slave. Thou lovely object! if the nymph that bare Thy charming person, were but half so fair; Well might a God her virgin bloom desire, And with a rape indulge his amorous fire. Oh! had I wings to glide along the air, To his dear tent I'd fly, and settle there: There tell my quality, confess my flame, And grant him any dowry that he'd name. All, all I'd give; only my native land, My dearest country, shou'd excepted stand, For, perish love, and all expected joys, E're, with so base a thought, my soul complies. Yet, oft the vanquish'd some advantage find, When conquer'd by a noble, gen'rous mind. Brave Minos justly has the war begun, Fir'd with resentment for his murder'd son: The righteous Gods a righteous cause regard, And will, with victory, his arms reward: We must be conquer'd; and the captive's fate Will surely seize us, tho' it seize us late. Why then shou'd love be idle, and neglect What Mars, by arms and perils, will effect? Oh! Prince, I dye, with anxious fear opprest, Lest some rash hand shou'd wound my charmer's breast: For, if they saw, no barb'rous mind cou'd dare Against that lovely form to raise a spear. But I'm resolv'd, and fix'd in this decree, My father's country shall my dowry be. Thus I prevent the loss of life and blood, And, in effect, the action must be good. Vain resolution! for, at ev'ry gate The trusty centinels, successive, wait: The keys my father keeps; ah! there's my grief; 'Tis he obstructs all hopes of my relief. Gods! that this hated light I'd never seen! Or, all my life, without a father been! But Gods we all may be; for those that dare, Are Gods, and Fortune's chiefest favours share. The ruling Pow'rs a lazy pray'r detest, The bold adventurer succeeds the best. What other maid, inspir'd with such a flame, But wou'd take courage, and abandon shame? But wou'd, tho' ruin shou'd ensue, remove Whate'er oppos'd, and clear the way to love? This, shall another's feeble passion dare? While I sit tame, and languish in despair: No; for tho' fire and sword before me lay, Impatient love thro' both shou'd force its way. Yet I have no such enemies to fear, My sole obstruction is my father's hair; His purple lock my sanguine hope destroys, And clouds the prospect of my rising joys. Whilst thus she spoke, amid the thick'ning air Night supervenes, the greatest nurse of care: And, as the Goddess spreads her sable wings, The virgin's fears decay, and courage springs. The hour was come, when Man's o'er-labour'd breast Surceas'd its care, by downy sleep possest: All things now hush'd, Scylla with silent tread Urg'd her approach to Nisus' royal bed: There, of the fatal lock (accursed theft!) She her unwitting father's head bereft. In safe possession of her impious prey, Out at a postern gate she takes her way. Embolden'd, by the merit of the deed She traverses the adverse camp with speed, 'Till Minos' tent she reach'd: the righteous king She thus bespoke, who shiver'd at the thing. Behold th' effect of love's resistless sway! I, Nisus' royal seed, to thee betray My country, and my Gods. For this strange task, Minos, no other boon but thee I ask. This purple lock, a pledge of love, receive; No worthless present, since in it I give My father's head.—Mov'd at a crime so new, And with abhorrence fill'd, back Minos drew, Nor touch'd th' unhallow'd gift; but thus exclaim'd (With mein indignant, and with eyes inflam'd), Perdition seize thee, thou, thy kind's disgrace! May thy devoted carcass find no place In earth, or air, or sea, by all out-cast! Shall Minos, with so foul a monster, blast His Cretan world, where cradled Jove was nurst? Forbid it Heav'n!—away, thou most accurst! And now Alcathoe, its lord exchang'd, Was under Minos' domination rang'd. While the most equal king his care applies To curb the conquer'd, and new laws devise, The fleet, by his command, with hoisted sails, And ready oars, invites the murm'ring gales. At length the Cretan hero anchor weigh'd, Repaying, with neglect, th' abandon'd maid. Deaf to her cries, he furrows up the main: In vain she prays, sollicits him in vain. And now she furious grows in wild despair, She wrings her hands, and throws aloft her hair. Where run'st thou? (thus she vents her deep distress) Why shun'st thou her that crown'd thee with success? Her, whose fond love to thee cou'd sacrifice Her country, and her parent, sacred ties! Can nor my love, nor proffer'd presents find A passage to thy heart, and make thee kind? Can nothing move thy pity? O ingrate, Can'st thou behold my lost, forlorn estate, And not be soften'd? Can'st thou throw off one Who has no refuge left but thee alone? Where shall I seek for comfort? whither fly? My native country does in ashes lye: Or were't not so, my treason bars me there, And bids me wander. Shall I next repair To a wrong'd father, by my guilt undone?- Me all Mankind deservedly will shun. I, out of all the world, my self have thrown, To purchase an access to Crete alone; Which, since refus'd, ungen'rous man, give o'er To boast thy race; Europa never bore A thing so savage. Thee some tygress bred, On the bleak Syrt's inhospitable bed; Or where Charybdis pours its rapid tide Tempestuous. Thou art not to Jove ally'd; Nor did the king of Gods thy mother meet Beneath a bull's forg'd shape, and bear to Crete. That fable of thy glorious birth is feign'd; Some wild outrageous bull thy dam sustain'd. O father Nisus, now my death behold; Exult, o city, by my baseness sold: Minos, obdurate, has aveng'd ye all; But 'twere more just by those I wrong'd to fall: For why shou'dst thou, who only didst subdue By my offending, my offence pursue? Well art thou matcht to one whose am'rous flame Too fiercely rag'd, for human-kind to tame; One who, within a wooden heifer thrust, Courted a low'ring bull's mistaken lust; And, from whose monster-teeming womb, the Earth Receiv'd, what much it mourn'd, a bi-form birth. But what avails my plaints? the whistling wind, Which bears him far away, leaves them behind. Well weigh'd Pasiphae, when she prefer'd A bull to thee, more brutish than the herd. But ah! Time presses, and the labour'd oars To distance drive the fleet, and lose the less'ning shores. Think not, ungrateful man, the liquid way And threat'ning billows shall inforce my stay. I'll follow thee in spite: My arms I'll throw Around thy oars, or grasp thy crooked prow, And drag thro' drenching seas. Her eager tongue Had hardly clos'd the speech, when forth she sprung And prov'd the deep. Cupid with added force Recruits each nerve, and aids her wat'ry course. Soon she the ship attains, unwelcome guest; And, as with close embrace its sides she prest, A hawk from upper air came pouring down ('Twas Nisus cleft the sky with wings new grown). At Scylla's head his horny bill he aims; She, fearful of the blow, the ship disclaims, Quitting her hold: and yet she fell not far, But wond'ring, finds her self sustain'd in air. Chang'd to a lark, she mottled pinions shook, And, from the ravish'd lock, the name of Ciris took.

7
