Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Transformation of the Naiads

Theseus mean-while acquitting well his share In the bold chace confed'rate like a war, To Athens' lofty tow'rs his march ordain'd, By Pallas lov'd, and where Erectheus reign'd. But Achelous stop'd him on the way, By rains a deluge, and constrain'd his stay. O fam'd for glorious deeds, and great by blood, Rest here, says he, nor trust the rapid flood; It solid oaks has from its margin tore, And rocky fragments down its current bore, The murmur hoarse, and terrible the roar. Oft have I seen herds with their shelt'ring fold Forc'd from the banks, and in the torrent roul'd; Nor strength the bulky steer from ruin freed, Nor matchless swiftness sav'd the racing steed. In cataracts when the dissolving snow Falls from the hills, and floods the plains below; Toss'd by the eddies with a giddy round, Strong youths are in the sucking whirlpools drown'd. 'Tis best with me in safety to abide, 'Till usual bounds restrain the ebbing tide, And the low waters in their channel glide. Theseus perswaded, in compliance bow'd: So kind an offer, and advice so good, O Achelous, cannot be refus'd; I'll use them both, said he; and both he us'd. The grot he enter'd, pumice built the hall, And tophi made the rustick of the wall; The floor, soft moss, an humid carpet spread, And various shells the chequer'd roof inlaid. 'Twas now the hour when the declining sun Two thirds had of his daily journey run; At the spread table Theseus took his place, Next his companions in the daring chace; Perithous here, there elder Lelex lay, His locks betraying age with sprinkled grey. Acharnia's river-God dispos'd the rest, Grac'd with the equal honour of the feast, Elate with joy, and proud of such a guest. The nymphs were waiters, and with naked feet In order serv'd the courses of the meat. The banquet done, delicious wine they brought, Of one transparent gem the cup was wrought. Then the great heroe of this gallant train, Surveying far the prospect of the main: What is that land, says he, the waves embrace? (And with his finger pointed at the place); Is it one parted isle which stands alone? How nam'd? and yet methinks it seems not one. To whom the watry God made this reply; 'Tis not one isle, but five; distinct they lye; 'Tis distance which deceives the cheated eye. But that Diana's act may seem less strange, These once proud Naiads were, before their change. 'Twas on a day more solemn than the rest, Ten bullocks slain, a sacrificial feast: The rural Gods of all the region near They bid to dance, and taste the hallow'd cheer. Me they forgot: affronted with the slight, My rage, and stream swell'd to the greatest height; And with the torrent of my flooding store, Large woods from woods, and fields from fields I tore. The guilty nymphs, oh! then, remembring me, I, with their country, wash'd into the sea; And joining waters with the social main, Rent the gross land, and split the firm champagne. Since, the Echinades, remote from shore Are view'd as many isles, as nymphs before.

7
