Ovid, Metamorphoses ( 7)

The Description of Famine

Where frozen Scythia's utmost bound is plac'd, A desart lies, a melancholy waste: In yellow crops there Nature never smil'd, No fruitful tree to shade the barren wild. There sluggish cold its icy station makes, There paleness, frights, and aguish trembling shakes, Of pining famine this the fated seat, To whom my orders in these words repeat: Bid her this miscreant with her sharpest pains Chastise, and sheath herself into his veins; Be unsubdu'd by plenty's baffled store, Reject my empire, and defeat my pow'r. And lest the distance, and the tedious way, Should with the toil, and long fatigue dismay, Ascend my chariot, and convey'd on high, Guide the rein'd dragons thro' the parting sky. The nymph, accepting of the granted carr, Sprung to the seat, and posted thro' the air; Nor stop'd 'till she to a bleak mountain came Of wondrous height, and Caucasus its name. There in a stony field the fiend she found, Herbs gnawing, and roots scratching from the ground. Her elfelock hair in matted tresses grew, Sunk were her eyes, and pale her ghastly hue, Wan were her lips, and foul with clammy glew. Her throat was furr'd, her guts appear'd within With snaky crawlings thro' her parchment skin. Her jutting hips seem'd starting from their place, And for a belly was a belly's space, Her dugs hung dangling from her craggy spine, Loose to her breast, and fasten'd to her chine. Her joints protuberant by leanness grown, Consumption sunk the flesh, and rais'd the bone. Her knees large orbits bunch'd to monstrous size, And ancles to undue proportion rise. This plague the nymph, not daring to draw near, At distance hail'd, and greeted from afar. And tho' she told her charge without delay, Tho' her arrival late, and short her stay, She felt keen famine, or she seem'd to feel, Invade her blood, and on her vitals steal. She turn'd, from the infection to remove, And back to Thessaly the serpents drove. The fiend obey'd the Goddess' command (Tho' their effects in opposition stand), She cut her way, supported by the wind, And reach'd the mansion by the nymph assign'd. 'Twas night, when entring Erisichthon's room, Dissolv'd in sleep, and thoughtless of his doom, She clasp'd his limbs, by impious labour tir'd, With battish wings, but her whole self inspir'd; Breath'd on his throat and chest a tainting blast, And in his veins infus'd an endless fast. The task dispatch'd, away the Fury flies From plenteous regions, and from rip'ning skies; To her old barren north she wings her speed, And cottages distress'd with pinching need. Still slumbers Erisichthon's senses drown, And sooth his fancy with their softest down. He dreams of viands delicate to eat, And revels on imaginary meat, Chaws with his working mouth, but chaws in vain, And tires his grinding teeth with fruitless pain; Deludes his throat with visionary fare, Feasts on the wind, and banquets on the air. The morning came, the night, and slumbers past, But still the furious pangs of hunger last; The cank'rous rage still gnaws with griping pains, Stings in his throat, and in his bowels reigns. Strait he requires, impatient in demand, Provisions from the air, the seas, the land. But tho' the land, air, seas, provisions grant, Starves at full tables, and complains of want. What to a people might in dole be paid, Or victual cities for a long blockade, Could not one wolfish appetite asswage; For glutting nourishment increas'd its rage. As rivers pour'd from ev'ry distant shore, The sea insatiate drinks, and thirsts for more; Or as the fire, which all materials burns, And wasted forests into ashes turns, Grows more voracious, as the more it preys, Recruits dilate the flame, and spread the blaze: So impious Erisichthon's hunger raves, Receives refreshments, and refreshments craves. Food raises a desire for food, and meat Is but a new provocative to eat. He grows more empty, as the more supply'd, And endless cramming but extends the void.

7
