
--- Calves Wilson ---

--- Charles C. Rich ---
[20-chapter-xvi.txt] Elder William Huntington was called to preside over the settlement in Pisgah, which position he filled until, as many others in that location, he was removed by death, and his mortal remains consigned to the silent grave. After his death, Elder Charles C. Rich was appointed to fill the vacancy. In the following Spring, 1847, Elder Rich left for the Bluffs, to join the main body of emigrants, and I succeeded him as president of Pisgah.
[21-chapter-xvii.txt] At a quarter past eight a grand and imposing escort was formed, under the direction of Lorenzo Snow, Jedediah M. Grant and Franklin D. Richards, in the following order, to wit: (1) Horace S. Eldredge, marshal, on horseback, in military uniform; (2) brass band; (3) twelve Bishops, bearing the banners of their wards; (4) twenty-four young men dressed in white pants, black coats, white scarfs on the right shoulder, and coronets on their heads, each carrying in his right hand a copy of the Declaration of Independence, and the Constitution of the United States, and each wearing a sheathed sword by his side—one of them carrying a beautiful banner, on which was inscribed, "The Lion of the Lord;" (5) twenty-four young ladies dressed in white, with blue scarfs on the right shoulder, and wreaths of 
[64-chapter-lx.txt] Subsequent to the President's death, Apostles Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow and Franklin D. Richards were appointed "Temple committee," as general supervisors of this important work; in which capacity Lorenzo Snow and Franklin D. Richards continued until its completion. Charles C. Rich was early prostrated by a lingering illness which terminated in his death, my brother serving as chairman of committee in his stead.
[25-chapter-25.txt] Elder William Huntington was called to preside over the settlement in Pisgah, which position he filled until, as many others in that location, he was removed by death, and his mortal remains consigned to the silent grave. After his death, Elder Charles C. Rich was appointed to fill the vacancy. In the following Spring, 1847, Elder Rich left for the Bluffs, to join the main body of emigrants, and I succeeded him as president of Pisgah.
[26-chapter-26.txt] At a quarter past eight a grand and imposing escort was formed, under the direction of Lorenzo Snow, Jedediah M. Grant and Franklin D. Richards, in the following order, to wit: (1) Horace S. Eldredge, marshal, on horseback, in military uniform; (2) brass band; (3) twelve Bishops, bearing the banners of their wards; (4) twenty-four young men dressed in white pants, black coats, white scarfs on the right shoulder, and coronets on their heads, each carrying in his right hand a copy of the Declaration of Independence, and the Constitution of the United States, and each wearing a sheathed sword by his side--one of them carrying a beautiful banner, on which was inscribed, "The Lion of the Lord;" (5) twenty-four young ladies dressed in white, with blue scarfs on the right shoulder, and wreaths of

--- Daniel Miles ---
[daniel-s-miles.txt] Brother Miles was baptized April 1832 by Orson Pratt and Lyman E. Johnson in Bath, New Hampshire. He joined with the Saints in Kirtland, Ohio by 1836. He is first mentioned in the history of Joseph Smith in connection with a Priesthood meeting held in the Kirtland Temple Feb. 24, 1836, at which "Daniel Miles was considered worthy to be ordained to the Priesthood." Two days later he was ordained an Elder by Reuben Hedlock. Later the same year he was ordained a Seventy on 20 December 1836 by Hazen Aldrich and set apart as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies on the same day, under the hands of Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith. He seems to have been the first man set apart as a President of the Seventy who did not participate in Zion's Camp.
[daniel-s-miles.txt] In Kirtland, Daniel Miles paid tax on two horses and one cow in 1836. As the winds of apostasy swirled about Kirtland, he removed with his family to Missouri early in 1838, arriving in Far West on 14 March. Here he represented the Seventies at a solemn meeting held April 6, 1838. Like others he suffered in the Missouri persecutions and was expelled from the state on threat of extermination. After the Mormon expulsion from Missouri, he located in Illinois. He was among the first "Mormon" settlers at Commerce (afterwards Nauvoo), Ill.; and is mentioned in a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Jan. 19, 1841. (Doc. and Cov. 124: 138.) though he traveled to Kirtland in November 1839. While in Nauvoo he was named a temporary member of Nauvoo high council, seemingly an unusual calling for
[65-miles-daniel-s.txt] Miles, Daniel S., one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1837 to 1845, was baptized at an early day and is first mentioned in the history of Joseph Smith in connection with a Priesthood meeting held in the Kirtland Temple Feb. 24, 1836, at which "Daniel Miles was considered worthy to be ordained to the Priesthood." He was ordained a Seventy April 6, 1837, by Hazen Aldrich and set apart as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies on the same day, under the hands of Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith. In the latter capacity he was duly sustained at a conference held at Kirtland, Ohio, Sept. 3, 1837. Early in 1838 he removed to Missouri, arriving at Far West March 14, 1838. Here he represented the Seventies at a solemn meeting held April 6, 1838, and subsequently passed through 

--- Daniel Stanton ---
[15-chapter-15.txt] Soon after our arrival in this place we held many councils, and one in particular I will here notice in which were several selections made, for particular individuals, according to the direction of the Spirit of the Lord through Joseph the Revelator, for inheritances in Zion as follows, first: Martin Harris 1, J. Smith, Jr., 2, Oliver Cowdery 3, David Whitmer 4, Sidney Rigdon 5, Edward Partridge 6, I. Morley 7, John Corrill 8, N. K. Whitney 9, Reynolds Cahoon 10, Hiram Smith 11, J. Smith Sr., 12, Peter Whitmer 13, John Whitmer 14, F. G. Williams 15, W. W. Phelps 16, S. H. Smith 17, Wm. Smith 18, D. C. Smith 19, Christian Whitmer 20, Jacob Whitmer 21, Peter Whitmer, Jr., 22, Joseph Knight 23, Newel Knight 24, Joseph Knight, Jr., 25, Hezekiah Peck 26, Ezekiel Peck 27, Philo Dibble 28, Calvin
[02-a-rich-heritage.txt] Things began to move quickly, and Ezra soon gained a witness of the truth. On Sunday, July 19, 1840, he and Pamelia attended a meeting during which a dispute arose between two individuals administering the sacrament, and harsh words were spoken. Concerned that the unruly display would dissuade her husband, Pamelia asked Ezra what he thought of it all. He replied that he couldn't imagine the actions of its members altering the truth of Mormonism. Afterwards, Daniel Stanton baptized them both in the Mississippi River in the presence of some three hundred curious onlookers. When the ordinances were completed a shout went up, "The Mormons have got them!"
[3928-hancock-joseph.txt] Hancock, Joseph, one of the original pioneers of Utah, was born March 17, 1800, at Smithfield, Mass., and was baptized by Daniel Stanton at Mayfield, Ohio, in 1830. In 1834 he was chosen a member of Zion's Camp, and on the way from Kirtland, Ohio, to Clay County, Mo., he acted as a hunter and was known as "Joseph's Nimrod" on that account. With others of that company he was taken sick with cholera, but was healed under the hands of the Prophet. Bro. Hancock hauled rock for the Kirtland Temple and endured persecution with the saints in Missouri. When the Prophet crossed the Mississippi river from Nauvoo in 1844 he put up at Joseph Hancock's house. After the martyrdom of the Prophet and his brother and the exile of the Saints from Nauvoo, Bro. Hancock located with them at Winter Quarters and

--- David Dort ---
[41-chapter-40.txt] Not to be tedious, I will say that I remained in this section of country about four weeks, during which time I labored incessantly for the truth's sake, and succeeded in gaining the hearts of many, among whom were David Dort and his wife. Many desired me to use my influence to have an elder sent into that region of country, which I agreed to do. As I was about starting home, Mr. Cooper observed that our ministers would have more influence if they dressed in broadcloth.
[08-family-heritage-and-support.txt] Not to be tedious, I will say that I remained in this section of country about four weeks, during which time I labored incessantly for the truth's sake, and succeeded in gaining the hearts of many, among whom were David Dort and his wife. Many desired me to use my influence to have an elder sent into that region of country, which I agreed to do. As I was about starting home, Mr. Cooper observed that our ministers would have more influence if they dressed in broadcloth.
[47-chapter-40.txt] Not to be tedious, I will say that I remained in this section of the country about three weeks after our brethren left me, making my whole stay four weeks, during which time I labored incessantly for the truth's sake and gained the hearts of many believers, among whom was David Dort and his wife. These were anxious to have me use my influence to have an elder sent into that region of the country, and they pledged that the man who came should not lack for anything. Just as I embarked for home, Mr. Cooper, my nephew of Detroit, said if we would dress our elders in broadcloth instead of homespun, it would add greatly to their influence. I promised him that the next one who came to preach to them should be more genteel.

--- David Fullmer ---
[18-chapter-xiv.txt] In accordance with the foregoing instructions, the Twelve appointed the following committee: Jonathan Dunham, Phineas H. Young, David D. Yearsley, David Fullmer, Alphonso Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt, Daniel Spencer. Subsequently others, including Lorenzo Snow, were called, and some volunteers were added to the above list.
[21-chapter-xvii.txt] At a quarter past eight a grand and imposing escort was formed, under the direction of Lorenzo Snow, Jedediah M. Grant and Franklin D. Richards, in the following order, to wit: (1) Horace S. Eldredge, marshal, on horseback, in military uniform; (2) brass band; (3) twelve Bishops, bearing the banners of their wards; (4) twenty-four young men dressed in white pants, black coats, white scarfs on the right shoulder, and coronets on their heads, each carrying in his right hand a copy of the Declaration of Independence, and the Constitution of the United States, and each wearing a sheathed sword by his side—one of them carrying a beautiful banner, on which was inscribed, "The Lion of the Lord;" (5) twenty-four young ladies dressed in white, with blue scarfs on the right shoulder, and wreaths of 
[23-chapter-23.txt] In accordance with the foregoing instructions, the Twelve appointed the following committee: Jonathan Dunham, Phineas H. Young, David D. Yearsley, David Fullmer, Alphonso Young, James Emmett, George D. Watt, Daniel Spencer. Subsequently others, including Lorenzo Snow, were called, and some volunteers were added to the above list.
[26-chapter-26.txt] At a quarter past eight a grand and imposing escort was formed, under the direction of Lorenzo Snow, Jedediah M. Grant and Franklin D. Richards, in the following order, to wit: (1) Horace S. Eldredge, marshal, on horseback, in military uniform; (2) brass band; (3) twelve Bishops, bearing the banners of their wards; (4) twenty-four young men dressed in white pants, black coats, white scarfs on the right shoulder, and coronets on their heads, each carrying in his right hand a copy of the Declaration of Independence, and the Constitution of the United States, and each wearing a sheathed sword by his side--one of them carrying a beautiful banner, on which was inscribed, "The Lion of the Lord;" (5) twenty-four young ladies dressed in white, with blue scarfs on the right shoulder, and wreaths of
[16-chapter-fifteen.txt] "I want you to help out a blind boy by the name of Truman Barlow. Also the following: Jonathan C. Wright, the widow of Vinson Knight; Andrew Gibbons; Wilmer S. Benson (who lives in St. Louis or Cincinnati); the widow of Aris Brown, (who lives in Missouri); Brother Fordsham or some good watch-maker, and the widow of Elijah Martin. I believe I did give you particular instructions to bring out David Fullmer's family. If I did not you will now take notice of it, as he is now on the exploring expedition south and will be back in the spring. I want you to bring his family to him without fail, that his soul may rejoice, and he may continue to do good. I also want you to bring Thomas Kington of Garden Grove."

--- David W. Patten ---
[04-contents.txt] Lorenzo Snow's Birth and Parentage.—Parents settled in Ohio.—Hardships and Privations.—Their Hospitality.—Lorenzo's early Characteristics.—Fondness for Books.—Military Aims.—Change in Pursuits.—Starts for Oberlin College.—Falls in Company with David W. Patten.—Conversation.—In College.—Eliza Embraces the Gospel.—Moves to Kirtland.—How she obtained a House and Lot.—Lorenzo in College.—Investigates.—Is disgusted.—Writes to Eliza.—Her Invitation.—He accepts and comes to Kirtland.—Studies Hebrew.—Is Baptized.—How he receives the Holy Ghost.
[05-chapter-i.txt] Lorenzo Snow's Birth and Parentage—Parents settled in Ohio.—Hardships and Privations.—Their Hospitality.—Lorenzo's early Characteristics.—Fondness for Books.—Military Aims.—Change in Pursuits.—Starts for Oberlin College.—Falls in Company with David W. Patten.—Conversation.—In College.—Eliza Embraces the Gospel.—Moves to Kirtland.—How she obtained a House and Lot.—Lorenzo in College.—Investigates.—Is disgusted.—Writes to Eliza.—Her Invitation.—He accepts and comes to Kirtland.—Studies Hebrew.—Is Baptized.—How he receives the Holy Ghost.
[05-chapter-i.txt] On his way to Oberlin, my brother accidentally fell in company with David W. Patten, an incident to which he frequently refers as one of those seemingly trivial occurrences in human life which leave an indelible trace. This gentleman was an early champion of the fulness of the Gospel as taught by Jesus and His Apostles in the meridian of time, and revealed in our own day through the Prophet Joseph Smith; to which cause Elder Patten fell a martyr on the 24th of October, 1838, in Missouri, during the terrible scenes of persecution through which the Latter-day Saints passed in that State. He possessed a mind of deep thought and rich intelligence. In conversation with him, my brother was much impressed with the depth and beauty of the philosophical reasoning with which this inspired Elder seem
[15-chapter-15.txt] Lorenzo Snow's Birth and Parentage--Parents settled in Ohio.--Hardships and Privations.--Their Hospitality.--Lorenzo's early Characteristics.--Fondness for Books.--Military Aims.--Change in Pursuits.--Starts for Oberlin College.--Falls in Company with David W. Patten.--Conversation.--In College.--Eliza Embraces the Gospel.--Moves to Kirtland.--How she obtained a House and Lot.--Lorenzo in College.--Investigates.--Is disgusted.--Writes to Eliza.--Her Invitation.--He accepts and comes to Kirtland.--Studies Hebrew.--Is Baptized.--How he receives the Holy Ghost.
[15-chapter-15.txt] On his way to Oberlin, my brother accidentally fell in company with David W. Patten, an incident to which he frequently refers as one of those seemingly trivial occurrences in human life which leave an indelible trace. This gentleman was an early champion of the fulness of the Gospel as taught by Jesus and His Apostles in the meridian of time, and revealed in our own day through the Prophet Joseph Smith; to which cause Elder Patten fell a martyr on the 24th of October, 1838, in Missouri, during the terrible scenes of persecution through which the Latter-day Saints passed in that State. He possessed a mind of deep thought and rich intelligence. In conversation with him, my brother was much impressed with the depth and beauty of the philosophical reasoning with which this inspired Elder seem

--- David Whitmer ---
[20-chapter-xv.txt] In accordance with one of the early revelations to the Church concerning the calling and ordination of Twelve Apostles,* this Quorum was now being filled. Among those chosen for this high and holy calling was my brother Orson and myself. He being still absent, and the other members having been already ordained, a meeting was convened at Kirtland, and very numerously attended, in which, on the 21st day of February, 1835, I took the oath and covenant of apostleship, and was solemnly set apart and ordained to that office; and as a member of that quorum under the hands of Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer; the minutes of which in the Church History are as follows:
[20-chapter-xv.txt] "Kirtland, February 21st, 1835. Pursuant to adjournment, a meeting of the Church was held, and, after prayer by President David Whitmer, and a short address by President Oliver Cowdery to the congregation, Elder Parley P. Pratt was called to the stand, and ordained one of the Twelve by President Joseph Smith, Jr., David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery. 'O, Lord, smile from heaven upon this thy servant; forgive his sins, sanctify his heart, and prepare him to receive the blessing. Increase his love for thee and for thy cause; increase his intelligence, communicate to him all that wisdom, that prudence and that understanding which he needs as a minister of righteousness, and to magnify the apostleship whereunto he is called. May a double portion of that Spirit which was communicated to the discip
[25-chapter-xxi.txt] David Whitmer,
[30-chapter-30.txt] David Whitmer,
[06-chapter-6.txt] Permit me here to remark, that David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, and Martin Harris, were the Three Witnesses, whose names are attached to the book of Mormon according to the prediction of the Book, who knew and saw, for a surety, into whose presence the angel of God came and showed them the plates, the ball, the directors, etc. And also other witnesses even eight viz: Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, John Whitmer, and Peter Whitmer Jr., Hiram Page, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith, are the men to whom Joseph Smith, Jr., showed the plates, these witnesses names go forth also of the truth of this work in the last days. To the convincing or condemning of this generation in the last days.

--- Don C. Smith ---
[03-portrait-of-a-prophet.txt] . . . We received some letters last evening—one from Emma, one from Don C. Smith, and one from Bishop Partridge—all breathing a kind and consoling spirit. We were much gratified with their contents. We had been a long time without information; and when we read those letters they were to our soul as the gentle air is refreshing, but our joy was mingled with grief, because of the sufferings of the poor and much injured Saints. And we need not say to you that the floodgates of our hearts were lifted and our eyes were a fountain of tears, but those who have not been enclosed in the walls of prison without cause or provocation, can have but little idea how sweet the voice of a friend is; one token of friendship from any source whatever awakens and calls into action every sympathetic feeling; it
[185-peterson-elwood-lynn.txt] Peterson, Elwood Lynn, fourth Bishop of Lakeside Ward, Snowflake Stake, was born Nov. 2, 1908, at Lakeside, Navajo Co., Arizona, a son of Joseph Peterson and Amanda Melvina Andelin. He was baptized Nov. 3, 1916, by Don C. Smith and ordained an Elder Nov. 11, 1928, by his father. He was ordained a Seventy Aug. 23, 1930, by Joseph F. Smith, jun., and a High Priest and Bishop, May 9, 1931, by Apostle George F. Richards, on which occasion he was set apart to preside over the Lakeside Ward. Bro. Peterson had previously served as counselor in a Deacons Quorum, superintendent of Sunday School, scout master and ward teacher. He graduated from the grammar school at Lakeside and from the Union High School at Snowflake, Arizona, and while in the latter school acted as president of the student class i
[60-chapter-51.txt] Don C. Smith
[31-alexander-mcrae.txt] "Among our friends who visited us were Presidents Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball—the latter several times; George A. Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve; Don C. Smith, brother of Joseph, came several times and brought some of our families to see us; Benjamin Covey, bishop of the Twelfth Ward of this city, brought each of us a new pair of boots and made us a present of them; Orrin P. Rockwell brought us refreshments many times and Jane Bleven and her daughter brought us cakes and pies, etc., and handed them in through the window. These things helped us much as our food was very coarse and so filthy we could not eat it until we were driven to it by hunger."

--- Dunbar Wilson ---
[609-wilson-lewis-dunbar-jr.txt] "Lewis Dunbar Wilson Jr.," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[610-wilson-lewis-dunbar-sr.txt] George Christian Wilson, "History of Lewis Dunbar Wilson," Mormon Biography File, LDS Church Archives, Salt Lake City, Utah.
