Various General Authorities, Heroes from the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

6 Elder Cree-L Kofford Abinadi

Few names in the scriptures have the power to stir the vision and touch the soul in the same way as does the revered name of Abinadi. Perhaps that is why this ancient prophet stands high on my list of all-time favorites. Even though his life as known to us is recounted in less than twelve pages of the Book of Mormon, and the total length of the messages delivered by him can be read in less than twenty-five minutes, he was a man of such tremendous power and impact as to leave an indelible impression upon any who come to know him.

In his poem Sohrab and Rustum the great poet Matthew Arnold had Sohrab pose a question of deep meaning to Rustum, with whom he was locked in mortal combat, not realizing that Rustum was his father: "Who art thou then, that canst so touch my soul?" I find myself thinking these very words whenever the name of Abinadi is mentioned.

As you read the account of Abinadi, as recorded in Mosiah 11-17, you too may well find yourself wanting to know more about this hero from the past. Remember that Abinadi's story is part of the record of Zeniff, which is placed in the book of Mosiah essentially in a "flashback" mode, the record of Zeniff beginning about the year 200 b.c., immediately following the eighth chapter of Mosiah, which is set at about 121 b.c.

We first hear of Abinadi in King Limhi's brief review of his people's history from Zeniff's day down to his own:

And a prophet of the Lord have they slain; yea, a chosen man of God, who told them of their wickedness and abominations, and prophesied of many things which are to come, yea, even the coming of Christ.

And because he said unto them that Christ was the God, the Father of all things, and said that he should take upon him the image of man, and it should be the image after which man was created in the beginning; or in other words, he said that man was created after the image of God, and that God should come down among the children of men, and take upon him flesh and blood, and go forth upon the face of the earth-

And now, because he said this, they did put him to death. (Mosiah 7:26-28.)

The name Abinadi, and the man to whom the name was given, both step boldly onto the pages of the Book of Mormon in the twentieth verse of the eleventh chapter of Mosiah. He comes without fanfare or introduction. With almost disarming simplicity the holy record simply says, "And it came to pass that there was a man among them whose name was Abinadi."

In general terms it may be said that the recorded portion of Abinadi's life and his dealings with King Noah and his people may be conveniently broken down into the following:

What is there that is so special about Abinadi? Perhaps it was his total obedience as he went, presumably alone, among those whom he must have known would take his life, to deliver the word of the Lord and to cry repentance to the people. Perhaps it is the very fact that we know so little about him, orperhaps it was simply the way with which he faced the adversities which came into his life in such a straightforward, "square-to-the world" way. Whatever the reason, Abinadi was and is special. His life, lived so long ago, still has the power to excite the mind and cause the pulse to pound.

To better understand why, imagine yourself standing in the crowd watching Abinadi converse with the priests of King Noah. If you can, you will hear him say: "Are you priests, and pretend to teach this people, and to understand the spirit of prophesying, and yet desire to know of me what these things mean? I say unto you, wo be unto you for perverting the ways of the Lord! For if ye understand these things, ye have not taught them; therefore, ye have perverted the ways of the Lord." (Mosiah 12:25-26.)

You will also see how deftly he moves from the role of witness to that of interrogator, when he says: "Ye have not applied your hearts to understanding; therefore, ye have not been wise. Therefore, what teach ye this people?" (Mosiah 12:27.)

One can almost hear the priests' rejoinder, which I imagine to have been said with some degree of self-righteousness: "We teach the law of Moses." And then this lone representative of the Lord, standing on the very threshold of losing his life, responds as would only a true servant: "If ye teach the law of Moses why do ye not keep it? Why do ye set your hearts upon riches? Why do ye commit whoredoms and spend your strength with harlots, yea, and cause this people to commit sin, that the Lord has cause to send me to prophesy against this people, yea, even a great evil against this people?" (Mosiah 12:30.)

As we continue our imaginary watch we observe that, having been confounded by the word of God's servant and following the command of their king, the wicked priests of Noah attempt to lay their hands on him that they might slay him. At this critical moment in the life of this great man, when his life hangs in the balance, his words reach out to us over a span of more than two thousand years. You can almost see his shoulders square noticeably as he draws himself to his full height and majestically proclaims: "Touch me not, for God shall smite you if ye lay your hands upon me, for I have not delivered the message which the Lord sent me to deliver" (Mosiah 13:3; emphasis added).

Can you feel the electricity of that moment? Can you begin to understand now why Abinadi is such a special prophet? Words like heroic, courageous, obedient, fearless, powerful, dynamic, and faithful all come flooding into your mind as you replay that moment in Abinadi's life over and over in your mind; and as you do, Abinadi rises to the very heights of what a servant of God should be.

Go with me also to a later moment in his life, when he has been condemned to death by Noah and his priests. It seems clear that King Noah had mixed emotions about what to do with this holy man. For whatever reason, it does appear that King Noah pondered the possibility of releasing Abinadi and perhaps sought a politically expedient way to do so. Consider the scene, again witnessed from our mythical vantage point, when Abinadi is brought before King Noah and his priests to hear these words: "Abinadi, we have found an accusation against thee, and thou art worthy of death. For thou hast said that God himself should come down among the children of men; and now, for this cause thou shalt be put to death unless thou wilt recall all the words which thou hast spoken evil concerning me and my people." (Mosiah 16:7-8.)

In all probability, having been in prison, Abinadi has been brought before the king and his priests in some form of physical restraint to minimize the possibility of escape. He has just heard the supreme authority of the land pronounce the death sentence upon him. Without attempting to impart emotions to Abinadi, consider yourself in that same circumstance. Would there not have been a flood of emotion pour over your body? Would there not have been, if only for a moment, a touch of panic, a desire to flee, a hope that the heavens would open and rescue would come? Now, having placed yourself in that frame of mind, would you not then have seized upon the words "unless thou wilt recall all the words which thou has spoken evil concerning me and my people" as the hoped-for route of escape? Would not most of us have sought to find some manner of taking advantage of that opportunity to avoid the sentence of death? Under circumstances such as that, it would not seem too difficult to clothe in respectability the desire to live by simply considering all of the good which you could continue to do if your life wereprolonged, and contemplating how you might "recall all the words" in such an equivocal way as to still leave intact the teachings which you had sought to impart.

Certainly most of us would be susceptible to some form of thinking along those or similar lines. And now, once again, we get a rare glimpse into the heart and mind of Abinadi, for the record states simply: "Now Abinadi said unto him: I say unto you, I will not recall the words which I have spoken unto you concerning this people, for they are true" (Mosiah 17:9; emphasis added).

He then underscored with this addendum the faith with which he faced that moment: "I will suffer even until death, and I will not recall my words, and they shall stand as a testimony against you" (Mosiah 17:10).

While his martyrdom, described as having been "death by fire," would undoubtedly have been a physically painful experience, it is my thought that Abinadi's moment of supreme triumph occurred in those moments when he formed the phrase: "I will not recall the words which I have spoken."

As an aside, one almost has to wonder how someone like Abinadi would feel if he were to hear some of the excuses we use for failing to do what the Lord has asked. Can you see yourself trying to explain to him why it is that you haven't been able to share the gospel with others? Why you are less than totally obedient? Or how, having taken the covenants of marriage, you can justify treating your husband or wife in less than a loving and nurturing way? Obviously, the list could go on and the examples be compounded, but perhaps in understanding yourself in these and other areas you will begin to catch a glimpse of why Abinadi has such a power to "stir my soul."

Teachings of Abinadi

The teachings of Abinadi are preserved for us in the pages of the book of Mosiah, by virtue of the fact that Alma (the father of Alma the Younger), who was converted to a belief in the words of Abinadi, "did write all the words which Abinadi had spoken" (Mosiah 17:4). As I have previously commented, all of the words spoken by Abinadi as recorded in Mosiah could well have been delivered in under twenty-five minutes. It seems, however, thatin reality his preaching took a good deal longer than this and that Mormon did not carry all of Abinadi's words forward to the gold plates. (See, for example, Mosiah 12:8, 19.)

As you will see from reading the messages of Abinadi, he touches upon a great number of gospel subjects, including the law of Moses and most of the Ten Commandments. However, to me his teachings on the coming of the Savior, the Atonement, and the Resurrection stand paramount in all that he taught. It is against this backdrop that Abinadi discusses the law of Moses and points out to the priests of King Noah that the law of Moses alone cannot save. To those who would slavishly follow the law of Moses, Abinadi appropriately begins his teachings by reciting what is now the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. That chapter contains a poetic prophecy of the coming of the Son of Man.

Incidentally, for any who have trouble in understanding Isaiah, may I suggest a learning technique that has proven very successful for me. I try to read the thoughts or ideas presented by Isaiah more than reading each individual word. I have found that in doing that I have been able to capture the spirit of what Isaiah is saying, and that spirit is confirmed by a greater understanding of his message. Typically, when I attempt to read Isaiah in the same way that I would read a manual on operating a computer, I find that a sequence of individual words can often be confusing or sometimes seemingly contradictory. When I rise above that approach and seek an understanding of what is taught, Isaiah becomes not only comprehensible but extremely enjoyable.

You will also want to read the fifteenth chapter of the book of Mosiah, where Abinadi discourses on Christ, His sojourn upon the earth, His temptation, His crucifixion, and His resurrection. You will find the ninth verse very instructive on the issue of justice and mercy.

However, it is on the issue of Christ being both the Father and the Son that I believe Abinadi is at his doctrinal best. I know of no other single place in the standard works where the principles surrounding the concept of Christ being the Father and the Son are so lucidly taught in such a short space. As you read the fifteenth chapter of Mosiah you may find it profitable to re-read the ninety-third section of the Doctrine and Covenants, particularly verses 2 through 5.

Abinadi's teachings say:

And because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son-

The Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and the Son-

And they are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth. (Mosiah 15:2-4).

The issue of how the son, Jesus Christ, also known as Jehovah, is additionally the Father is one of extreme importance and is found by many to be difficult to understand. In fact, the 1988 Gospel Doctrine manual refers to verses 1-5 of chapter 15 as "some of the most difficult verses in the Book of Mormon."

The challenge comes in understanding Abinadi's teachings in view of the separate and distinct identities of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, as taught in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Almost everyone can readily understand Abinadi when he says that Jesus Christ is the Son. That part of his teachings seems to fit neatly into the doctrines most of us have understood since the beginning of our gospel study. It is when Abinadi gets to the Father and the Son being one ("and they are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth") that we tend to become confused. If that happens to be your particular situation, don't be discouraged. It was enough of a challenge for many others that the First Presidency, on June 30, 1916, issued a statement on how Christ was theFather and the Son. (This statement is reproduced in Appendix 2 of the James E. Talmage book The Articles of Faith , published by the Church.)

Generally, it may be said that Christ is the Father in at least three separate ways:

Abinadi's teachings on the subject of the resurrection may need some clarification, especially to the beginning student of the gospel. To assist you in your understanding, it might be well to comment briefly upon these teachings:

And there cometh a resurrection, even a first resurrection; yea, even a resurrection of those that have been, and who are, and who shall be, even until the resurrection of Christ-for so shall he be called.

And now, the resurrection of all the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept the commandments of God, shall come forth in the first resurrection; therefore, they are the first resurrection.

They are raised to dwell with God who has redeemed them; thus they have eternal life through Christ, who has broken the bands of death.

And these are those who have part in the first resurrection; and these are they that have died before Christ came, in their ignorance, not having salvation declared unto them. And thus the Lord bringeth about the restoration of these; and they have a part in the first resurrection, or have eternal life, being redeemed by the Lord.

And little children also have eternal life.

But behold, and fear, and tremble before God, for ye ought to tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them; these are they that have no part in the first resurrection.

Therefore ought ye not to tremble? For salvation cometh to none such; for the Lord hath redeemed none such; yea, neither can the Lord redeem such; for he cannot deny himself; for he cannot deny justice when it has its claim. (Mosiah 15:21-27.)

At first glance it might seem that the teachings of Abinadi are at variance with the doctrines of the resurrection accepted by the Church. That seeming contradiction disappears when we carefully examine Abinadi's counsel. You will note that Abinadi has established a special set of definitions by which his teachings are to be understood. Specifically, he defines the first resurrection in terms of the period during which the person being resurrected lives or has lived (those who lived before the resurrection of Christ), noting that the wicked have no part in that first resurrection. That resurrection being long since over, in these latter days we normally use the term first resurrection to refer to that which will begin at Christ's second coming, which also is linked to worthiness (see D&C 29:13). But we have to understand that Abinadi made no effort to teach concerning the various degrees of glory. That being the case, the term eternal life, which we currently understand to mean life in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom, must be understood as being used by Abinadi in a much broader and more inclusive way. Read with this understanding, Abinadi's instruction is both informative and enlightening.

One other doctrinal subject treated by this ancient sage compels a brief observation. In Mosiah 15:10-12, Abinadi discourses on the "spiritual seed" of Christ, or alternatively, the children of Christ by adoption:

And now I say unto you, who shall declare his generation? Behold, I say unto you, that when his soul has been made an offering for sin he shall see his seed. And now what say ye? And who shall be his seed?

Behold I say unto you, that whosoever has heard the words of the prophets, yea, all the holy prophets who have prophesied concerning the coming of the Lord-I say unto you, that all those who have hearkened unto their words, and believed that the Lord would redeem his people, and have looked forward to that day for a remission of their sins, I say unto you, that these are his seed, or they are the heirs of the kingdom of God.

For these are they whose sins he has borne; these are they for whom he has died, to redeem them from their transgressions. And now, are they not his seed?

His words are both cautionary and profound. As the reading reveals, Abinadi first poses the question: Who shall be his seed? In answer to this question, Abinadi succinctly states that all those who have hearkened to the words of the holy prophets, and believed that the Lord would redeem His people, and look forward to that day for remission of their sins, are the seed of Christ.

A casual reading of Abinadi's teachings might lead the uninitiated to the conclusion that a mere intellectual belief in the words of the prophets and in the redemptive power of the Lord Jesus Christ is sufficient. That of course is not the meaning intended by Abinadi, nor is it in harmony with the teachings of the restored gospel.

To hearken to the words of the prophets means not only to hear them and seek to spiritually understand them but also to guide our lives, our conduct, and our thoughts by them. Someone who hearkens to the words of the prophets follows those words, adheres to those words, and obeys those words. Companion requirements are fairly set forth in the Articles of Faith and include the requirement of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and the conviction that through His atoning sacrifice all mankind may be saved.

Thus, to become the seed of Jesus Christ requires not only faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and His atoning sacrifice but also obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. As we harmonize our lives with these teachings, we qualify for the rewardof those who are the seed of Christ. We become those for whom He has borne our sins, those for whom He has died to redeem us from the effects of our transgressions, and those who are heirs to the kingdom of God.

Perhaps, after all else has been said, it is most appropriate to conclude with the thought that Abinadi's greatest contribution lies in the fact that he lived so as to qualify to be the seed of Jesus Christ. His life and death establish a standard by which we might gauge our own progress. While it is doubtful that most of us will ever be called upon to die for our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, it is very clear that each day we will be called upon to live for our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

As to the great prophet Abinadi, it seems befitting of his stature to observe that he stepped onto the passages of the Book of Mormon with obedience, courage, and faith, and he roared across its history like a meteor lighting up the sky and sealed his outstanding life with a martyr's death.
