Various General Authorities, Heroes from the Book of Mormon ( 1995)

11 Elder F. Burton Howard Ammon: Reflections on Faith and Testimony

From my earliest childhood, I held the full-time missionaries in special esteem. This, in the beginning, was due to my mother, who taught me to pray for them. Before I could read, she read me stories about the missionary experiences of Wilford Woodruff, Parley P. Pratt, John Taylor, and Ammon. As a result, my association with missionaries has always been positive and uplifting. The most enjoyable sacrament meetings of my youth were the homecomings and farewells of those who were coming or going to the mission field. The example of missionaries past and present has thrilled me from then till now.

Inspirational experiences of a more recent vintage have had the same effect and have served to keep the missionary heritage of the Latter-day Saints in the foreground of my life. Many a young person has had the course of his or her life changed by the acceptance of a mission call. I was such a one. The enlarged horizons, the compassion for others, the ordering of life's priorities which come to a missionary, can come in no other way. Sometimes these changes are painful. They were to me. Time has revealed previously unexpected dimensions to the missionary experience. It is now seen as multifaceted and never ending.

My release as a full-time missionary did not signal an end to my missionary activity. Since that time many years ago, I have continued to associate with the work as a shepherd, coach, player, and referee. It has been an exciting and satisfying time. Increased maturity has also brought me an increasedappreciation for the great missionaries of the past. Lessons which were perceived only dimly, if at all, now are seen more clearly. Characteristics and attributes of some of my childhood heroes are now more evident.

When I was young, the thing that impressed me most about Ammon was that he bravely defended the flocks of King Lamoni and cut off the arms of renegade Lamanites who tried to scatter those flocks. That was the kind of story that personified what I thought a missionary or great religious leader should be. But the fact that people perform brave acts or achieve victory in battle does not impress me now as much as it did before. There are more far-reaching lessons to be learned. Ammon remains one of my heroes, even though I see him with different eyes. Today, I see heroism as being something different from bravery. It is that quality which makes one courageous when it matters. It is doing what one must do when temptation, or discouragement, or illness, or personal inconvenience suggest otherwise. It is always predicated on faith.

As Moroni abridged the writings of Ether and prepared to bury the plates which became the Book of Mormon, he had occasion to look back on the record his father had written, as well as all that he knew about the history of his people. He felt impressed to talk about those who had demonstrated great faith. In the twelfth chapter of Ether, he set forth his own gallery of heroes. One of them was Ammon. Moroni said, "It was the faith of Ammon and his brethren which wrought so great a miracle among the Lamanites" (Ether 12:15). And so to me a hero is one who is and does more than we commonly expect of someone by exceeding the normal limitations of virtue, faith, valor, and excellence. He or she inspires others to exceed them as well. A hero "reminds us of what lies unrecognized and unused in ourselves" (Henry Fairlie, "Too Rich for Heroes," Harpers, November 1978, p. 40).

A careful study of the life of Ammon teaches lessons that cannot be learned as well anywhere else.

After their miraculous conversion, the sons of Mosiah determined to go their several ways to declare the word of God to the Lamanites. The twenty-sixth chapter of Alma tells us about this experience and their many years in the mission field. Speakingabout his mission afterwards, in a setting comparable to a modern missionary homecoming, Ammon tells about his decision to go on a mission and the blessing it is to be an instrument "in the hands of God" (verse 3). He talks about how his friends gathered around to give him a scornful, mocking farewell. They laughingly asked if he supposed he could bring the heathen "to the knowledge of the truth," or if he supposed he could "convince the Lamanites of the incorrectness of the traditions of their fathers" (verse 24).

His friends reminded him that the Lamanites were difficult-that they delighted in shedding blood, that their days had been spent in grossest iniquity, and that their "ways [had] been the ways of a transgressor from the beginning" (verse 24). They suggested that they would be better off taking up arms against the Lamanites and destroying them, lest they should someday overrun the Nephites (see verse 25).

Notwithstanding this kind of negative peer pressure, Ammon went on a mission with the hope that, as he put it, he "might save some few of their souls" (verse 26). And scripture details the story of his mission. Let me highlight a few elements of that story.

The Book of Mormon tells us that he was depressed after entering the mission field and was "about to turn back" (verse 27). However, the Lord comforted him and said, "Go amongst thy brethren, the Lamanites, and bear with patience thine afflictions, and I will give you success" (verse 27). Ammon says that he did go forth and that he was patient in his sufferings; and that he suffered every privation and traveled from house to house relying upon the mercies of the world, and also upon the mercies of God.

He states that he entered into their houses and taught them, and taught them in their streets, and taught them upon their hills; and entered into their temples and their synagogues and taught them. He reports that he and his brothers were cast out and mocked, spit upon, smote upon their cheeks, stoned, bound with strong cords, and cast into prison. Through the power and wisdom of God they were delivered again (verse 29). Two verses portray in a majestic way the reward of all missionary service:

And we suffered all manner of afflictions, and all this, that perhaps we might be the means of saving some soul; and wesupposed that our joy would be full if perhaps we could be the means of saving some.

Now behold, we can look forth and see the fruits of our labors; and are they few? I say unto you, Nay, they are many; yea, and we can witness of their sincerity, because of their love towards their brethren and also towards us. (Alma 26:30-31.)

Ammon's brother Aaron had previously rebuked him as he related his success in the mission field, stating, "I fear that thy joy doth carry thee away unto boasting" (verse 10). Ammon's response constitutes some of the most beautiful language in literature:

Now have we not reason to rejoice? Yea, I say unto you, there never were men that had so great reason to rejoice as we, since the world began; yea, and my joy is carried away, even unto boasting in my God; for he has all power, all wisdom, and all understanding; he comprehendeth all things, and he is a merciful Being, even unto salvation, to those who will repent and believe on his name.

Now if this is boasting, even so will I boast; for this is my life and my light, my joy and my salvation, and my redemption from everlasting wo. (Alma 26:35-36.)

A testimony of the gospel usually consists of two things. It consists of the bright moment of realization when, touched by the Holy Ghost, we first sense that the gospel is true. A testimony is also evolutionary. It is a gradual, growing awareness based on experience and prayer that one's initial testimony was incomplete because there are many facets to the gospel, each of which is true.

I cannot remember a time when I did not know that the Book of Mormon was true. I had studied it before I went on my mission. There I read it many times. After my mission, I had the privilege of teaching early morning seminary for seven years. The subject each year was the Book of Mormon. Again I read it each year, followed the outline, assimilated the lessons, and testified of its truthfulness. But after all of this, one day in preparing to teach a lesson my testimony of the Book of Mormon was fortified and the Holy Spirit touched my heart in a way that causes me to remember the moment even now after many years.

I was reading again the twenty-sixth chapter of Alma and the story of Ammon's mission. I read out loud, as I sometimes do, trying to put myself in the position of the characters in the book, imagining that I was saying or hearing the words, that I was there. Once more I went over the report, and, with a clarity which cannot be described and which would be difficult to comprehend by one who has not experienced it, the Spirit spoke to my soul, saying, Did you notice? Everything that happened to Ammon happened to you.

It was a totally unexpected sentiment. It was startling in its scope; it was a thought that had never occurred to me before. I quickly reread the story. Yes, there were times when my heart had been depressed and I had thought about going home. I too had gone to a foreign land to teach the gospel to the Lamanites. I had gone forth among them, had suffered hardships, had slept on the floor, endured the cold, gone without eating. I too had traveled from house to house, knocking on doors for months at a time without being invited in, relying on the mercies of God.

There had been other times when we had entered houses and talked to people. We had taught them on their streets and on their hills. We had even preached in other churches. I remembered the time I had been spit upon. I remembered the time when I, as a young district leader assigned by the mission president to open up a new town, had entered, with three other elders, the main square of a city that had never had missionaries before. We went into the park, sang a hymn, and a crowd gathered.

Then the lot fell upon me, as district leader, to preach. I stood upon a stone bench and spoke to the people. I told the story of the restoration of the gospel, of the boy Joseph going into the grove and the appearance of the Father and the Son to him. I remembered well a group of teenage boys, in the evening shadows, throwing rocks at us. I remembered the concern about being hit or injured by those who did not want to hear the message.

I remembered spending time in jail while my legal right to be a missionary in a certain country was decided by the police authorities. I didn't spend enough time in prison to compare myself to Ammon, but I still remember the feeling I had when the door was closed and I was far away from home, alone, with only the mercies of the Lord to rely on for deliverance. Iremembered enduring these things with the hope that "we might be the means of saving some soul" (Alma 26:30).

And then on that day as I read, the Spirit testified to me again, and the words remain with me even today: No one but a missionary could have written this story. Joseph Smith could never have known what it was like to be a missionary to the Lamanites, for no one he knew had ever done such a thing before.

And so Ammon is one of my heroes, and part of my testimony of the Book of Mormon is based on the fact that I have had experiences similar to his own, and I know them to be true.

Moroni said that "it was the faith of Ammon and his brethren which wrought so great a miracle among the Lamanites" (Ether 12:15). Missionaries are noted for their faith, and because of Ammon's faith, as well as the faith of many among whom he labored, many miracles accompanied his ministry. The single-handed defeat of the robbers at the waters of Sebus was indeed miraculous. The scripture says that notwithstanding their numbers, Ammon could not be slain (see Alma 18:3). The converting of King Lamoni as a result of spiritual promptings which told Ammon what to do and say was another great miracle. The Spirit bearing witness of the divinity of the Savior to the queen was another. Ammon's rescue of his imprisoned brethren was still another, as was the conversion of thousands of the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi. Even though the Anti-Nephi-Lehies had committed great iniquity, they were able to take advantage of the redeeming power of the Atonement, they renounced war, and they determined to be perfectly honest and upright in all things and to be firm in the faith of Christ even to the end. This was perhaps one of the greatest of all the miracles. And it was the great faith of Ammon and his brethren, combined with the faith and receptive spirit of the people, that accomplished it.

In speaking about faith, Moroni tells us that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen, and that no miracle can occur until after the trial of our faith (see Ether 12:6, 12). In addition, it has always seemed to me that faith is the power which enables us to venture beyond the limits of our own experience. It is the power that pierces the walls of certainty that surround us just enough so that we can see beyond them and slip through to abrighter realm that we have not known before. This is the legacy of Ammon. He is the personification of faith. What he did and learned as a result of going where no man had gone before will stand forever as an example to us all.

Ammon learned about missionary work, and through him the entire Church has learned about it. Ammon learned that missionary work is contagious and gratifying, that it is impossible not to be profoundly changed as a result of participating in it. He learned that those who trust in the Lord don't turn back when they encounter difficulty. He learned that there is a difference between being disappointed and being discouraged. He learned that missionaries pray and work, that they are at peace with themselves, that anyone who repents and exercises faith and accepts the gospel is given to know the mysteries of God, including a personal witness of the truthfulness of the work. He learned that one of the great blessings that men and women can aspire to is to be instruments in the hands of God. He learned of the love which exists between missionaries and converts. He learned of the joy which none receive "save it be the truly penitent" (Alma 27:18).

Ammon lived on the bright edge of the Spirit. There is no record that he ever fully comprehended the transcendent change which came into his own life. Nevertheless, his life was a miracle. He was not motivated by a hope of reward or the expectation of position. He served because he had become so close to the work that it was part of him and he was part of it. He was the kind of missionary able to be used by the Lord in any place to do any thing. He was the kind of member of the Church who caused things to go better when he was there. He sensed his responsibility to care for those who had been converted, to fellowship them and integrate them into his society. He was trusted by the Lord, with all that this implies, and was therefore able to be used as an instrument.

I suspect that Ammon came to know that the Lord often calls people to positions because of blessings He wants to give them. Not all blessings are pleasant; some are painful. Some require growth, patience, and perspective to be fully appreciated. Ammon learned that sometimes the Lord prepares His servants for future callings and that often the real value and purpose of the preparation is not revealed until a later time. Ammon is agenuine hero. He is an example to all who are laboring in that field which is white, already to harvest, and to all who ever have or who ever will do so.

His story encourages us, each and every one of us, to ask what it would be like after a lifetime of doubt to find certainty, after a period of pride and rebellion to wondrously discover God. Ammon drifted aimlessly for years before he found a purpose to his creation. He was in the dark and found light; he despaired and found hope. After a frantic, friendless search for pleasure, he found peace. He learned what it was like to leave mistakes behind and begin again. He learned to know the love of Christ, to hear the still, small voice for the first time. He learned the joys of service. He learned to receive answers to prayer.

Imagine what it would be like to have the experiences that Ammon had. Imagine what it would be like to bring these priceless gifts to others.
