George Bond was so excited to receive the Aaronic Priesthood that he counted down the days until he turned 12. “I was really excited to become a deacon so I could pass the sacrament,” George says.

At last the Sunday arrived. He awoke early and got ready for the 9:00 a.m. sacrament meeting of the Arlington Ward, Jacksonville Florida East Stake.

“George was ready at 8:00. He had his white shirt and tie on. He was set to go well before any of us were,” his dad, Bill, remembers. “At sacrament meeting that day, I didn’t hold the tears back when I saw him up there passing the sacrament for the first time. When I thought that he was a part of our family and now also a holder of the priesthood, it was wonderful.” George, who is from Russia, was adopted by the Bonds on April 29, 2002.

Because Brother Bond joined the Church as an adult in 1991, he is watching his son have experiences as a young man that Brother Bond never experienced. “I wish I had grown up in the Church,” Brother Bond says. “I wish I could have grown up with the knowledge that George is getting now as an Aaronic Priesthood holder. Many times I’ve wished that.”

“Bill has really helped George understand certain things, such as the way he needs to dress when he goes to church,” says George’s mom, Fran. “I’ve noticed in the time that George has been in our family how much he is drawn to follow in his dad’s footsteps. He really wants to be like his dad.”

George, the first counselor in his ward’s deacons quorum presidency, continues to grow in both the gospel and the priesthood. He took the initiative to find out exactly what fast offerings are and what the donations are used for. “I was reading in a book about fast offerings,” he says. “That’s how I know why people donate the money and why I collect fast offerings each month.”

“It’s been a learning experience for him, but I’m impressed by how he pays such close attention to what has to be done,” Brother Bond adds. “We’re very fortunate to have him as a son.”
