Many people want to know where they came from, why they are here, and where they are going. Heavenly Father’s plan of happiness answers these questions.

Before we were born, we all lived together in heaven with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. We learned and grew as much as we could. But eventually Heavenly Father gathered all His children in a council and told us that to become like Him, we must leave heaven for a time. He would create an earth for us, He would give us the freedom to choose between good and evil, and He would show us the way to know what is good. He would provide a Savior so that when we sinned, we could repent and still return to Him.

We came to earth to gain a body and walk by faith. We can’t remember our home in heaven, but we can choose the right by following the example of Jesus, obeying our parents, and living My Gospel Standards.

After we die, we will all live again because of the Atonement of Jesus Christ. He overcame death through the Resurrection, and everyone will be resurrected. He also overcame sin, and those who have faith, repent, are baptized, receive the Holy Ghost, and keep the commandments will return to live with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ. They will have the gift of eternal life, which is what the plan of happiness is all about.

Remove page F9 from the magazine, and mount it on heavy paper. Cut along the solid lines. Glue the second strip to the tab on the first strip. Fold back and forth on the dotted lines.

Heavenly Father’s Plan of Happiness for Me
(See Moses 1:39.)
We lived in heaven with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ before we were born. (See Abr. 3:22–26.)
An earth was created. (See Moses 2:1–3:3.)
Adam and Eve and the Fall were a part of Heavenly Father’s plan. (See Moses 4:6–5:12.)
Jesus Christ came to earth. He is our Savior; He overcame the Fall. Because of Him, we can live again. (See Abr. 3:27–28.)
Coming to a family is part of Heavenly Father’s plan. (See paragraphs 1–4 of “The Family: A Proclamation to the World,” Liahona, Oct. 2004, 49; Ensign, Nov. 1995, 102.)
We will all die, and because of Jesus Christ, we will all be resurrected. (See Alma 11:42–45.)
When we follow the example of Jesus Christ, we can inherit the celestial kingdom. (See D&C 76:50–70.)

Note: If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied, traced, or printed out from the Internet at www.lds.org. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on the world map.

1.  Divide the Primary into seven groups, and give each group a scripture passage recounting one of the seven days of the Creation (see Gen. 1:3–2:3; Moses 2:3–3:3). Have each group draw pictures of that part of the Creation. Then have them hold up their drawings and recite their scripture. Move from day one to day seven. Have the children attach their pictures to a large circle representing the earth. Point out that Heavenly Father created the world for us because He loves us. We show our love for Heavenly Father by treating His creations with reverence.

2.  Write the words to the third article of faith on the chalkboard with many other words interspersed. As you repeat the article of faith, have children erase the extra words. Repeat the article of faith together several times; then erase the words of the article of faith one at a time until the children can repeat it by themselves. Teach that there are two parts to the Atonement: (1) Jesus Christ overcame the Fall and physical death through the Resurrection. Everyone who has ever lived will be resurrected. (2) Jesus Christ also overcame spiritual death for us by taking our sins upon Himself. To be saved from our sins, we must be obedient to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Make a representation of the celestial kingdom, such as a sun. Cut it into puzzle pieces. On each piece write a scripture that teaches about laws (for example, tithing, Word of Wisdom, forgiveness) and ordinances (baptism, sacrament). Pass out as many pieces as you have to an equal number of groups of children. Have the groups locate the scripture, explain the law or ordinance, and add their piece to the puzzle.
