Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

PREFACE

Nothing bears a stronger testimony to the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith than the Book of Mormon. Its detailed historical narrative, intricate and consistent geographical presentation, and profound description of human nature demonstrate beyond doubt that no uninspired person could have produced such a book. More importantly, its unparalleled description of the doctrine of God and its uncompromising testimony to the mission of Jesus Christ shout from the housetops that the Book of Mormon is true—the work of the Lord—and that Joseph Smith, through whom God brought it forth, was the Lord's servant.

We Latter-day Saints gratefully acknowledge the Book of Mormon as the keystone of our religion, revealed by the Lord to provide a sure foundation of our faith. In the Church we accept not only the truthfulness of its doctrine, but also the historicity of the events it describes. Those who choose to do otherwise not only deny the Lord's witness concerning it (see D&C 17:6) but also forfeit the blessings that attend those who read it, love it, and abide by the doctrine and precepts to which it bears testimony.

Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni was written to accompany one's personal study of the Book of Mormon. The authors and the editor acknowledge that there is no substitute for carefully searching the scriptures themselves, and we encourage all to do so. The Studies in Scripture series is presented as a resource to help readers in that effort.

This volume emphasizes the teachings of the Book of Mormon. The authors have stressed the messages contained in the sermons and writings of its prophets. At the same time, they have discussed Book of Mormon history in order to clarify the narrative and emphasize the lessons that are taught through historical events. Since the primary purpose of the Book of Mormon itself is to teach and bear testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ, our purpose in this volume has been to do likewise. Thus we have considered external evidences of the Book of Mormon, as well as contextual and comparative studies, to be of lesser value for this work.

Each of the contributors is responsible for his or her own conclusions. This book is a private endeavor and not a production of either Brigham Young University or The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Although the writers and the editor have sought to be in harmony with the teachings of the scriptures and the leaders of the Church, the reader should not regard this work as a primary source for gospel understanding but should turn instead to the scriptures and the words of modern prophets for authoritative doctrinal statements.

I express my appreciation to the management and staff of Deseret Book Company, to my assistant Charles J. Baldwin, and to the contributors to this volume, whose knowledge and spiritual sensitivities are apparent throughout its pages. I am also most thankful for the expert assistance of my colleagues Robert E. Parsons, Rex C. Reeve, Jr., and Robert L. Millet, whose wisdom and advice have added much to this book.

Kent P. Jackson
