Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

2

A FAITH UNTO SALVATION

(Alma 31-33)

Rodney Turner [^1]

The religion of the ancient Zoramites in the Book of Mormon is paralleled by much of the religion practiced in our modern world: it was false, superficial, undemanding, impotent, and Christless. Consequently, the message of God's prophets to that misguided people is as relevant now as it was over two thousand years ago. While religious illusions may serve us in time, they will fail us in eternity. Only a faith centered in things as they really are and as they really will be can produce the knowledge that saves. Such a faith was the topic of the message delivered to certain Zoramites by the prophet Alma in 74 B.C.

Four False Faiths

Alma's teachings and those of his companion, Amulek (Alma 34), can best be understood in the larger context of certain incorrect doctrines that arose from time to time among the Nephites beginning in the days of Jacob. These erroneous ideas had one thing in common: they denied the future coming of God to the earth in the person of Jesus Christ. The underlying question in them all was the same as it is now: How are we saved? The Book of Mormon describes five variant answers to this question. Four of them are false.

Of these four, the first was advocated by a man named Sherem, who lived in the sixth century B.C. He taught that the law of Moses was all-sufficient for salvation. (See Jacob 7:7.) Characteristically, Sherem was a learned, eloquent speaker who denied the possibility of prophecy but then proceeded to prophesy himself: "I know that there is no Christ, neither has been, nor ever will be." (Jacob 7:9.) Deceived by the devil, Sherem became Satan's servant and led many souls into apostasy. Struck down by God, and knowing that he was dying, he confessed: "I fear lest I have committed the unpardonable sin, for I have lied unto God; for I denied the Christ, and said that I believed the scriptures; and they truly testify of him." (Jacob 7:19.) The spirit of Sherem—denying prophets and prophecy—is with us today.

The second heresy arose some four hundred years later in 91 B.C. when a man named Nehor taught a pleasing doctrine of universal salvation without the need for repentance: "For the Lord had created all men, and had also redeemed all men; and, in the end, all men should have eternal life." (Alma 1:4; cf. 15:15.) Humanity's redemption required no sacrifice on God's part; he simply willed it. So Nehorism predestined everyone to heaven; hell was no problem.

The spirit of Nehorism is alive and well in many Christian churches where much sermonizing on God's unconditional love can be heard. Because God loves us, they say, sin is not as sinful as once thought. And if there is a hell—which is doubtful—it will be a vast improvement over the old fire-and-brimstone one of eternal burnings. This deceptive attitude was foreseen by Nephi: "There shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Ne. 28:8.) In advocating a paid ministry, Nehor introduced priestcraft among the Nephites. [^2] Opposed by an aged man named Gideon, a member of Alma's church, Nehor slew him and was executed for his murder. But Nehorism did not die with its founder; it wreaked great havoc among the Nephites for at least twenty more years.

The third, and probably the most charismatic, of the great heretics in the Book of Mormon was the anti-Christ Korihor. [^3] He denied the existence of anything beyond the natural order. [^4] God, Christ, prophecy, immortality, and judgment were products of false traditions and deranged minds. His advocacy of jungle law ("every man conquered according to his strength; and whatsoever a man did was no crime"—Alma 30:17) promoted rampant immorality among his eager followers. Korihor's descent from theism ("I always knew that there was a God"—Alma 30:52) into professed atheism and its frequent companion, libertinism ("I taught them because they were pleasing unto the carnal mind; and I taught them, even until I had much success, insomuch that I verily believed that they were true"—Alma 30:53) is a classic example of self-delusion. Like Sherem, Korihor demanded a sign and, like Sherem, was struck dumb. Thereafter, while begging food among another group of apostates, the Zoramites, he was trampled to death. Mormon concluded his account of this pathetic anti-Christ by observing: "Thus we see that the devil will not support his children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to hell." (Alma 30:60; cf. 2 Ne. 28:21.)

The fourth false faith was advocated by a man named Zoram [^5] who, with his followers, had apostatized from Alma's church of Christ. Like Sherem, Nehor, and Korihor, the Zoramites denied that there would ever be an incarnated—flesh and bone—Christ. How could there be? God was "a spirit forever." (Alma 31:15.) They thanked their immaterial God for having "made it known unto us that there shall be no Christ." They were also grateful that God had "elected us that we shall be saved, whilst all around us are elected to be cast by thy wrath down to hell; for the which holiness, O God, we thank thee." (Alma 31:16-17.)

Their weekly group-devotion on the "Rameumptom," a prayer tower that dominated their synagogues, consisted of this single, formalized, self-congratulatory prayer. Having taken care of their spiritual obligations for the week, "they returned to their homes, never speaking of their God again until they had assembled themselves together again to the holy stand." (Alma 31:23.) Their choral exercise in vanity sufficed to appease their God and permitted them to freely indulge themselves. Having been predestined to holiness and salvation, they had no need for daily prayer or obedience to restrictive commandments. The issue of life after death had been fully and happily settled; they could get on with the things of this world. Such is the underlying assumption of every "Sunday religion." It renders God a practical irrelevance. He exists, but he need not be taken too seriously. The false doctrines of Sherem, Nehor, Korihor, and Zoram were both predictive and representative of those apostate religious beliefs—Christian and non-Christian—that shroud the world in spiritual darkness in these latter days.

True Faith

To combat the Zoramite heresy, and knowing that "preaching of the word . . . had had more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else, . . . therefore Alma thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of God." (Alma 31:5.) The battle between truth and error, righteousness and rebellion, was joined.

Spiritual Humility

Bad religion breeds bad societies. The Zoramites created a class system that ostracized their less fortunate brothers and sisters from the very synagogues they had built. But—as has been the case from time immemorial—it was these downtrodden souls who proved most responsive to the message of Alma and his companions. [^6] Impoverished "as to things of the world," they are described as "poor in heart" or "lowly in heart." (Alma 32:3-4, 8.) That is, they were dispirited and quite hopeless. [^7] Alma "beheld that their afflictions had truly humbled them, and that they were in a preparation to hear the word." (Alma 32:6.)

Spiritual humility—the recognition of one's dependence upon God for all things temporal and spiritual, coupled with a willingness to accept his law—is a precondition for true repentance. Some achieve this humility only after they have been "compelled to be humble" by those "slings and arrows of outrageous fortune" of which Hamlet soliloquized. Some do so only after they have been brought face-to-face with the stark truth about themselves and the God they defied, or never knew.

Some will never learn humility and, therefore, never repent even when they stand before God with a "perfect knowledge" of their guilt and uncleanness. [^8] However, God's truth will prove irresistible, and they will acknowledge to their "everlasting shame that all his judgments are just." (Alma 12:15; cf. 2 Ne. 9:13-16.) President Spencer W. Kimball wrote one "disbeliever": "The time will come when there will be a surrender of every person who has ever lived on this earth . . . and it will be an unforced surrender, an unconditional surrender. When will it be for you? . . . It is not if you will capitulate to the great truth; it is when, for I know that you cannot indefinitely resist the power and pressure of truth." [^9]

"Therefore," said Alma, "blessed are they who humble themselves without being compelled to be humble . . . who would humble themselves, let them be in whatsoever circumstances they might." (Alma 32:16, 25.) Such spirits are in tune with the Holy Spirit. "Without compulsory means" (D&C 121:46), the intelligence, virtue, and truth in them draws them to the intelligence, virtue, and truth in God (see D&C 88:40). Perhaps they developed much of this affinity with the divine in their premortal existence, although undoubtedly it can be developed during mortality as well. Elder Bruce R. McConkie referred to this disposition as "the talent for spirituality. Those so endowed find it easy to believe the truth in this life." [^10] Needless to say, the sooner genuine humility—"a broken heart and a contrite spirit" (2 Ne. 2:7)—is achieved, the better off one is.

Sign-Seekers

To be "compelled to know" is characteristic of the carnally minded. This disposition results from an empirical or rational mind-set that accepts only what can be perceived through the physical senses or is deemed reasonable. (See Hel. 16:17-18.) But physical experiences and secular knowledge are the common property of the entire, disparate human race without regard to spirituality or moral character. A person may be a gifted artist, scientist, or philosopher, and a scoundrel at the same time. A university degree is not a prerequisite for salvation. Rather, we are saved only as we gain spiritual intelligence—light and truth, the glory of God. (See D&C 93:36.) Such knowledge comes only through faith and its resulting works. Paul wrote: "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Cor. 2:14.) The sign-seeker is the natural man par excellence. For him, if a thing cannot be seen, heard, touched, tasted, or smelled, it does not exist. Thus such people demand "a sign from heaven" before they will acknowledge the reality of "things which are not seen." Alma asked: "Is this faith? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for if a man knoweth a thing he hath no cause to believe, for he knoweth it." (Alma 32:18.) When certitude is obtained, faith is swallowed up in knowledge, becoming one with it. But, as we shall see, faith is indispensable in acquiring the knowledge that leads to salvation. To demand such knowledge in the absence of faith is to invite disaster. Those who do so will never obtain a fullness of either faith or knowledge.

The sign-seekers, the God-tempters, presume to put the Almighty on trial by challenging him to prove his own existence. Korihor typified them: "Except ye show me a sign, I will not believe." (Alma 30:48.) In their pride, the Korihors of this world set up the preconditions under which they may condescend to believe. But it is all a sham; their insistence on signs is not meant to foster faith but to justify doubt. And the seed of faith will never grow in the soil of doubt. Where there is a will to doubt, a heavenly sign or evidence will be ignored, rejected, or rationalized away. The Lord told young Joseph Smith: "Behold, if they will not believe my words, they would not believe you, my servant Joseph, if it were possible that you should show them all these things [obtained from the hill Cumorah] which I have committed unto you." (D&C 5:7; cf. Luke 16:31.) The rational mind will always reject what the hardened heart is unprepared to accept. That is why signs without faith are a barrier against, not a path to, God.

The last thing sign-seekers should seek is a sign. In insisting upon knowing before believing, they become their own worst enemy. "How much more cursed is he that knoweth the will of God and doeth it not, than he that only believeth, or only hath cause to believe, and falleth into transgression?" (Alma 32:19; cf. D&C 63:7, 11; 82:3.) The principle enunciated by Moroni—"Ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6)—is a blessing. Knowledge in excess of one's will and wisdom is a formula for disaster in all things. The world's understanding of nuclear energy far exceeds their ability to control it, because that knowledge does not rest upon a commitment to moral law. This condition accounts for the very real likelihood that we will yet be confronted with nuclear war. Power without principle is a scourge in every age.

Just as a wise parent keeps medicine or tools out of a child's reach, so does God withhold divine knowledge from the ill-prepared. [^11] In his wisdom and mercy, he has ordained that faith must precede certitude so that, in the very process of exercising faith, the individual develops the spiritual maturity needed to possess divine knowledge in righteousness. Thus capacitated, such knowledge magnifies rather than diminishes one's relationship to God.

For example, the Lord promised the brother of Jared that if he developed sufficient faith he could be shown all things. The brother of Jared did so, "wherefore [Christ] showed him all things, for he could no longer be kept without the veil." (Ether 12:21.) Christ was bound by his own promise; he could not deny the brother of Jared the knowledge his faith had prepared him to receive. This is an eternal principle. Hence the Prophet Joseph Smith's remark: "God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them." [^12]

Faith versus Knowledge

In scripture, faith and belief are frequently employed as interchangeable terms. [^13] In its broadest sense, faith is belief in the existence, virtue, validity, or efficacy of something or someone, seen or unseen, past, present, or future. [^14] It may be a good faith or a bad faith; it may be constructive or destructive. It all depends upon the nature of the person or thing that is its object. However, Alma delimited faith to belief in what is real and deserving of trust—the doctrine of Christ. Hence, he spoke of "things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21; italics added.)

Alma begged the Zoramites to "exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if you can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you." (Alma 32:27.) The "desire to believe" becomes the motivation for the "trial of faith," which eventually produces a "perfect knowledge" or verification of what was, at first, only an unproven possibility. When the desire to believe is combined with effort, faith is born, and when faith is born, saving works follow.

Alma used the example of planting a seed (his own testimony of Christ—Alma 33:1) in the hope of growing a tree, the fruit of which would be everlasting life (Alma 32:27-43). As each step of the "experiment" is verified by observed results, there is no further need to exercise faith in what has become an accomplished fact. For example, when the "seed" germinates, there is no longer need to have faith that it will germinate: "Yea, your knowledge is perfect in that thing, and your faith is dormant; and this because you know, for ye know that the word hath swelled your souls, and ye also know that it hath sprouted up, that your understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and your mind doth begin to expand." (Alma 32:34; italics added.)

While each successfully accomplished phase of the experiment is replaced with certitude or perfect knowledge of that phase, faith is still needed in carrying out each subsequent phase of the experiment. So initial faith produces initial knowledge, which, in turn, produces more faith, which then leads to even more knowledge, and so on until one's knowledge is perfect or complete pertaining to the entire experiment.

This same process was advocated by Jesus when he said: "If any man will do [God's] will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:17.) This is simply the scientific method raised to the spiritual plane: we do in order to know. As we live the gospel, we reap an ever greater harvest of faith and knowledge until, like God himself, our faith and our knowledge become perfect in all things. For those who aspire to that divine state, the faith-to-knowledge process must continue into eternity until they obtain "a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth." (D&C 93:26.) Like Adam and Eve, they will have become as the Gods who forever partake of both the tree of life and the tree of knowledge. Such is that "perfect day" called exaltation. (See D&C 50:24.)

Hope

As faith is not knowledge, but the means to knowledge, so faith is not hope, but the basis of hope: "If ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21.) [^15] Faith and hope are inseparable; one does not exist without the other. (See Moro. 7:41-42.) Faith in the redemptive power of Christ produces the hope of everlasting life, "the heavenly gift." (Ether 12:8.) Once that hope is realized, it is no longer hoped for; it is possessed. Paul wrote: "We are saved by hope: but hope that is seen [realized] is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?" (Rom. 8:24.) However, if the "tree of life"—which grows from a testimony of Christ—never matures, "it is because your ground [soul] is barren, and ye will not nourish the tree." (Alma 32:39.) No matter how fervent one's faith in the beginning, if the person becomes neglectful, apathetic, or rebellious, faith dies. And when faith dies, hope dies with it. But as Alma assured the Zoramites, if, with "an eye of faith," [^16] and with great diligence and patience, we nourish the word, "[we] shall pluck the fruit . . . which is most precious . . . and . . . feast upon this fruit even until [we] are filled, that [we] hunger not, neither shall [we] thirst." (Alma 32:42.)

The Prophetic Witness

Alma's general teachings on faith became increasingly specific as he brought his message to its climax. Driven from their synagogues, the despised Zoramites felt that they could no longer worship God. (See Alma 32:2, 3, 5; 33:2.) Somewhat perplexed by Alma's message, they asked two questions: (1) Should they believe in but one God? and (2) How were they to begin exercising faith?

Alma responded by first quoting two ancient prophets of Israel, Zenos and Zenock. Zenos taught that the real issue was not where or when one prays—it can be any place, any time—but how, and to whom, one prays. Zenos stressed that prayers are heard and mercy is extended through the Son of God. Said he: "Thou hast turned thy judgments [the demands of justice] away from me, because of thy Son." (Alma 33:11; italics added.) Zenock testified that Israel "will not understand thy mercies which thou hast bestowed upon them because of thy Son." (Alma 33:16; italics added; see 34:7.) [^17] Moses taught the same doctrine: the brazen serpent symbolized the saving power of the God of Israel. [^18] "But few understood the meaning of those things, and this because of the hardness of their hearts." (Alma 33:20.) Nevertheless, every true prophet understood and testified of the Son of God. (See Jacob 7:11; 3 Ne. 20:24.) Their combined testimonies of the promised Messiah constituted the "seed" the Zoramites were to plant in their hearts. "And as it beginneth to swell even so nourish it by your faith. And behold, it will become a tree, springing up in you unto everlasting life." (Alma 33:23.) Where can we worship? Everywhere. When should we worship? Always. Whom should we worship? The only true God. [^19]

Conclusion

Prominent among the many truths taught by Alma are the following: God is not an amorphous spirit ruling with arbitrary indifference over human affairs. He responds to our prayers and is profoundly involved in our lives, so much so that he sent his Son into the world to rescue us from endless temporal and spiritual death.

Prayer is not a weekly ritual but a daily necessity. It is not a means of evading our responsibilities; rather, it is an expression of commitment to them. Disdain of others renders prayer a vain, hypocritical exercise in self-delusion. If we would have God hear our cries, we cannot be deaf to the pleas of those around us.

True faith is not centered in ourselves but in the Lord; not in our virtues but in his. We believe in ourselves because we believe in him. Saving faith—unlike the credulity of the Zoramites, ancient and modern—is not a static, lifeless, attitude of self-complacency requiring nothing and giving nothing. Rather, true faith is dynamic and demanding. It is a lifetime process of spiritual growth wherein we work out our salvation "with fear before God." (Alma 34:37; cf. Philip. 2:12.) "Faith precedes the miracle" of revelation. To know—as God knows—the hidden things of time and eternity, we must first become like him. Only as we are transformed through faith are we capacitated to receive the blessings and responsibilities of spiritual knowledge.

Faith in Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of mankind, is the key to salvation and a knowledge of all things. Those who walk the strait and narrow way with "an eye of faith" shall be perfected in all the knowledge of God: "And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom. Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations." (D&C 76:7-8.) Thus, from the tiny seed of mortal faith in the Son of Man will come an immortal knowledge of God and his unimaginable mysteries. It only remains for us to plant that seed and nourish it with diligence.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Rodney Turner is professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Exactly why one man and woman's transgression led to everyone's transgression is not explicitly revealed in scripture. However, God is just; we are no more accountable to him for someone else's acts in one estate than we are in another. Possibly, the Fall affected all people because all people-exercising their agency-became willing co-partners in Adam's foreordained fall. That is, humanity covenanted to accept the Fall's temporary negative consequences (spiritual and physical death) so as to obtain its ultimate blessings (immortality and eternal life).
[^3] If the major premise of a syllogism is false, regardless of how valid the reasoning, the conclusion will be materially-that is to say, factually-false. The major premise of the Zoramites (God saves whom he chooses) was false, therefore the conclusion (Christ is unnecessary) was factually incorrect. Logic determines the soundness or validity of one's reasoning, but it cannot, of itself, establish its factual correctness.
[^4] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938), p. 358.
[^5] It is in this sense that mankind is ''conceived in sin.'' (Moses 6:55; cf. Ps. 51:5.) That is, whereas the human spirit-a child of God-was conceived by divine parents in a holy estate, its mortal tabernacle was brought by mortal parents into an unholy, imperfect estate.
[^6] The City of God, chapter 21.
[^7] While the Book of Mormon also speaks of man as a creature, it is always in the context of his fallen physical nature, not of his relationship to God as an immortal spirit or soul. The doctrine that man is the literal spirit offspring of divine parents was apparently made known to Joseph Smith subsequent to the publication of the Book of Mormon.
[^8] The City of God, chapters 13 and 14.
[^9] Speaking of little children, an angel of the Lord told king Benjamin that ''as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins.'' (Mosiah 3:16; italics added.)
[^10] See Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 66.
[^11] It is understood that Christ redeems every earth he has organized under the Father's direction. The question is whether this is literally all existing earths, or only a limited number. Elder Bruce R. McConkie defined the word ''infinite'' quantitatively as well as qualitatively: ''The atonement of Christ, being literally and truly infinite, applies to an infinite number of earths.'' (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 65.)
[^12] Only Jesus Christ lived the law of God with perfectness. ''For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.'' (Rom. 3:23; cf. 4:15; Gal. 2:16; 3:10-13.)
[^13] Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985), no. 5, par. 2.
[^14] Amulek was addressing a people who knew of Christ and had the opportunity to repent and come unto him. Such are expected to do so and be faithful until the end of ''the life of the mortal body.'' (Mosiah 4:6.)
[^15] The extent to which Alma and Amulek understood the doctrine of post-mortal repentance and salvation is unknown. Their silence on the matter does not prove that they were unaware of it. The stark dichotomy described by Alma may have been designed to make clear the issue of life and death facing his wayward son Corianton, and all mankind. (See Alma 39:3-8; 42:29-30; 2 Ne. 2:27.) The Lord has deliberately employed some extreme terminology so that ''it might work upon the hearts of the children of men, altogether for my name's glory.'' (D&C 19:7; cf. 43:25.)
[^16] Alma, the four sons of Mosiah, and the Apostle Paul are examples of people whose conduct at one period of their lives belied their true worth. Indeed, the doctrine of salvation of the dead is predicated upon the assumption that a ''mighty change'' of heart (Alma 5:14) is possible for some even beyond the grave.
[^17] The teachings of Alma and Amulek are directed only to those having a knowledge of Christ and his commandments. They do not apply to any little children or to any adults who lived and died in ignorance of God's will (without his law). These two classes are automatically redeemed (saved) by virtue of the power of the Atonement. See 2 Nephi 9:25-27; Moroni 8:19-22.
[^18] All who reject Christ are sent to this ''prison.'' See D&C 76:73-74, 82-85, 106; JST 1 Peter 3:20; 4:6.
[^19] See also John 5:25; JST 1 Peter 3:18-20; 4:6; D&C 138:20-22, 29-37.
