Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

3

THE INFINITE ATONEMENT OF GOD

(Alma 34-35)

Rodney Turner [^1]

A major doctrine of the Book of Mormon is that as a result of Adam's transgression, "all mankind became a lost and fallen people." (Alma 12:22.) [^2] The whole world was lost to God, and only God could redeem it from its fallen state. (See 1 Ne. 10:6.) The message with which Amulek climaxed Alma's preceding discourse (Alma 31-33) was that God—in the person of Jesus Christ—would bring about that imperative redemption.

Zoramite Religion

Amulek's audience consisted of Zoramites—a Nephite faction that had apostatized from the church of God and turned to the worship of idols. They believed that God (who was "a spirit forever") had elected them to be saved "whilst all around [them were] elected to be cast by [God's] wrath down to hell." (Alma 31:15-17.) This predestinarian doctrine implied that, for all practical purposes, God was independent of all moral considerations: he could forgive sins and save souls—or not—as he chose, without regard to justice, mercy, or any other divine principle. That being the case, a Redeemer was not really needed, and there never would be one.

It was the rejection of the message of the prophets concerning the future coming of a divine Redeemer that was at the heart of the Zoramite apostasy. Like much erroneous doctrine, it did not stem from faulty logic but from incorrect premises. Wrong assumptions produce wrong conclusions. The syllogistic argument of the Zoramites—like many theological propositions—was logically valid but materially false. [^3]

Although Christ is spoken of in the Book of Mormon as "the Lord God Omnipotent" (Mosiah 5:15), yet he does not function as an absolutely omnipotent being. If he did, the Zoramite argument would have been correct and there would have been no inescapable need for an atoning sacrifice. But the Almighty works in harmony with the various systems of law he has established. (See D&C 88:36-38.) That is why he cannot lie (Ether 3:12), "look upon sin with the least degree of allowance" (Alma 45:16), grant mercy without repentance, or save a sinner in his sins (Alma 11:37; 42:24). Thus, it is more accurate to say that God rules as a pen-omnipotent being rather than as an absolute monarch.

Testimony of the Prophets

In whom were the Zoramites to believe—a predestinarian God who arbitrarily saved or damned as he chose, or a God who respected human agency and governed with justice, equity, and mercy? Amulek addressed their dilemma. He reminded them that they were not ignorant of the truth: "These things were taught unto you bountifully before your dissension from among us." (Alma 34:2.) But failing to nourish the "seed" of testimony, they had failed to harvest its intended fruit. Continuing Alma's analogy (Alma 32:28), Amulek invited the Zoramites: "Have so much faith as even to plant the word in your hearts, that ye may try the experiment of its goodness." Only by doing so could they determine "whether the word [the truth] be in the Son of God, or whether there shall be no Christ." (Alma 34:4-5.) Amulek had done this; he knew the answer to that critical question.

To the testimonies of Alma, Zenos, Zenock, and Moses, Amulek added his own: "I do know that Christ shall come." (Alma 34:8.) He knew because he had experienced a witness from the Lord to that effect. He did not merely rationalize, conjecture, hypothesize, or assume such a being; he knew by direct revelation that there would be a Christ. So certain, so absolute is such knowledge, that any denial of it is the ultimate lie called the sin against the Holy Ghost. The Prophet Joseph Smith said that one guilty of this sin "has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened to him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes open to the truth of it." [^4] While the apostate Zoramites claimed that God had told them that there would be no Christ (Alma 31:16), their unsupported lie was refuted by the Spirit of truth. This Spirit enables the prophets—and those sent by them—to "seal both on earth and in heaven [the spirit world], the unbelieving and rebellious." (D&C 1:8; cf. 2 Ne. 11:3; 27:14; 33:10-15.)

The Nature of Fallen Humanity

Amulek did not mince words; his testimony was categorical and emphatic: "According to the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made, or else all mankind must unavoidably perish; yea, all are hardened; yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient should be made." (Alma 34:9.) Amulek's description of humanity as hardened, fallen, and lost must be understood in context. The Book of Mormon does not teach an Augustinian-like doctrine of human depravity. This now largely rejected concept defined humans as creatures of God who, through willful rebellion, became essentially incapable of any virtuous thought or act.

While rejecting this extreme doctrine, the Book of Mormon does describe mankind as "carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature." (Alma 42:10; Mosiah 16:3.) That is, because of the Fall, people tend to yield to the undisciplined, unsanctified appetites and passions of the flesh. [^5] Just as gravity abets poor physical posture, so does the Fall abet poor moral and spiritual posture. Those who cater to their fleshly appetites become "devilish" because they subject themselves to the will of the devil. (See Mosiah 16:3.)

But Augustine's doctrine of human depravity differs from the Book of Mormon doctrine of the Fall on two important points. First, Augustine viewed mortals as creatures of God whose nature was "a mean between the angelic and the bestial." [^6] As such, mortals at their best could only aspire to "the company of the angels," who were themselves but creatures of God. Thus humanity's immortal horizon was circumscribed by their literal creaturehood. [^7]

Secondly, humanity's depravity was total, their whole being—soul and flesh—was in revolt against God: "For the soul, revelling in its own liberty, and scorning to serve God, was itself deprived of the command it had formerly maintained over the body. And because it [the soul] had willfully deserted its superior Lord, it no longer held [controlled] its own inferior servant; neither could it hold the flesh subject, as it would always have been able to do had it remained itself subject to God. . . . And thus, from the bad use of free will, there originated the whole train of evil, which, with its concatenation of miseries, convoys the human race from its depraved origin, as from a corrupt root, on to the destruction of the second death, which has no end, those only being excepted who are freed by the grace of God." [^8]

The Book of Mormon does not support this view. It is not the whole soul—spirit and flesh—that is corrupt and "an enemy to God" (Mosiah 3:19), but only the person's fallen mortal nature—a nature inherited through Adam's necessary transgression. Through the atonement of Christ, this initially corrupt nature may be overcome, sanctified, and glorified. Therefore, humanity's condemnation is not that as mortals they were born carnal, sensual, and devilish, [^9] but that they choose to remain so when given the opportunity to repent and overcome that condition. For, contrary to Augustine, the gospel is not designed to restore some people to an acceptable creature state as immortal angels, but to endow all who fully repent with the very nature of God—both in spirit and in flesh. Those who do so achieve a fullness of eternal life.

The Infinite Atonement of Christ

The "great plan of the Eternal God" was formulated in the eternities. It was not a spur-of-the-moment reaction to unforeseen problems arising from Adam's transgression. All was foreordained; all was planned. The critical elements in that eternal plan were moral agency, the Fall, the Atonement, the resurrection, and the judgment. Moral agency led to the Fall, and the Fall made the three-fold mission of Christ (atonement, resurrection, and judgment) imperative. The Almighty does not rule by mere fiat, nor does he ignore the moral imbalance in the universe caused by the cumulative sins of mankind.

Yet some who reject the atonement of Christ argue, "How can one mortal die for the sins of all mortals?" The answer is, he cannot. No mortal, however virtuous, can atone for the sins of another, let alone the sins of all mankind. (See Alma 34:11-12.) Why not? Because as a result of Adam's transgression, "all mankind became a lost and fallen people." (Alma 12:22; italics added.) If all are lost, who can save them? Only an infinite Being—free of the spiritual consequences of the Fall—could do so. Only a God could atone for the sins of the world. Only by God satisfying the righteous demands of divine justice could the truly penitent be saved by divine mercy. (See Alma 34:15-16; 42:13-15, 22-25.) Therefore, "God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people." (Mosiah 15:1.) "God himself atoneth for the sins of the world." (Alma 42:15.)

Lest the idolatrous Zoramites assume that the God called Christ would be a mere mortal, Amulek explained: "It shall not be a human sacrifice; but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice." (Alma 34:10; italics added; cf. 42:15.) In the Book of Mormon, we read of God's infinite goodness, mercy, and grace. (See 2 Ne. 9:7; 25:16.) In other words, all that pertains to God is infinite, even as the adjectives eternal, endless, and everlasting describe his divine nature. (See D&C 19:10-13.) Therefore, the Atonement was an infinite act because it was performed by an infinite Being. The nature of the act reflected the nature of the Actor.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the atonement of Jesus Christ was efficacious not only for mankind on this earth, but for the human family on other earths as well. In his poetic parallel of Doctrine and Covenants 76:23-24, the Prophet wrote of the worlds the Saviour had organized:

Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last, Are sav'd by the very same Saviour of ours; And, of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons By the very same truths and the very same powers. [^10]

The Book of Mormon is silent on this doctrine. It treats the Atonement only in terms of Adam's posterity on this earth: "He [Christ] suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam." (2 Ne. 9:21.) That Jesus Christ performed an infinite atonement is beyond dispute, but how far-reaching it was pertaining to all the worlds that were, are, and will be is, as yet, unrevealed. [^11]

Because of the Fall, the laws and commandments of God save no one. To the contrary, they tend to condemn everyone. [^12] Yet with the Lord's help, his laws are livable. The Savior "kept the law of God, and remained without sin, showing thereby that it is in the power of man to keep the law and remain also without sin." [^13]

Justice is the essence of law: we reap what we sow. Alma called this principle "the plan of restoration." (Alma 41:2.) And, said he, "restoration is to bring back again evil for evil . . . good for that which is good." (Alma 41:13; italics added.) That is, we are personally accountable for how we use the gift of moral agency. In harmony with this principle, Amulek asked: "Now, if a man murdereth, behold will our law, which is just, take the life of his brother? I say unto you, Nay. But the law requireth the life of him who hath murdered." (Alma 34:11-12; italics added.)

Speaking of the Mosaic order, Amulek declared Christ to be "the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal." (Alma 34:14.) Sacrifice began with Adam as an ordinance of the fullness of the gospel and was continued under Moses as an aspect of the "preparatory gospel," which included the Mosaic law. (See Moses 5:5-7; D&C 84:26-27.)

However, "the law of Moses availeth nothing except it were through the atonement of his blood." (Mosiah 3:15; cf. Alma 26:16.) Without Christ, the law was a shadow without substance. More to the point, without Christ humanity stood naked and helpless before the justice of God no matter how faithfully the law might have been observed. It is the Redeemer's atoning sacrifice—an act of infinite mercy—that provides the essential motivation for the faith taught by Alma and Amulek. For in the absence of God's mercy, why should anyone have faith? Life would still be a dead-end street leading to death, hell, and the devil. (See 2 Ne. 9:7-9; Jacob 7:12.) Thus God's mercy justifies human faith. And faith, in turn, begets the hope of eternal life. This hope is justified by the works of divine love that complete the triangle of salvation: faith, hope, and charity. (See Alma 34:27-29; Moro. 7:38-48.)

The Night of Darkness and the Day of Mercy

In the final analysis, people have but two choices: to be saved in the kingdom of God or to be damned in the kingdom of the devil; there is no third alternative. (See 2 Ne. 2:27-29; Alma 41:4.) Whatever the choice, it will be made this side of eternity before the last judgment. Hence, Amulek's warning: "Now is the time and the day of your salvation; . . . this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God." [^14] (Alma 34:31-32; italics added.) When the sun sets on the day of probation, "then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed." (Alma 34:33; italics added; cf. Alma 41:5, 7; 3 Ne. 27:33.) That "night" is the time when "it is everlastingly too late" (Hel. 13:38) to perform the labors of repentance. "For the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with man." (2 Ne. 26:11; italics added.)

Alma was told by an angel that at death the righteous entered "a state of happiness, which is called paradise," while the wicked were consigned to a state of misery or "outer darkness." (Alma 40:12-13.) This black-or-white description of the post-mortal state was something of a generalization. It did not explicitly cover that gray host of spirits who—while not totally bereft of the Spirit of the Lord—were nevertheless unredeemed. [^15]

Amulek taught: "That same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world." (Alma 34:34; italics added.) "This life" means "this probationary state" (Alma 42:10), and "that eternal world" is the post-resurrection, not the spirit, world. "That same spirit" is one's distilled, fundamental self, stripped of all the transitory, superficial baggage acquired in mortality. It is what the soul really is in its fixed, resurrected state, rather than what it appeared to be at any given moment in its fluid, probationary state. [^16] What it really is determines what it really desires. These desires, free of all mitigating entanglements, constitute the soul's own self-judgment. (See Alma 41:3-7.) [^17]

The explicit teachings of Alma and Amulek quoted above must, therefore, be understood in the time frame of those who lived before the Savior initiated his appointed ministry to the unredeemed in the spirit world. Until that hour there was "a great gulf" (Luke 16:26) between those in "paradise" and those in "outer darkness." The latter were, relatively speaking, "in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them." (Alma 40:14.) Some thirty-five hundred years before Alma's day, Enoch learned that the unrepentant who perished in the world-wide Flood would be "in torment" in a "prison" prepared for them by the Lord. [^18] (See Moses 7:38-39; cf. 6:29.) There they, and all like them, remained until Jesus personally inaugurated the spirit world dispensation of the gospel. Messengers were commissioned by the then-disembodied Son of God to bring the message of salvation "to those who had died in their sins, without a knowledge of the truth, or in transgression, having rejected the prophets." (D&C 138:32.) [^19]

Thanks to the merciful Redeemer, eternity—the "night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed"—was seemingly held back, and the probationary "day of salvation" extended even to the second resurrection! This post-mortal gospel dispensation enables those who repent after death to come forth from their prison of torment and despair and stand on the right hand of God—the hand of salvation. [^20] Thus the gates of hell do not prevail against Christ and his priesthood. The vast majority of mankind will pass through those gates and be saved in the "many mansions" comprising the immortal kingdom of God! (See D&C 76:111.)

But to forever reject Christ is to forever forfeit mercy. In that event, it is "as though there had been no redemption made." (Alma 12:18; cf. verse 32.) Justice exercises total dominion, and mercy stands mute. Such is the fate of those children of perdition who, never repenting, are never redeemed. They are known as the "filthy still" [^21] who are sealed up to Satan and suffer the fullness of the second death. (See 2 Ne. 9:15-16; Alma 12:16-17; 34:35.)

The rest of mankind—whatever their sins—will eventually repent: "And after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions, and are washed clean, shall receive a reward according to their works, for they are heirs of salvation." (D&C 138:59; italics added; cf. 76:43-44, 88.) [^22] And so beginning with the Book of Mormon, God's great plan of happiness for all of his children has been revealed, line upon line, in this, the dispensation of the fullness of times!

Epilogue

Upon completing their mission, Alma, Amulek, and their fellow companions left Antionum and journeyed northward to the land of Jershon—the home of the people of Ammon, the Lamanite converts who had taken the name Anti-Nephi-Lehies. (Alma 23:17.) They were soon joined by those Zoramites who, because they accepted the teachings about Christ, had been driven out by their leaders who sought to perpetuate priestcraft. The people of Ammon fed and clothed the wretched Zoramites and even provided them with inheritances.

Ironically, Alma's mission of peace provoked a war in 74 B.C. Infuriated by the Ammonites' acts of charity, the unbelieving Zoramites not only joined the Lamanites in preparing for war but actually became Lamanites. (Alma 43:4.) Their descent into even greater spiritual darkness bore out an earlier observation by Amulek: "They that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell." (Alma 12:11.)

Under oath never to take up arms again (Alma 24:18), the people of Ammon temporarily left Jershon to the defending Nephite armies—whom they materially supported—and withdrew to the land of Melek, west of the Sidon river. However, the converted Zoramites remained to support the Nephite armies in defending the land of Jershon. The "chief captains" of the Lamanite armies were Amalekites and Zoramites—fanatical enemies of their own Nephite people. But within the year—and with devastating losses to the Lamanites—the Nephites, led by young general Moroni and "inspired by a better cause" (Alma 43:45), proved victorious.

Meanwhile, Alma and his associates returned to Zarahemla, "having been instruments in the hands of God of bringing many of the Zoramites to repentance." (Alma 35:14.) But during the war, Alma "could not rest." (Alma 43:1.) With his three sons, Helaman, Shiblon, and Corianton, he went forth for the last time to declare the truth. Then, after giving final instructions to his sons, prophesying the eventual destruction of the Nephite nation, and reaffirming America's law of inheritance, "he departed out of the land of Zarahemla, as if to go into the land of Melek. And it came to pass that he was never heard of more." (Alma 45:10-18.) Thus passed from the scene two of the Lord's most faithful witnesses, Alma and Amulek.

Conclusion

The heart of the plan of salvation is the infinite atoning sacrifice of the Son of God. Without him, there is no salvation for anyone. His merits, combined with faith and its ordained works, open the door to an appropriate mansion in the kingdom of God for all who call upon his name either in this world or in the world to come.

The Lord's witnesses, both divine and human, leave humanity without excuse. Nephi wrote: "Wherefore, by the words of three, God hath said, I will establish my word. Nevertheless, God sendeth more witnesses, and he proveth all his words." (2 Ne. 11:3; italics added; cf. D&C 6:28.) To their own testimonies, Alma and Amulek added those of Zenos, Zenock, and Moses. All such prophetic testimonies are quickened, made alive, by the over-arching witness of the Holy Spirit. (See Alma 30:44; 31:34-36; 34:30, 33, 38.) "When a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men. But behold, there are many that harden their hearts against the Holy Spirit, that it hath no place in them." (2 Ne. 33:1-2.)

The sum and substance of the prophet Amulek's discourse on the infinite atonement of the Son of God is, "That ye contend no more against the Holy Ghost, but that ye receive it, and take upon you the name of Christ; that ye humble yourselves even to the dust, and worship God, in whatsoever place ye may be in, in spirit and in truth." (Alma 34:38.) Peace of mind, lasting happiness, and salvation in the presence of God the Father are assured to all who heed this counsel.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Clark V. Johnson is associate professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.
[^2] See also Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938), pp. 158, 323, 337-38.
[^3] Lehi and his family wandered eight years in the wilderness. (1. Ne. 17:4.)
[^4] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), pp. 786-87.
[^5] Mormon Doctrine, pp. 644-45.
[^6] The City of God, chapter 21.
[^7] While the Book of Mormon also speaks of man as a creature, it is always in the context of his fallen physical nature, not of his relationship to God as an immortal spirit or soul. The doctrine that man is the literal spirit offspring of divine parents was apparently made known to Joseph Smith subsequent to the publication of the Book of Mormon.
[^8] The City of God, chapters 13 and 14.
[^9] Speaking of little children, an angel of the Lord told king Benjamin that ''as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins.'' (Mosiah 3:16; italics added.)
[^10] See Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 66.
[^11] It is understood that Christ redeems every earth he has organized under the Father's direction. The question is whether this is literally all existing earths, or only a limited number. Elder Bruce R. McConkie defined the word ''infinite'' quantitatively as well as qualitatively: ''The atonement of Christ, being literally and truly infinite, applies to an infinite number of earths.'' (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, p. 65.)
[^12] Only Jesus Christ lived the law of God with perfectness. ''For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.'' (Rom. 3:23; cf. 4:15; Gal. 2:16; 3:10-13.)
[^13] Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985), no. 5, par. 2.
[^14] Amulek was addressing a people who knew of Christ and had the opportunity to repent and come unto him. Such are expected to do so and be faithful until the end of ''the life of the mortal body.'' (Mosiah 4:6.)
[^15] The extent to which Alma and Amulek understood the doctrine of post-mortal repentance and salvation is unknown. Their silence on the matter does not prove that they were unaware of it. The stark dichotomy described by Alma may have been designed to make clear the issue of life and death facing his wayward son Corianton, and all mankind. (See Alma 39:3-8; 42:29-30; 2 Ne. 2:27.) The Lord has deliberately employed some extreme terminology so that ''it might work upon the hearts of the children of men, altogether for my name's glory.'' (D&C 19:7; cf. 43:25.)
[^16] Alma, the four sons of Mosiah, and the Apostle Paul are examples of people whose conduct at one period of their lives belied their true worth. Indeed, the doctrine of salvation of the dead is predicated upon the assumption that a ''mighty change'' of heart (Alma 5:14) is possible for some even beyond the grave.
[^17] The teachings of Alma and Amulek are directed only to those having a knowledge of Christ and his commandments. They do not apply to any little children or to any adults who lived and died in ignorance of God's will (without his law). These two classes are automatically redeemed (saved) by virtue of the power of the Atonement. See 2 Nephi 9:25-27; Moroni 8:19-22.
[^18] All who reject Christ are sent to this ''prison.'' See D&C 76:73-74, 82-85, 106; JST 1 Peter 3:20; 4:6.
[^19] See also John 5:25; JST 1 Peter 3:18-20; 4:6; D&C 138:20-22, 29-37.
[^20] See Moses 7:57; Isaiah 42:7; 61:1; D&C 128:22.
[^21] 21. See 2 Nephi 9:16; Mormon 9:14; D&C 29:44; 88:35.
[^22] 22. In scripture, salvation is not always synonomous with exaltation. To be saved is one thing; to be exalted, another. There is no ''gospel of the second chance.'' Elder Melvin J. Ballard stated Church doctrine when he said: ''In this day any man or woman who has had a good chance to have heard the Gospel to receive it and embrace it and enjoy its blessings and privileges, who lived during their life in absolute indifference to these things, ignoring it, and neglected it, need not hope or anticipate that when they are dead the work can be done for them and they gain Celestial Glory.'' (The Three Degrees of Glory [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, n.d.], p. 23.) In any given case, only God can determine what constitutes a ''good chance'' to receive and live the gospel. Regardless of their eternal state, all who are saved in any heaven or degree of glory are ''heirs of salvation.'' Those who inherit the telestial kingdom are specifically spoken of as ''heirs of salvation.'' (D&C 76:88.)
