Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

4

ALMA'S COUNSEL TO HIS SONS

(Alma 36-38)

Clark V. Johnson [^1]

Inherent within the gospel is the divine power given by God to act in his name. God restored this authority to the Prophet Joseph Smith through John the Baptist; Peter, James, and John; and Elijah. (JS-H 1:69; D&C 13; 27:12; 110:16.) [^2] Once a man holds the Melchizedek Priesthood and receives in the temple with his wife those covenants and ordinances available, he has the divine right to preside over his family. This means that he may importune the Lord for inspiration and then bless and counsel his family. King Benjamin taught his people: "Ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of God, and fight and quarrel one with another." (Mosiah 4:14.) In this dispensation the Lord stated, "I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth." (D&C 93:40.) He then instructed Frederick G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith, Jr., and Newell K. Whitney to go home and teach their families. (D&C 93:41-49.) The scriptures contain several examples of fathers seeking inspiration and instructing their children.

Alma and His Sons

Alma is an example of a father who counseled his sons. He explained to them: "The Spirit of the Lord doth say unto me: Command thy children to do good." (Alma 39:12.) Under the guidance of the Spirit, Alma approached each of his sons differently as he urged them to keep the commandments, as he taught them the doctrines of the gospel, and as he bore them his testimony.

Alma promised his sons Helaman and Shiblon that if they kept the commandments they would "prosper in the land." (Alma 36:1; 38:1.) Unlike Eli in the Old Testament, who apparently did not discipline his sons sufficiently for their misconduct, Alma confronted Corianton about his lack of diligence in keeping the commandments. (Alma 39:2; 1 Sam. 2:22-25, 27-34.) Whether Alma taught his sons collectively or individually in a personal interview cannot be determined. Yet even though the approach in addressing each son was different, his discussions have one thing in common: They are Christ-centered. (Alma 36; 37:9, 43-47; 38:8-9; 39:15.)

Unlike his brothers Shiblon and Corianton, Helaman did not accompany his father on the mission to the Zoramites. (Alma 31:7.) Alma encouraged his eldest son, Helaman, to place his trust in God. He promised Helaman that God would support him in his trials, troubles, and afflictions. (Alma 31:7; 36:3.) He referred to the scriptures to teach Helaman that God sustains his children if they worship him and keep his commandments. He challenged him to remember the bondage of their ancestors and that God had supported them in their afflictions. He also referred to the enslavement of ancient Israel. Alma reminded Helaman that God had delivered Israel from the Egyptians by allowing them to pass through the Red Sea safely, while destroying Pharaoh's army. (Alma 36:2, 28-29.) The promise to each group was prosperity. Israel did prosper physically in the land, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob prospered both physically and spiritually as they achieved eternal life. (D&C 132:28, 36-37.)

Alma concluded his remarks to Helaman by referring to the "shadow" and "type" found within the scriptures. Reminding Helaman of the history of his father Lehi, Alma said, "They tarried in the wilderness, or did not travel a direct course . . . because of their transgressions." [^3] (Alma 37:42.) The reason for their wanderings was their lack of faith. The Liahona worked only according to their faith and obedience. Alma taught "that these things are not without a shadow; for as our fathers were slothful to give heed to this compass (now these things were temporal) they did not prosper; even so it is with things which are spiritual." (Alma 37:43.) Thus, the Liahona or "shadow" served the same purpose to Lehi's family that the brazen serpent had served to ancient Israel. (1 Ne. 17:41; Num. 21:4-9.) The Liahona was a "shadow" or "type" that strengthened their faith and led them to Christ.

Alma promised Helaman that the words of Christ "carry us beyond this vale of sorrow [earth life] into a far better land of promise [eternal life]." (Alma 37:45.) Hence, the promised land has a two-fold interpretation. First, it is a physical place to live, where God blesses his children temporally. Second, it has spiritual significance in which God blesses his children with experiences to lead them to eternal life. Alma concluded his interview by admonishing his son not to be slothful because of the easiness of the way, but to "look to God and live." (Alma 37:46-47.)

Shiblon was a faithful missionary and had endured many hardships. During his mission, he was imprisoned and stoned by the Zoramites. (Alma 38:3-4.) Alma commended this faithful son for his "steadiness" and "faithfulness" during a time of persecution. (Alma 38:2.) He also gave special counsel to this son who had brought him "great joy." (Alma 38:3.) Alma cautioned Shiblon to beware of pride, not to boast of his own wisdom, to be diligent and temperate, to use boldness, but not overbearance, to bridle his passions, to refrain from idleness, and to pray. (Alma 38:10-13.) He instructed him to acknowledge the power of God in his prayers, and to remember his own weaknesses, to pray for his brethren, and to "acknowledge [his] unworthiness before God at all times." (Alma 38:14.)

Alma's Testimony

Alma loved his sons and wanted only the best in life for each of them. As he bore his testimony to them he said, "I would not that ye think that I know of myself," for "if I had not been born of God I should not have known these things." (Alma 36:4-5; emphasis added.) He continued to explain that he and the sons of Mosiah had sought to destroy the church of God. (Alma 36:6; Mosiah 27:8-10.) They were stopped by an angel who promised their destruction if they continued, and they fell to the earth in fear. (Alma 36:7-9.) Alma noted that he did not hear the rest of the words spoken by the angel, but he remembered all his sins, and was "tormented with the pains of hell." (Alma 36:11, 13.) He asserted that he did not want to be brought into the presence of God, for he was ashamed, and he knew he was unworthy. It was at this moment that he remembered the teachings of his father "concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world." (Alma 36:17.) He said, "I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness." (Alma 36:18.) From that moment on Alma did not remember his sins, but he knew joy, and then he said, "Methought I saw, even as our father Lehi saw, God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels, in the attitude of singing and praising their God; yea, and my soul did long to be there." (Alma 36:22; 1 Ne. 1:8-15; Isa. 6:1-6.) He ended his testimony by pointing out that after this experience he had sought continually to teach the people the truth.

Most people do not gain a testimony by having experiences with angels. Almost all testimonies come through prayer, as did that of Enos. Enos said: "My soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer. . . . There came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed. And I, Enos, knew that God could not lie; wherefore, my guilt was swept away." (Enos 1:4-6.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

Any accountable person can gain a testimony of the gospel by obedience to that law upon which the receipt of such knowledge is predicated. This is the formula: 1. He must desire to know the truth of the gospel, of the Book of Mormon, of the Church, or of whatever matter is involved. 2. He must study and learn the basic facts relative to the matter involved. "Search the scriptures." (John 5:39). "Search these commandments," (D&C 1:37). 3. He must practice the principles and truths learned, conforming his life to them. "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:16-17). 4. He must pray to the Father in the name of Christ, in faith, and the truth will then be made manifest by revelation "by the power of the Holy Ghost. And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Moroni 10:3-5; 1 Corinthians 2). [^4]

Many times a testimony comes through fulfilling the challenge Moroni issued to those who have read the Book of Mormon. He promised those who read the book a special witness from the Holy Ghost regarding its veracity. (Moroni 10:4-5.) Testimonies are borne about many things and are expressed in many different ways. Latter-day Saints are expected to receive revelation. Elder McConkie pointed out that "every devoted, obedient, and righteous person on the earth has and does receive revelation from God. Revelation is the natural inheritance of all the faithful. . . . The saints are expected (because they have the gift of the Holy Ghost) to gain personal revelation and guidance rather than to run to the First Presidency or some other church leaders to be told what to do." [^5]

When Alma related his witness to Shiblon, he only alluded to his conversion, which he had told in great detail to Helaman, and then, he testified boldly of Jesus Christ. (Alma 38:6-9.) To his son Corianton, Alma testified powerfully, while teaching him the doctrines of the kingdom. (Alma 39-42.)

Alma's Charge to His Sons

During his interviews with his sons, Alma challenged each to keep the commandments, to be an example, and to teach the gospel to the people. (Alma 37:47; 38:15; 42:31.) However, he gave Helaman additional responsibilities.

Alma entrusted Helaman with the sacred records: the plates of brass, the twenty-four plates belonging to the Jaredites, and the records of the Nephites, as well as the interpreters or Urim and Thummim, and the Liahona. (Alma 37:24.)

The records that Alma and his predecessors kept served two purposes. First, they had been used to teach the Nephites and the Lamanites. Alma stated, "Were it not for these things that these records do contain, which are on these plates, Ammon and his brethren could not have convinced so many thousands of the Lamanites of the incorrect tradition of their fathers." These records brought the Lamanites to the knowledge of the Lord and caused them "to rejoice in Jesus Christ their Redeemer." (Alma 37:8-9.) Second, speaking prophetically he said that these records will show God's "power unto future generations." (Alma 37:14, 18-19.)

With the responsibility of keeping the sacred artifacts safe, Helaman was also admonished to write and continue the record. (Alma 37:2, 47.) Likewise, a modern father might entrust to one of his children journals, papers, and diaries belonging to previous generations. From such records may come spiritual witnesses to enrich the lives of living family members as well as future generations.

Conclusions

The Book of Mormon contains several father-son encounters: Father Lehi with Laman, Lemuel, Sam, Nephi, Jacob, and Joseph; Alma the Elder and Mosiah with their sons; and Mormon and Moroni. But none is more soul-searching than the counsel given to Helaman, Shiblon, and Corianton by Alma. Each of these fathers, like Alma, had one thing in mind, the welfare of his children. Alma counseled his sons about physical and spiritual matters. He encouraged them to put their trust in God, to keep his commandments, to pray, to keep records, to be an example, and to teach the gospel to others. And, like the others, he blessed them. Modern-day scripture instructs us to "set in order" our own homes. (D&C 93:43.) Nothing is more beautiful than Mormon's farewell to his son, Moroni. After instructing his faithful son one final time, Mormon, echoing the desire of every father, wrote, "Behold, my son, I recommend thee unto God." (Moro. 9:22.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] He had become haughty, had yielded to feelings of self-sufficiency. He had begun to boast in his own strength (Alma 39:2), to rely less and less on the arm of the Lord and more and more on the arm of flesh. In our day, Corianton might have been heard to say repeatedly, "I can handle it!" Corianton learned through a painful process that no man or woman has sufficient strength to resist the enticements of the father of lies. Alma had pleaded almost a decade earlier with a rebellious people: "Cast off your sins, and [do] not procrastinate the day of your repentance; but humble yourselves before the Lord, and call on his holy name, and watch and pray continually, that ye may not be tempted above that which ye can bear." (Alma 13:27-28; emphasis added.) Robert L. Millet is associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Corianton had forsaken his ministry (Alma 39:3), had left his duty station. He was not where he had been assigned to be. One who sings "I'll go where you want me to go, dear Lord," must not then be guilty of desertion, of negligence and waywardness when the assignment comes. "No man," the Savior declared, "having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God." (Luke 9:62.) There is a sense in which those who have ''shed innocent blood'' are guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost. That person who becomes a son of perdition crucifies Christ anew. (Compare Heb. 6:4-6.) ''He gets the spirit of the devil-the same spirit that they had who crucified the Lord of Life-the same spirit that sins against the Holy Ghost.'' (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976], p. 358.) ''The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which shall not be forgiven in the world nor out of the world, is in that ye commit murder wherein ye shed innocent blood, and assent unto my death.'' (D&C 132:27; emphasis added.) See also Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 3:116, 345; The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1979-81), 2:216; A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985), p. 233.
[^3] He had begun to associate with the wrong kinds of people; he eventually surrendered to the allurements and pressures to conform to the ways of the worldly. But, Alma scolded, because others gave in to sin was no reason for him to do the same: "This was no excuse for thee, my son. Thou shouldst have tended to the ministry wherewith thou wast entrusted." (Alma 39:3-4.) Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 358.
[^4] Ibid., p. 339.
[^5] A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, p. 231.
