Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

5

THE PATH OF REPENTANCE

(Alma 39)

Robert L. Millet [^1]

Alma discovered, to his horror, that his son Corianton had been guilty of sexual sin during his mission to the Zoramites; he had become involved with a harlot named Isabel, a woman of degraded character and morals who had contributed to the downfall of many men. In the words of Alma, Corianton had yielded to moral temptation for several reasons, reasons that should cause the Saints of the twentieth century to take note:

The Seriousness of Sexual Transgression

Alma then placed all things in perspective by stressing the seriousness of this immoral practice: he explained that only two sins were greater abominations in the sight of God—the sin against the Holy Ghost, and murder or the shedding of innocent blood. In speaking of the former sin, he taught: "If ye deny the Holy Ghost when it once has had place in you, and ye know that ye deny it, behold, this is a sin which is unpardonable." (Alma 39:6.)

"All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men," Jesus warned, "but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men, . . . neither in this world, neither in the world to come." (Matt. 12:31-32.) These are they who "know [God's] power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy [God's] power—they are they who are the sons of perdition, . . . vessels of wrath," enemies to the cause of truth, "having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves and put him to an open shame." (D&C 76:31-35.) [^2] Joseph Smith declared:

All sins shall be forgiven, except the sin against the Holy Ghost; for Jesus will save all except the sons of perdition. What must a man do to commit the unpardonable sin? He must receive the Holy Ghost, have the heavens opened unto him, and know God, and then sin against Him. After a man has sinned against the Holy Ghost, there is no repentance for him. He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened unto him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes open to the truth of it; and from that time he begins to be an enemy. [^3]

The sin against the Holy Ghost is unpardonable because it is not covered by the atoning blood of Christ and because no amount of personal suffering on the part of the sinner can atone for the pernicious deed.

"Whosoever murdereth against the light and knowledge of God, it is not easy for him to obtain forgiveness," Alma warned. (Alma 39:6.) "A murderer," Joseph Smith explained, "one that sheds innocent blood, cannot have forgiveness." [^4] Murder is thus referred to as an unforgivable sin, a heinous crime against humanity, an offense not covered by the atoning blood of Christ and for which deliverance from hell in the world of spirits is possible only after much personal suffering. "There are sins unto death," wrote Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "meaning spiritual death. There are sins for which there is no forgiveness, neither in this world nor in the world to come. There are sins which utterly and completely preclude the sinner from gaining eternal life. Hence there are sins for which repentance does not operate, sins that the atoning blood of Christ will not wash away, sins for which the sinner must suffer and pay the full penalty personally." [^5]

Sexual immorality ranks third in order of serious offenses before God because it, like murder, deals with life. One who tampers with virtue prematurely or inappropriately—outside of marriage—tampers with the powers of life. Elder Boyd K. Packer has taught: "There was provided in our bodies—and this is sacred—a power of creation, a light, so to speak, that has the power to kindle other lights. This gift was to be used only within the sacred bonds of marriage. Through the exercise of this power of creation, a mortal body may be conceived, a spirit enter into it, and a new soul born into this life." Further, this power "is a gift from God our Father. In the righteous exercise of it as in nothing else, we may come close to him." On the other hand, "God has declared in unmistakable language that misery and sorrow will follow the violation of the laws of chastity. . . . Crowning glory awaits you if you live worthily. The loss of the crown may well be punishment enough. Often, very often, we are punished as much by our sins as we are for them." [^6]

A Pattern for Repentance

It would appear that much of Corianton's problem was borne of doctrinal ignorance and misunderstanding, particularly concerning the appropriateness of justice and punishment for sin. (See Alma 41:1; 42:1.) It is fitting, then, that Alma should instruct his son about repentance and point the way back to the path of peace and happiness.

First, having stressed the seriousness of the offense, Alma sought now to ensure that Corianton was experiencing godly sorrow for sin, the kind of sorrow that is an essential element of true repentance. In short, Alma desired that his son experience appropriate guilt—no more than is requisite, but surely no less than is needful to bring about change. Alma observed: "I would to God that ye had not been guilty of so great a crime. I would not dwell upon your crimes, to harrow up your soul, if it were not for your good." (Alma 39:7; compare 2 Cor. 7:10.) Alma later remarked: "And now, my son, I desire that ye should let these things trouble you no more, and only let your sins trouble you, with that trouble which shall bring you down unto repentance." (Alma 42:29.) Alma knew only too well the awful agony associated with grievous sin; on the other hand, he understood as few others do how intense pain could be turned to consummate joy, how suffering could make saints out of sinners. Appropriate guilt can and does have a sanctifying effect: it alerts the offender to the spiritual chasm between himself and his Maker and motivates him thereafter to a godly walk and conduct.

"Now my son," Alma continued, "I would that ye should repent and forsake your sins, and go no more after the lusts of your eyes, but cross yourself in all these things." (Alma 39:9.) For Corianton to "cross himself" was for him to turn away from evil inclinations, to deny himself of worldly lusts, to work at cross purposes from the natural man, to forsake worldly paths, and to chart and navigate a course of righteousness. (See 3 Ne. 12:30.) "As well as establishing worthy goals, charting the course prevents one from living an unplanned, haphazard life—a tumbleweed existence." [^7] Those desirous of keeping themselves from sinful practices must often change associations, places, and attitudes toward life. Corianton was specifically advised to lean upon his older brothers—Helaman and Shiblon—for support, to look to their example and seek their counsel. "Ye stand in need to be nourished by your brothers," Alma said. (Alma 39:10.)

Because Corianton's abominable deeds rang so loudly in the ears of the Zoramites, the words of the Nephite missionaries did not have the spiritual appeal they might otherwise have had. "How great iniquity ye brought upon the Zoramites," Alma chastened the errant son, "for when they saw your conduct they would not believe in my words." (Alma 39:11.) It was thus incumbent upon Corianton—a major part of his repentance and a key to forgiveness—to make restitution where possible. "Turn to the Lord with all your mind, might, and strength; that ye lead away the hearts of no more to do wickedly; but rather return unto them, and acknowledge your faults and that wrong which ye have done." (Alma 39:13.) President Joseph F. Smith asked: "Does repentance consist of sorrow for wrong doing?" "Yes," he answered, "but is this all? By no means."

True repentance only is acceptable to God, nothing short of it will answer the purpose. Then what is true repentance? True repentance is not only sorrow for sins, and humble penitence and contrition before God, but it involves the necessity of turning away from them, a discontinuance of all evil practices and deeds, a thorough reformation of life, a vital change from evil to good, from vice to virtue, from darkness to light. Not only so, but to make restitution, so far as it is possible, for all the wrongs we have done, to pay our debts, and restore to God and man their rights—that which is due to them from us. This is true repentance, and the exercise of the will and all the powers of body and mind is demanded, to complete this glorious work of repentance; then God will accept it. [^8]

Indeed, Corianton learned, as do we all, that repentance consists of a major realignment of priorities, a turn from the fleeting, and an acceptance of the permanent. "Seek not after riches nor the vain things of this world," a tender father thus counseled, "for behold, you cannot carry them with you." (Alma 39:14.)

No discussion of repentance would be complete without a focus upon the power and saving grace available through the redemptive work of Jesus Christ. And thus it is that Alma set forth in plain and unmistakable language the significance of the timeless and eternal sacrifice available through the blood of him who is man's Advocate with the Father. Alma's testimony (see Alma 39:17-18) is in harmony with that of John the Revelator: Jesus Christ is the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world (Rev. 13:8). The Book of Mormon provides a restoration of a vital and precious truth, a verity largely absent from the biblical record: the knowledge that Christian prophets have taught Christian doctrine and administered Christian ordinances since the beginning of time. Our Lord's atonement reaches from creation's dawn to millennial splendor; the children of God from Eden to Armageddon can have their sins remitted in the name of the Holy One of Israel. That is, the atonement applies to "not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, who believed in the words of the holy prophets, . . . as well as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost." (D&C 20:26-27.)

The Return of the Prodigal

Corianton's sin was abhorrent to God and the people of God. It hindered the work of the Lord among the Zoramites and caused deep pain and sorrow for those who knew and loved him. But it was not an unpardonable nor an unforgivable sin. Though it is true that the Holy One cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance, it is also true that "he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven." (D&C 1:31-32; see also Alma 45:16.) God the Father is anxious for the return of his children to the path of righteousness and peace, perhaps infinitely more so than we can now perceive. Elder Orson F. Whitney held out this hope for the parents of wandering or wayward children:

You parents of the wilful and the wayward: Don't give them up. Don't cast them off. They are not utterly lost. The shepherd will find his sheep. They were his before they were yours—long before he entrusted them to your care; and you cannot begin to love them as he loves them. They have but strayed in ignorance from the Path of Right, and God is merciful to ignorance. Only the fulness of knowledge brings the fulness of accountability. Our Heavenly Father is far more merciful, infinitely more charitable, than even the best of his servants, and the Everlasting Gospel is mightier in power to save than our narrow finite minds can comprehend. [^9]

President J. Reuben Clark observed: "I feel that [the Lord] will give that punishment which is the very least that our transgression will justify. . . . I believe that when it comes to making the rewards for our good conduct, he will give the maximum that it is possible to give." [^10]

Alma was not only a concerned father; he was a prophet of God and the president of the Church. His was the gift of discernment and the spirit of prophecy and revelation. He was thus able to judge whether Corianton's repentance was genuine and when his heart was right before God. Knowing these things, it is touching to read these words of Alma to his son: "And now, O my son, ye are called of God to preach the word unto this people. And now, my son, go thy way, declare the word with truth and soberness, that thou mayest bring souls unto repentance, that the great plan of mercy may have claim upon them. And may God grant unto you even according to my words. Amen." (Alma 42:31.) We have every reason to believe that Corianton's repentance was complete, that he "crossed himself" and forsook sinful practices, places, and people, and that he qualified to return to the ministry and to full fellowship among the household of faith. We read of Corianton's labors a year or so later: "Thus ended the nineteenth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi. Yea, and there was continual peace among them, and exceedingly great prosperity in the church because of their heed and diligence which they gave unto the word of God, which was declared unto them by Helaman, and Shiblon, and Corianton, and Ammon and his brethren, yea, and by all those who had been ordained by the holy order of God." (Alma 49:29-30, emphasis added.) [^11] Truly salvation is free (2 Ne. 2:4), freely available, and the Lord's hand is extended to all, such that "whosoever will come may come and partake of the waters of life freely" (Alma 42:27; cf. Isa. 55:1-2).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Robert L. Millet is associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Alma repeatedly used the word soul to refer to the spirit (see vv. 7, 9, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18, 21, 23). This, of course, is a different usage from the more specific definition of soul (the spirit and the body) contained in D&C 88:15; see also 2 Nephi 9:13.
[^3] Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 3:368.
[^4] Orson Pratt, ibid., 16:365.
[^5] George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth, 2 vols. in one, comp. Jerreld L. Newquist (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1987), p. 58.
[^6] This expression is used by Joseph F. Smith (see Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1971], pp. 448-49) and is probably what Alma was describing in Alma 40:15 as an initial consignation to happiness or misery before the actual resurrection.
[^7] Robert L. Millet and Joseph Fielding McConkie, The Life Beyond (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), p. 18. For a discussion of the Savior's statement to the thief on the cross, ''To day shalt thou be with me in paradise'' (Luke 23:43), see The Life Beyond, pp. 19-20, 168.
[^8] With but few exceptions, outer darkness refers to hell, the place of suffering and sadness and confrontation in the spirit world. (See Alma 34:33; 40:13-14; 41:7; D&C 38:5; 138:22, 30, 57; Isa. 49:9.) ''So complete is the darkness prevailing in the minds of these spirits, so wholly has gospel light been shut out of their consciences, that they know little or nothing of the plan of salvation, and have little hope within themselves of advancement and progression through the saving grace of Christ.'' (Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd. ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], pp. 551-52.)
[^9] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938), pp. 310-11.
[^10] Ibid., p. 357.
[^11] The entire spirit world, and not just that portion designated as hell, is appropriately called a ''spirit prison.'' (See D&C 45:17; 138:15, 18, 50; Moses 7:55-57; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 310; Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, 1:289-90; Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 3:95; Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, August 1976, p. 11.) Paradise will be vacated and its residents released to a glorious resurrection at the second coming of Christ. Hell comes to an end at the time of the second resurrection, at the end of the Millennium.
