Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

6

JUSTICE, MERCY, AND THE LIFE BEYOND

(Alma 40-42)

Robert L. Millet [^1]

It is in the context of a serious father-and-son discussion—counsel by Alma to his errant son, Corianton—that we are able to read some of the deepest and most profound doctrine in the Book of Mormon. Because life is at best tenuous; because death is an ever-present reality; and because all men and women must eventually put off this mortal coil and engage a new existence that is, for the most part, strange and unknown, a theological discussion of life after life is welcomed and appreciated. The prophet Alma, recognizing that resurrection—the inseparable union of spirit and body—did not immediately follow death, inquired of the Lord about the state of the soul between death and the resurrection. An angel, a citizen himself of the world of spirits, taught Alma about the nature of the afterworld. And it is through Alma's explanation of these things to his son that we become privy to sacred and solemn matters.

Between Death and Resurrection

Before discussing the doctrine of resurrection and the law of restoration—the principle that all people will be raised to that level of glory commensurate with the lives they lived in mortality—Alma turned his attention to a discussion of the postmortal spirit world, a matter he had "inquired diligently of the Lord to know." (Alma 40:9.) He explained that, according to what he had been taught by an angel, "the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits [^2] of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life." (Alma 40:11.) "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was," said the Preacher, "and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." (Eccl. 12:7.) Both of these scriptural preachers were speaking in broadest terms and should not be interpreted to mean that the spirit—at the time of death—goes into the immediate presence of the Lord. President Brigham Young explained that to speak of the spirit returning to the God who gave it means that "when the spirits leave their bodies they are in the presence of our Father and God" in the sense that they "are prepared then to see, hear and understand spiritual things." [^3] To go into the "presence" of God is not necessarily to be "placed within a few yards or rods, or within a short distance of his person." [^4] President George Q. Cannon explained: "Alma, when he says that 'the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, . . . are taken home to that God who gave them life,' has the idea, doubtless, in his mind that our God is omnipresent—not in His own personality but through His minister, the Holy Spirit. He does not intend to convey the idea that they are immediately ushered into the personal presence of God. He evidently uses that phrase in a qualified sense." [^5]

The transition from time into eternity is immediate. As the physical self breathes its last breath, the spirit self passes through a veil separating this world from the next. At this point the spirit experiences what might be called a "partial judgment." [^6] Those who have been true and faithful to their trust in mortality, Alma explained, are received into paradise, "a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow." (Alma 40:12.) As I have written elsewhere, "those things which burdened the obedient—the worldly cares and struggles, the vicissitudes of life—are shed with the physical body. Paradise is a place where the spirit is free to think and act with a renewed capacity and with the vigor and enthusiasm which characterized one in his prime. Though a person does not rest per se from the work associated with the plan of salvation . . . , at the same time he is delivered from those cares and worries associated with a fallen world and a corrupt body." [^7]

Those, on the other hand, who have been wicked on earth—who gave themselves up to the lusts and lasciviousness of the flesh—shall be received into that portion of the spirit world called hell or outer darkness, [^8] a place of "weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil." (Alma 40:13.) Joseph Smith explained: "The great misery of departed spirits in the world of spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short of the glory that others enjoy and that they might have enjoyed themselves, and they are their own accusers." [^9] On another occasion the Prophet taught: "A man is his own tormenter and his own condemner. Hence the saying, They shall go into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. The torment of disappointment in the mind of man is as exquisite as a lake burning with fire and brimstone. I say, so is the torment of man." [^10] Hell or outer darkness is both a place—a part of the world of spirits where suffering and sorrow and repentance take place—and a state—a condition of the mind associated with remorseful realization. The righteous remain in paradise and the wicked in hell until the time of their resurrection. (Alma 40:14.) [^11]

The Doctrine of Resurrection

No doctrine provides a more powerful assurance and comfort to the bereaved than the doctrine of resurrection—the verity that all who have taken physical bodies through birth shall survive death, shall receive those bodies again in the resurrection. Resurrection is a doctrine as old as the world: it is not a creation of the first-century Christians, nor a belief spawned by the Jews in Babylonian captivity. It was taught to Adam, discussed by Enoch, and testified of by Abraham. Any people through the ages who have gained the understanding of the ministry of the Messiah, who have come to know by revelation of the coming of Jesus Christ, have likewise gained the understanding that Christ would break the bands of death and open the door for all others to be likewise raised from death to life in glorious immortality. It was just so with the Nephites. Alma, the noble patriarch, sought to inform and inspire his son on this fundamental principle of the Christian religion. [^12]

"The soul shall be restored to the body," Alma explained, "and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame." (Alma 40:23; cf. 11:43.) [^13] Joseph Smith provided additional insight into the nature of the resurrection when he said: "As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will come from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there will not be 'added unto their stature one cubit,' neither taken from it; all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies, and not blood." [^14]

A prophetic successor, Joseph F. Smith, observed: "The body will come forth as it is laid to rest, for there is no growth or development in the grave. As it is laid down, so will it arise, and changes to perfection will come by the law of restitution. But the spirit will continue to expand and develop, and the body, after the resurrection will develop to the full stature of man." [^15]

Alma's discussion of the first resurrection (Alma 40:16-20) is slightly difficult to follow. At first it appears that Alma was suggesting that the first resurrection consists of the resurrection of all persons—righteous and wicked—who had lived before Christ. (See Alma 40:16.) Abinadi had clearly stated, however, that the first resurrection would be made up of "the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept the commandments of God." (Mosiah 15:22.) That is to say, from Abinadi's and Alma's chronological perspective, the first resurrection would be made up of the righteous dead—"an innumerable company of the spirits of the just" (D&C 138:12)—from Adam to Christ. From our perspective in the final dispensation, with information revealed to Joseph Smith, we know that the first resurrection will resume at the time of the Second Coming; the Savior will bring with him the hosts of the righteous from the meridian of time to the time of his coming. Finally Alma did give his opinion on the matter—an opinion that is in fact accurate and appropriate—that "the souls and the bodies are reunited, of the righteous, at the resurrection of Christ, and his ascension into heaven." (Alma 40:20; emphasis added.) [^16]

The Lord has stated in a modern revelation that "the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul." (D&C 88:16.) Death is not the end. The grave shall not have won the victory. The prophetic promise is sure. Joseph Smith declared: "All your losses will be made up to you in the resurrection, provided you continue faithful. By the vision of the Almighty I have seen it." [^17]

The Doctrine of Restoration

The resurrection, Alma explained, is but a part of a larger system of restoration: not only shall spirit and body be inseparably united, but all things shall hereafter be restored to the way they were here. In short, our station and reward hereafter shall be directly related to the manner in which we managed our time and spiritual resources while in this life. It is thus ludicrous to suppose that one could hope for a glorious resurrection and transcendent reward hereafter when his or her thoughts and actions in this life were shoddy and superficial. What was to Paul the Law of the Harvest ("whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap"—Gal. 6:7) was to Alma the Law of Restoration. "The plan of restoration," he observed, "is requisite with the justice of God; for it is requisite that all things should be restored to their proper order." Further, "it is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works; and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good," what we would know as exaltation in the highest heaven. "And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil." (Alma 41:2-4.)

Wickedness here never was and never will be happiness here or hereafter. Carnality here never was and never will be spirituality here or hereafter. Charting a course contrary to God and his plan in this life can never lead to spiritual union and joy with him in the life to come. (See Alma 41:10-11.) Moroni focused the attention of his readers upon the stark reality of the Law of Restoration in these words: "Do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with [God] under a consciousness of your guilt? Do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws? Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to dwell with the damned souls in hell." (Morm. 9:3-4.) A modern revelation thus stated that "they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom."

For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory. And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a terrestrial glory. And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom cannot abide a telestial glory; therefore he is not meet for a kingdom of glory. Therefore he must abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory.

They who are of a celestial spirit [in mortality] shall receive [in the resurrection] the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened. Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness. And they who are quickened by a portion of the terrestrial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness. And also they who are quickened by a portion of the telestial glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness. (D&C 88:21-24, 28-31.)

In summary, "that which ye do send out [the life we live, the deeds we do] shall return unto you again, and be restored; therefore, the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner, and justifieth him not at all." (Alma 41:15.)

Justice and Mercy: The Delicate Balance

To demonstrate the necessity and timelessness of justice and to show that there are always consequences for our transgressions, Alma recounted the story of the fall of Adam and Eve. The fall brought on the justice of God and resulted in physical and spiritual death, both of which were necessary in the eternal plan of the Father. "Now behold," Alma continued, "it was not expedient that man should be reclaimed from this . . . death, for that would destroy the great plan of happiness." (Alma 42:8.) Jacob had noted earlier that "death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator." (2 Ne. 9:6.) It was necessary for the justice of a God to be meted out in order for the mercy of a God to be extended; as the fall is the father of the atonement, so justice paves the way for mercy. (See Alma 42:1-13.)

The balance of justice and mercy is achieved only in and through a God, only in and through a being in whom there is a perfect balance, through him who is both infinitely just and merciful. The balance is achieved only by him who is sinless and upon whom justice has no claim, through him who has no need of pardoning mercy. Elder Boyd K. Packer beautifully illustrated the role of Christ as Mediator in the following parable:

There was once a man who wanted something very much. It seemed more important than anything else in his life. In order for him to have his desire, he incurred a great debt.

He had been warned about going into that much debt, and particularly about his creditor. But it seemed so important for him to do what he wanted to do and to have what he wanted right now. He was sure he could pay for it later.

So he signed a contract. He would pay it off some time along the way. He didn't worry too much about it, for the due date seemed such a long time away. He had what he wanted now, and that was what seemed important.

The creditor was always somewhere in the back of his mind, and he made token payments now and again, thinking somehow that the day of reckoning really would never come.

But as it always does, the day came, and the contract fell due. The debt had not been fully paid. His creditor appeared and demanded payment in full.

Only then did he realize that his creditor not only had the power to repossess all that he owned, but the power to cast him into prison as well.

"I cannot pay you, for I have not the power to do so," he confessed.

"Then," said the creditor, "we will exercise the contract, take your possessions, and you shall go to prison. You agreed to that. It was your choice. You signed the contract, and now it must be enforced."

"Can you not extend the time or forgive the debt?" the debtor begged. "Arrange some way for me to keep what I have and not go to prison. Surely you believe in mercy? Will you not show mercy?"

The creditor replied, "Mercy is always so one-sided. It would serve only you. If I show mercy to you, it will leave me unpaid. It is justice I demand. Do you believe in justice?"

"I believed in justice when I signed the contract," the debtor said. "It was on my side then, for I thought it would protect me. I did not need mercy then, nor think I should need it ever. Justice, I thought, would serve both of us equally as well."

"It is justice that demands that you pay the contract or suffer the penalty," the creditor replied. "That is the law. You have agreed to it and that is the way it must be. Mercy cannot rob justice."

There they were: One meting out justice, the other pleading for mercy. Neither could prevail except at the expense of the other.

"If you do not forgive the debt there will be no mercy," the debtor pleaded.

"If I do, there will be no justice," was the reply.

Both laws, it seemed, could not be served. They are two eternal ideals that appear to contradict one another. Is there no way for justice to be fully served, and mercy also?

There is a way! The law of justice can be fully satisfied and mercy can be fully extended—but it takes someone else. And so it happened this time.

The debtor had a friend. He came to help. He knew the debtor well. He knew him to be shortsighted. He thought him foolish to have gotten himself into such a predicament. Nevertheless, he wanted to help because he loved him. He stepped between them, faced the creditor, and made this offer:

"I will pay the debt if you will free the debtor from his contract so that he may keep his possessions and not go to prison."

As the creditor was pondering the offer, the mediator added, "You demanded justice. Though he cannot pay you, I will do so. You will have been justly dealt with and can ask no more. It would not be just."

And so the creditor agreed.

The mediator turned then to the debtor. "If I pay your debt, will you accept me as your creditor?"

"Oh yes, yes," cried the debtor. "You save me from prison and show mercy to me."

"Then," said the benefactor, "you will pay the debt to me and I will set the terms. It will not be easy, but it will be possible. I will provide a way. You need not go to prison."

And so it was that the creditor was paid in full. He had been justly dealt with. No contract had been broken.

The debtor, in turn, had been extended mercy. Both laws stood fulfilled. Because there was a mediator, justice had claimed its full share, and mercy was fully satisfied. [^18]

The scriptures affirm that "there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." (1 Tim. 2:5.) Mercy comes because of the atonement. Mercy is extended to the penitent. (Alma 42:23.) Those who accept Christ as their Benefactor and pay the appropriate price of repentance are delivered from the demands of justice and come to know that freedom and peace available only through him who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. (John 8:31-32.)

Can God Cease to Be God?

In seeking to dramatize the absolute necessity for God's justice to be meted out where appropriate, Alma spoke to Corianton of a most unusual hypothetical situation. "According to justice," he said, "the plan of redemption could not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of men in this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice could not be destroyed; if so, God would cease to be God." Alma explained further that "there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance, mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:13, 22, emphasis added; see also v. 25.) Some have taken these verses to mean that it is indeed possible for God to cease to be God; that if he should, by some bizarre means, fail to function in perfectness, he would be unseated and removed from his place of preeminence; that the forces in the universe would demand his abdication from the heavenly throne. Such ideas are to some quite stimulating. They are, nonetheless, erroneous and misleading.

Joseph Smith taught and the scriptures boldly and repeatedly attest to the fact that God is omnipotent, omniscient, and, by the power of his Holy Spirit, omnipresent. The Prophet taught that "God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fulness and perfection dwell; . . . without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell; and that he is the Father of lights; in him the principle of faith dwells independently, and he is the object in whom the faith of all other rational and accountable beings center for life and salvation." [^19] Joseph Smith also stated:

It is . . . necessary, in order to the exercise of faith in God unto life and salvation, that men should have the idea of the existence of the attribute justice in him; for without the idea of the existence of the attribute justice in the Deity, men could not have confidence sufficient to place themselves under his guidance and direction; for they would be filled with fear and doubt lest the judge of all the earth would not do right, and thus fear or doubt, existing in the mind, would preclude the possibility of the exercise of faith in him for life and salvation. But when the idea of the existence of the attribute justice in the Deity is fairly planted in the mind, it leaves no room for doubt to get into the heart, and the mind is enabled to cast itself upon the Almighty without fear and without doubt, and with the most unshaken confidence, believing that the Judge of all the earth will do right. [^20]

The fact of the matter is that God will not nor cannot cease to be God. His title, his status, and his exalted position are forever fixed and immutable. Exalted beings simply do not apostatize! They do not slip! It is contrary to their divine nature to lie or cheat or be impartial. God is not dependent on others for his Godhood, nor can he be impeached. Nor need the Saints of God spend a particle of a second worrying and fretting about the Almighty falling from grace. For members of the Church to do so, in fact—as the Prophet has suggested—is to err in doctrine as to the true nature of God and thus fall short of that dynamic faith which leads to life and salvation. Alma's hypothetical case is just that—purely hypothetical. He is arguing toward the impossible to demonstrate the logical certainty of his position—that mercy cannot rob justice. It is as if Alma had said: "To suppose that one can break the laws of God with impunity; to suppose that one can live a life of sin and have the atonement of Christ—the mercy of the Lord—rob justice of its due, is to suppose that which cannot be. It is as absurd as to suppose that God could cease to be God!" Truly, Alma explained, "God ceaseth not to be God, and mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement. . . . For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved." (Alma 42:23-24; emphasis added.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] H. Dean Garrett is assistant professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.
[^2] See H. Dean Garrett, ''The Book of Mormon on War,'' A Symposium on the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Church Educational System, 1986), pp. 47-53, for a more thorough discussion of this concept.
[^3] Conference Report, April 1942, p. 72.
[^4] The Works of the Right Honorable Edmund Burke (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1889), pp. 51-52.
[^5] ''Peace in This World,'' Improvement Era, June 1967, p. 77.
[^6] Cited in Louis Fischer, The Life of Mahatma Ghandi (New York: Harper & Brothers, Publishers, 1950), p. 349.
[^7] Peace with Justice, Selected Addresses of Dwight D. Eisenhower (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961) pp. 37-38.
[^8] ''From the First Presidency,'' Church News, 20 Dec. 1980, p. 3.
[^9] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938), pp. 310-11.
[^10] Ibid., p. 357.
[^11] The entire spirit world, and not just that portion designated as hell, is appropriately called a ''spirit prison.'' (See D&C 45:17; 138:15, 18, 50; Moses 7:55-57; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 310; Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, 1:289-90; Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 3:95; Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, August 1976, p. 11.) Paradise will be vacated and its residents released to a glorious resurrection at the second coming of Christ. Hell comes to an end at the time of the second resurrection, at the end of the Millennium.
[^12] Joseph Smith explained that ''the fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it.'' (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 121; cf. 1 Cor. 15:1-4.)
[^13] Joseph Smith distinguished between the fundamental and nonfundamental elements of the body. ''There is no fundamental principle,'' he taught, ''belonging to a human system that ever goes into another in this world or in the world to come; I care not what the theories of men are. We have the testimony that God will raise us up, and he has the power to do it. If anyone supposes that any part of our bodies, that is, the fundamental parts thereof, ever goes into another body, he is mistaken.'' (History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 5:339.)
[^14] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 199-200.
[^15] Improvement Era, June 1904, pp. 623-24; see also Gospel Doctrine, pp. 23, 447-48. President Smith's son, Joseph Fielding Smith, commented on these words as follows: ''President Smith was in full accord with Amulek and Alma. He taught that the body will be restored as stated in Alma 11:42-45 and 40:22-23. While he expresses the thought that the body will come forth as it was laid down, he also expresses the thought that it will take time to adjust the body from the condition of imperfections. This, of course, is reasonable, but at the same time the length of time to make these adjustments will not cover any appreciable extent of time. "President Smith never intended to convey the thought that it would require weeks or months of time in order for the defects to be removed. These changes will come naturally, of course, but almost instantly. We cannot look upon it in any other way." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols. comp. Bruce R. McConkie [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56], 2:293-94.)
[^16] ''It is evident Alma's understanding of the extent of the resurrection at the time the Savior came forth from the dead was limited, therefore he stated only his opinion.'' (Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols., compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1957-66], 1:36; see also Doctrines of Salvation, 2:300.)
[^17] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 296.
[^18] Conference Report, April 1977, pp. 79-80.
[^19] Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985), 2:2.
[^20] Ibid., 4:13. In a limited meaning of the phrase, therefore, God can cease to be God in the mind of mortals, but never in an absolute sense. That is to say, if people do not understand that God Almighty possesses all attributes in perfection, they cannot exercise saving faith in him-he ceases to be God to them!
