Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

7

INSPIRED BY A BETTER CAUSE

(Alma 43-51)

H. Dean Garrett [^1]

Mormon, as the compiler of the Book of Mormon, was faced with the challenge of determining what to include in his abridged record. In making his decisions, he was guided by two factors. The first was the charge given him by the Lord to write those things "which have been commanded." (3 Ne. 26:12.) The second influence was Mormon's understanding of the times and the conditions under which the records would come forth in the last days. Thus directed, Mormon deliberately selected those events and discourses from the original plates that best met the needs his future book would serve.

His account of the record of Alma is a good illustration of Mormon's methodology. In the first part of this book, he dedicated considerable space to the missionary labors of Alma and the four sons of Mosiah. However, in recording the events of their missions, he announced that he was changing his emphasis: "Now we shall say no more concerning their preaching, except that they preached the word, and the truth, according to the spirit of prophecy and revelation; and they preached after the holy order of God by which they were called. And now I return to an account of the wars between the Nephites and the Lamanites in the eighteenth year of the reign of the judges." (Alma 43:2-3.)

This was a curious decision for Mormon to make. If the Book of Mormon was intended to be used by a church greatly involved in missionary work, would it not be more beneficial for the readers of the book to be instructed in the missionary experiences of Alma and the sons of Mosiah? Why write about the wars of the Nephites?

An analysis of the composition of the Book of Mormon might lead us to an answer to such questions. Sixty-four percent of the history covered from 1 Nephi to Mormon 6, comprising 220 pages, is found in Alma 1 to 3 Nephi 10, surely an inordinate amount of space for a diminutive amount of history. [^2] A unique historical pattern is found in this section of the Book of Mormon. In Alma 1-42, Mormon emphasized priestcraft, materialism, social-economic inequality, and other social problems. This period is followed in Alma 43-63 by a period of war and civil disruptions. This dissension led to a corruption of civil government (as described in the book of Helaman) and to the eventual collapse of the government (see 3 Nephi 1-10). At this point, the Savior visited the people.

A similar pattern of social problems, priestcrafts, materialism, wars, government corruption, and disrupted life is prophesied for the last days leading to the Savior's second coming. (D&C 45:16-48; D&C 87; Mormon 8:26-41.) As indicated, Mormon and his successor, Moroni, saw our day (see Mormon 8:27-31) and took from the history and prophecies of the Nephites those events that would best help the readers of their record in the day in which it would come forth. Since Mormon knew of the wars and chaos that would characterize the last days, he abbreviated his account of the missionary efforts of Alma and the sons of Mosiah and emphasized the challenges created by war and social turmoil, along with the reaction of the righteous to those challenges.

Motivations for War

A study of the Nephite-Lamanite wars provides helpful insights into the motivations of people or nations at war. In Alma 43, Mormon related how the Zoramites joined the Lamanites (under Zerahemnah) and an apostate group of Nephites called Amalekites to war against the Nephites. Because the Amalekites and Zoramites were "of a more wicked and murderous disposition than the Lamanites," Zerahemnah placed them as "chief captains" over his armies. (Alma 43:6.) In doing this, the Lamanite leader wished to "preserve their hatred towards the Nephites" and to "stir up the Lamanites to anger against the Nephites." His personal design was to "usurp great power over them [the Lamanites], and also that he might gain power over the Nephites by bringing them into bondage." (Alma 43:7-8.) It appears that Zerahemnah's motivation for going to war was his hatred of the Nephites and his thirst for power.

On the other hand, the Nephites entered this war with a far different attitude. It was their desire to "support their lands and their houses, and their wives, and their children, that they might preserve them from the hands of their enemies; and also that they might preserve their rights and their privileges, yea, and also their liberty, that they might worship God according to their desires." (Alma 43:9.) Because of the Lamanites' hatred toward them and because of the evil desires of their apostate allies, the Nephites knew they would suffer much death and an insufferable bondage if they fell prey to their enemies.

The major motivation of each of these groups determined the approach each took in preparing for war and in actually fighting. The Lamanites gathered themselves with anger, while the Nephites responded with resolve and preparation.

The leader of the Nephites, Moroni, "had prepared his people with breastplates and with arm-shields, yea, and also shields to defend their heads, and also they were dressed with thick clothing." (Alma 43:19.) The Lamanites, on the other hand, had their weapons of war, but they were naked, except for a "skin which was girded about their loins." (Alma 43:20.) The Nephites also prepared for battle by spying on the foe and by seeking direction from the prophet Alma.

The motivation that people have for going to war often dictates the manner in which the conflict is pursued. Even though the Lamanites were not prepared to battle a more physically prepared foe, nevertheless they "did fight exceedingly; yea, never had the Lamanites been known to fight with such exceedingly great strength and courage, no, not even from the beginning. And they were inspired by the Zoramites and the Amalekites, who were their chief captains and leaders, and by Zerahemnah, who was their chief captain, or their chief leader and commander; yea, they did fight like dragons." (Alma 43:43-44.) The Nephites, however, were inspired by a greater cause. They "were not fighting for monarchy nor power but they were fighting for their homes and their liberties, their wives and their children, and their all, yea, for their rites of worship and their church." (Alma 43:45.)

The Nephites were fighting for a higher cause—"their duty which they owed to their God." (Alma 43:46.) They were fighting under a God-given mandate that declared: "Inasmuch as ye are not guilty of the first offense, neither the second, ye shall not suffer yourselves to be slain by the hands of your enemies." And again, the Lord said: "Ye shall defend your families even unto bloodshed. Therefore for this cause were the Nephites contending with the Lamanites, to defend themselves, and their families, and their lands, their country, and their rights, and their religions." (Alma 43:46-47.) This motivation produced a faith in the Nephites that allowed them to fight with valor, for when they began to fear and were about to flee the fierceness of the Lamanites, a reminder of their cause from Moroni allowed them to turn on the Lamanites with power. (See Alma 43:48-50.) On the other hand, when the Lamanites saw the power of the Nephites, they were filled with fear and "were struck with terror." (Alma 43:53.)

The account of this war clarified an important concept: there might be a justifiable reason for going to war. That reason should not include the motivation to gain power, nor control, nor should it be out of anger or hatred. The Lord simply stated that if the Nephites were not guilty of the first or second offense, they should not allow themselves to be slain by their enemies. (Alma 43:46.) This same counsel was given to the early saints through the Prophet Joseph Smith. In the Doctrine and Covenants, section 98, the Lord gave this command: "Now, I speak unto you concerning your families—if men will smite you, or your families, once, and ye bear it patiently and revile not against them, neither seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded; but if ye bear it not patiently, it shall be accounted unto you as being meted out as a just measure unto you." (D&C 98:23-24.) The Lord further instructed the saints that if they bore these attacks the third and fourth times, their rewards would be increased. However, if their enemies escaped the vengeance of God, then a warning voice should be raised that if the enemy came against them again, the Lord would have "delivered thine enemy into thine hands." (D&C 98:29.) If the saints spared the enemy, they would be blessed, but if "thou rewardest him according to his works thou art justified; if he has sought thy life, and thy life is endangered by him, thine enemy is in thine hands and thou art justified." (D&C 98:31.)

The Lord applied this same law to nations, with the injunction that "if any nation, tongue, or people should proclaim war against them, they should first lift a standard of peace unto that people, nation, or tongue." (D&C 98:34.) If that people or nation did not accept the standard of peace, then the same procedures would be followed the second and third time. After this procedure was followed, the Lord would "justify them in going out to battle against that nation, tongue, or people. And I, the Lord, would fight their battles." (D&C 98:36-37.) This law of war was given to Nephi, Joseph, Jacob, Abraham, "and all mine ancient prophets and apostles." (D&C 98:32.)

The Lord commanded his people to "renounce war and proclaim peace" (D&C 98:16), but he does give a nation the right to go to war. President David O. McKay suggested the following righteous reasons for war:

I still say that there are conditions when entrance into war is justifiable, and when a Christian nation may, without violation of principles, take up arms against an opposing force. Such a condition, however, is not a real or fancied insult given by one nation to another. When this occurs proper reparation may be made by mutual understanding, apology or by arbitration. Neither is there justifiable cause found in a desire or even a need for territorial expansion. The taking of territory implies the subjugation of the weak to the strong—the application of the jungle law. Nor is war justified in an attempt to enforce a new order of government, or even to impel others to a particular form of worship, however better the government or eternally true the principles of the enforced religion may be. [^3]

An example of this philosophy is found in the Book of Mormon when Mormon, the abridger, was acting as the military leader for the Nephites. After great victories over the Lamanites, the Nephites began to "boast in their own strength, and began to swear before the heavens that they would avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren who had been slain by their enemies. And they did swear by the heavens, and also by the throne of God, that they would go up to battle against their enemies, and would cut them off from the face of the land." (Morm. 3:9-10.)

This attitude did not reflect the "law of war" as defined by the Lord. Thus Mormon "did utterly refuse from this time forth to be a commander and a leader of this people, because of their wickedness and abomination" (Morm. 3:11), even though Mormon had led the Nephites in battle many times. Furthermore, "when they had sworn by all that had been forbidden them by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that they would go up unto their enemies to battle, and avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren, behold the voice of the Lord came unto me, saying: Vengeance is mine, and I will repay; and because this people repented not after I had delivered them, behold, they shall be cut off from the face of the earth." (Morm. 3:14-15.)

A message to the people of the latter days from the war period of the Book of Mormon would be that if there must be war, then it must be entered for the right reasons and under proper circumstances if people desire the blessings of God. Writing to Zerahemnah, Captain Moroni made this interesting observation: "Ye see that God will support, and keep, and preserve us, so long as we are faithful unto him, and unto our faith, and our religion; and never will the Lord suffer that we shall be destroyed except we should fall into transgression and deny our faith." (Alma 44:4.)

In a day when prophecies note that there will be wars and rumors of wars (JS-M 1:28-29), there are some who question their role in supporting a government that is preparing for war. As nations prepare from time to time to go to war, what should be an individual's role? Must one support the government? Is one morally responsible to take sides? Mormon pointed out in the Book of Alma that perhaps the side is not as important to one's personal salvation as the motivation.

The Fight for Liberty

Mormon continued the account of the wars of the Nephites by interjecting a prophecy of Alma. Alma, before his final departure, told his son Helaman that the Nephites would dwindle in unbelief until a final destruction of his people took place. (See Alma 45:10-16.) As Helaman and his brethren tried to organize the people, "there arose a dissension among them, and they would not give heed to the words of Helaman and his brethren." (Alma 45:23.) This reaction to the attempts of Helaman to establish righteousness laid a foundation for internal dissent. Those who would not give heed to "Helaman and his brethren were gathered together against their brethren." (Alma 46:1.) This dissension allowed a man by the name of Amalickiah to create a movement to make him king over the Nephites. There were many in the church who accepted the flatteries of Amalickiah and therefore broke away from the Church. "And thus were the affairs of the people of Nephi exceedingly precarious and dangerous, notwithstanding their great victory which they had had over the Lamanites, and their great rejoicings which they had had because of their deliverance by the hand of the Lord." (Alma 46:7.) It does not take long for a people who are full of pride to "forget the Lord their God" and "be led away by the evil one." (Alma 46:8.) One wicked individual can cause great wickedness to take place among such a people. (See Alma 46:9.)

On the other hand, one righteous person can make a difference in such a setting. Captain Moroni reacted to this situation by making a banner (the Title of Liberty) on which he wrote this reminder: "In memory of our God, our religion, and freedom, and our peace, our wives, and our children." (Alma 46:12.) He prayed fervently to the Lord for "the blessings of liberty to rest upon his brethren, so long as there should a band of Christians remain to possess the land." (Alma 46:13.) This became such an important time for Moroni that he challenged all his supporters to "enter into a covenant that they will maintain their rights, and their religion, that the Lord God may bless them." (Alma 46:20.)

The battle that followed forced Amalickiah and his people into the wilderness. The Amalickiahites who were taken captive were given the option of joining the people of Moroni by entering into the covenant with them. Those Amalickiahites who "would not enter into a covenant to support the cause of freedom, that they might maintain a free government, he caused to be put to death; and there were but few who denied the covenant of freedom." (Alma 46:35.)

The Amalickiahites who had fled joined forces with the Lamanites; and, through treachery and murder, Amalickiah became the king of the Lamanites. It was still his design to control the Nephites, and thus a great battle ensued. The righteous Nephites turned to God in preparation for this war. Mormon observed that the wicked Nephites "became more hardened and impenitent, and more wild, wicked and ferocious than the Lamanites." (Alma 47:36.) This battle for the Nephite nation, which lead to much dissension among the Nephites, was due to their own wickedness. Mormon stated: "For it has been their quarrelings and their contentions, yea, their murderings, and their plunderings, their idolatry, their whoredoms, and their abominations, which were among themselves, which brought upon them their wars and their destructions." (Alma 50:21.) No matter who the leader was, this wickedness caused some to seek an overthrow of freedom, to replace the government with a monarchy. Thus they had the kingmen trying to seize power, and the ensuing battle between the kingmen and the freemen took place. (See Alma 50-51.)

This dissension so weakened the Nephites that "while Moroni was thus breaking down the wars and contentions among his own people, and subjecting them to peace and civilization" (Alma 51:22), the Lamanites again attacked and tried to overpower the Nephites. Mormon showed, by his account, that wickedness brought dissent, and dissent brought the threat of destruction from outside forces. The only way that the Nephites could stay free was to stay righteous.

Edmund Burke echoed these same feelings when he stated:

Men are qualified for civil liberty in exact proportion to their disposition to put moral chains upon their own appetites, in proportion as their love to justice is above their rapacity, in proportion as their soundness and sobriety of understanding is above their vanity and presumption, in proportion as they are more disposed to listen to the counsels of the wise and good, in preference to the flattery of knaves. Society cannot exist, unless a controlling power upon will and appetite be placed somewhere; and the less of it there is within, the more there must be without. It is ordained in the eternal constitution of things, that men of intemperate minds cannot be free. Their passions forge their fetters. [^4]

The Individual and War

Can righteousness be maintained and happiness be found in an atmosphere of wars and rumors of war? Can righteous people remain righteous under such circumstances? Mormon gave us insights into the answers to these questions by describing how the Nephites struggled through this period. He made this intriguing observation about the Nephites who were preparing for war: "And those who were faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord were delivered at all times, whilst thousands of their wicked brethren have been consigned to bondage, or to perish by the sword, or to dwindle in unbelief, and mingle with the Lamanites. But behold there never was a happier time among the people of Nephi, since the days of Nephi, than in the days of Moroni." (Alma 50:22-23.)

Yet the challenges and struggles that come with war come to the individual. Can a righteous, peaceful individual maintain those qualities in an atmosphere of hatred, along with an environment where life is not respected nor God revered? The answer to this question is also found in this section of the Book of Mormon. We are given the example of Captain Moroni. He did not want to shed blood, but he loved peace and desired to keep the commandments. Yet he spent most of his adult life in war. His profession appeared to be that of a military leader. He took good men into battle, and he had to watch many of them suffer and die.

Even with this life-style, he still remained righteous. Mormon gave this description of him: "If all men had been, and were, and ever would be, like unto Moroni, behold, the very powers of hell would have been shaken forever; yea, the devil would never have power over the hearts of the children of men." (Alma 48:17.)

Moroni remained righteous, strong, and powerful even in an environment where death, suffering, pain, and hatred became the norm. The question can then be asked, "Can a Latter-day Saint be righteous in a military environment?" The answer, based on Moroni's experience, is yes.

Conclusion

The Book of Mormon was designed to prepare its readers to survive the problems of the latter days. Book of Mormon prophets stated that this book would be brought forth when there would be wars and other social problems. Elder Marion G. Romney made this observation: "Latter-day Saints know that this earth will never again, during its telestial existence, be free from civil disturbance and war." [^5] This being true, if people of these latter days have any hope, it will be founded in righteousness. We must be careful that we do not follow the pattern of the Book of Mormon people who had more faith in their own armaments than they had in God. A modern-day general, Omar N. Bradley, once warned: "We have grasped the mystery of the atom and rejected the Sermon on the Mount. . . . Ours is a world of nuclear giants and ethical infants. We know more about war than we know about peace, more about killing than we know about living." [^6]

In our society today, we find that we are well prepared for war. In our preparation, however, we have lost the spiritual strength to prevent it.

President Dwight D. Eisenhower observed: "Every gun made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed. This world in arms is not spending money alone. It is spending the sweat of its laborers, the genius of its scientists, the hopes of its children. . . . This is not a way of life at all, in any true sense. Under the cloud of threatening war, it is humanity hanging from a cross of iron." [^7]

The cry in these days is for righteousness. If there is to be hope for a peaceful future, it will be because people repent and serve the Lord. The First Presidency, in a Christmas message to the world, made this plea:

We are dismayed by the growing tensions among the nations, and the unrestricted building of arsenals of war, including huge and threatening nuclear weaponry. Nuclear war, when unleashed on a scale for which the nations are preparing, spares no living thing within the perimeter of its initial destructive force, and sears and maims and kills wherever its pervasive cloud reaches.

While recognizing the need for strength to repel any aggressor, we are enjoined by the word of God to "renounce war and proclaim peace." We call upon the heads of nations to sit down and reason together in good faith to resolve their differences. If men of good will can bring themselves to do so, they may save the world from a holocaust, the depth and breadth of which can scarcely be imagined. We are confident that when there is enough of a desire for peace and a will to bring it about, it is not beyond the possibility of attainment. [^8]

It is the duty of every Latter-day Saint to live righteously enough to be an influence for peace. However, if the time comes that they have to fight "for their homes and their liberties, their wives and their children, and their all, yea, for their rites of worship and their church" (Alma 43:45), then they must be prepared to respond in righteousness and with purity of heart.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer J. Condie is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Hugh Nibley, Brigham Young Univeristy Summer Commencement Address, August 19, 1983.
[^3] Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1952), pp. 117-18, 196.
[^4] Sir Henry Sumner Maine, Ancient Law (New York: H. Holt and Co., 1885).
[^5] John L. Sorenson, An Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, and Provo, Utah: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1985), pp. 265-68.
[^6] R. Lanier Britsch, ''Maori Traditions and the Mormon Church,'' New Era, June 1981, pp. 38-46.
[^7] Sorenson, An Ancient American Setting, p. 269.
[^8] See W. A. Cole and E. W. Jensen, Israel in the Pacific (Salt Lake City: Genealogical Society of Utah, 1961), p. 388; Conference Report, April 1962, p. 112; Church News, May 10, 1958, p. 2.
