Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

8

RIGHTEOUS OATHS, REPROOF, AND RECONCILIATION

(Alma 52-63)

Spencer J. Condie [^1]

The concluding chapters of the book of Alma are not only an exciting account of ingenious military strategies but also a spiritual saga in which humble followers of Christ encounter in exquisite detail "an opposition in all things." (2 Ne. 2:11.) This is the a story of a people with deep, abiding faith despite unrestrained wickedness in the world in which they lived. These chapters reassure us that there are still promises to keep, notwithstanding the fact that others may engage in deception, intrigue, and even murder to gain greater power. This is the unusual story of larger-than-life military leaders who loved their troops more than themselves and who loved liberty more than life.

One of the great lessons of the Nephite-Lamanite war, and perhaps all wars, was that "many had become hardened, because of the exceedingly great length of the war; and many were softened because of their afflictions, insomuch that they did humble themselves before God, even in the depth of humility." (Alma 62:41; emphasis added.)

Alma's successor as chief judge, Nephihah, died, and his son Pahoran "was appointed chief judge and governor over the people." (Alma 50:37-40.) Citizens who have inherited a long, traditional, constitutionally based form of government take for granted the smooth transition of leadership from one leader to another. But in many societies, even today, the death of a ruler or the transition from a military rule to a more civilian form of government sometimes creates a leadership vacuum filled only after revolution and bloodshed. Unless the transition is considered legitimate by the opposition, political turmoil will likely result.

Such was the political climate in 67 B.C. Notwithstanding the ever present external threat of Lamanite invasions, the Nephites became divided among themselves, and a revolutionary movement of so-called "king-men" sought to alter the laws of the land in order to remove the duly appointed Pahoran from the judgment seat. (Alma 51:2-5.)

The matter was put to a vote, and "the voice of the people came in favor of the freemen, and Pahoran retained the judgment-seat" (Alma 51:7). But order in the land of Zarahemla was short-lived, because the dreaded king of the Lamanites, Amalickiah, "had gathered together a wonderfully great army" (Alma 51:11) and quickly took possession of the heavily fortified cities of Nephihah, Lehi, Morianton, Omner, Gid, and Mulek (Alma 51:25-27). But the fearless leader of one of the Nephite armies, Teancum, successfully resisted the forces of Amalickiah and bravely stole into the Lamanite camp at night and thrust a javelin into the Lamanite leader's heart. (Alma 51:33-34.) Shortly thereafter, the king's equally bloodthirsty brother, Ammoron, was appointed to be a king over the Lamanites.

Teancum concluded that it would be impossible to attack the Lamanites in their fortified cities, so the chief captains of the Nephite armies held a council of war and developed a plan to "decoy the Lamanites out of their strongholds." (Alma 52:17-21.) Teancum led a token force near the seashore while Moroni led his forces into the wilderness. The Lamanites pursued Teancum in vain while Moroni marched back to take the city of Mulek. (Alma 52:22-26.)

In the meantime, Captain Lehi marched against the weary Lamanites with a fresh Nephite army that joined forces with Moroni's army. A furious battle ensued. Jacob, the head of the Lamanites, was slain, and Moroni himself was wounded. The chief captains of the Lamanites "came forth and threw down their weapons," but those who would not surrender voluntarily were taken as prisoners. (Alma 52:27-40.) The Nephites used these prisoners of war to dig trenches around the city of Bountiful and to build a "breastwork of timbers" around the ditches to fortify the city.

Just as the tides of fortune seemed to be turning in a favorable direction, while Moroni was away from Zarahemla, the Lamanites had caused great dissensions among the Nephites and had taken possession of several cities on the west sea, south. (Alma 53:8-9.)

The Nephite armies had regained the city of Mulek and fortified the land of Bountiful. In the process they were now confronted with the simultaneous problems of regaining their other lost cities, dealing with the dissension and intrigue between the king-men and freemen back at headquarters, watching over an ever-increasing number of prisoners of war, and protecting the Ammonites who had taken an oath never again to fight. Who could assume responsibility for leading and defending this people amidst such apparently insurmountable problems?

A Profile of Captain Moroni

The record describes Moroni as "a strong and a mighty man," "a man of a perfect understanding," "a man that did not delight in bloodshed," "a man whose soul did joy in the liberty and the freedom of his country." (Alma 48:11.) "If all men had been, and were, and ever would be, like unto Moroni, behold, the very powers of hell would have been shaken forever; yea, the devil would never have power over the hearts of the children of men." (Alma 48:17.)

Moroni had been appointed chief captain only two years previously at the age of twenty-five. (Alma 43:17.) He was a very astute strategist and tactician and was absolutely fearless, a style of leadership involving considerable risks as he, himself, was wounded in battle. (Alma 52:35.) In describing the desirable qualities of a great leader, Hugh Nibley cites Moroni's character traits as the epitome of the consummate leader. Said Nibley: "Leaders are movers and shakers, original, inventive, unpredictable, imaginative, full of surprises that discomfit the enemy in war and the main office in peace." [^2]

Yes, indeed, Moroni was righteous, intelligent, creative, and courageous. But what of his communication skills? May it be said of Captain Moroni that he was seldom, if ever, misunderstood. A case in point is the letter he wrote to Ammoron in response to an offer to exchange prisoners. The Lamanites had not only taken captive Nephite soldiers, but their wives and children as well. Thus, it was an enticing offer to exchange prisoners. But Moroni would agree only on his own terms: a Nephite family for each Lamanite prisoner. (Alma 54:11.)

To underscore the intensity of his feelings about Ammoron's aggressive attempts to take the Nephite lands through bloodshed, Moroni wrote: "I would tell you concerning that awful hell that awaits to receive such murderers as thou and thy brother have been" (Alma 54:7), and "it supposeth me that thou art a child of hell" (Alma 54:11). Then, just in case Ammoron did not catch the full flavor of his message, Moroni added the afterthought: "Behold, I am in my anger." (Alma 54:13.)

Here was the right man, in the right place, at the right time! Moroni's integrity would not allow him to bargain cheaply the lives of the Nephite families in question, especially without an assurance from Ammoron that he would no longer seek to destroy the Nephites (Alma 54:13), and so Moroni refused Ammoron's offer to exchange prisoners (Alma 55:1-2).

Never one to shrink from his duty to free the Nephite prisoners of war, Moroni identified a Lamanite convert within his own ranks whom he sent by night to the city of Gid, where the Lamanites were guarding numerous Nephite prisoners. This courier, whose name was Laman, took with him a few other men and some bottles of strong wine. Upon reaching the Lamanite camp, the Nephite platoon indicated that they had just escaped from the Nephite camp. The Lamanites were only too happy to welcome them and to drink their specially prepared wine. (Alma 55:4-13.)

As soon as the Lamanite guards had had their fill of wine and had sunk into a drunken slumber, Laman's platoon returned to report to Captain Moroni. Moroni's troops returned to the city of Gid and quietly armed the Nephite prisoners while the Lamanites slept. In the morning the Lamanites awakened to discover that they were surrounded. Perhaps with tongue in cheek, the chronicler of these events wrote: "In these circumstances they found that it was not expedient that they should fight with the Nephites." (Alma 55:23.)

Again we are reminded that Moroni "did not delight in murder or bloodshed, but he delighted in the saving of his people from destruction." (Alma 55:19.) So it was that the Lamanite prisoners' lives were spared, and they were subsequently put to work fortifying the city of Gid. (Alma 55:25.)

As mentioned previously, protracted war can either harden or soften a people, coarsen or refine them, create cynicism or build faith. As for the Nephites, they "were not slow to remember the Lord their God in this their time of affliction." (Alma 55:31.)

Promises to Keep

As internal dissensions among the Nephites added fuel to the already raging fires of war with the Lamanites, the need for additional valiant Nephite warriors became critical. And so it was that the faithful people of Ammon, Lamanite converts who had been the beneficiaries of Nephite protection for several years, felt such an acute sense of obligation to assist in the war effort that they were about to break the oath they had taken never to bear arms and shed the blood of another. (See Alma 24.) "But behold, as they were about to take their weapons of war, they were overpowered by the persuasions of Helaman and his brethren, for they were about to break the oath which they had made." (Alma 53:14.)

Long before the age of notarized signatures, of quintuplicate copies of contracts with countless qualifications and exceptions, there was a time when a verbal oath had all the pulling power necessary to bind someone to his word. The commitment to oaths among the people of the Book of Mormon is everywhere evident, from the reciprocal promises between Nephi and Zoram (1 Ne. 4:33-37) to the refusal of Zerahemnah, the Lamanite leader, to take an oath "which we know that we shall break" (Alma 44:8), to the people of Morianton who, "upon their covenanting to keep the peace," were once again allowed to return to their lands (Alma 50:36).

Whether made by the righteous or the wicked, an oath was a sacred promise to be kept inviolate under any and all circumstances. Few examples of broken oaths are recorded in the entire Book of Mormon, and these breaches occurred under very unusual mitigating circumstances. (See Mosiah 19:20-20:24.)

Hugh Nibley has provided enlightening evidence of the great binding power of oaths in the ancient Arab world. [^3] Henry Sumner Maine, in his classic treatise on Ancient Law, also cites examples of binding verbal oaths from Roman Law and more recent Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence. [^4] Indeed, our own contemporary courtroom oath "to swear the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth" is not to be taken lightly (as indicted perjurers have painfully discovered).

How could the Nephites resolve their current dilemma? They had a critical shortage of troops and were encumbered by an obligation to protect the faithful Ammonites who had taken an oath not to bear arms. The Ammonites "had many sons, who had not entered into a covenant that they would not take their weapons of war to defend themselves against their enemies. . . . And they entered into a covenant to fight for the liberty of the Nephites." (Alma 53:16-17.)

Two Thousand Heroic Mothers

There are about two thousand mothers whose names remain unknown but whose faithful stripling sons helped to alter the course of Nephite history. Helaman was selected to lead them and described his young "sons" as being "exceedingly valiant for courage, and also for strength and activity . . . men who were true at all times in whatsoever thing they were entrusted. Yea, they were men of truth and soberness, for they had been taught to keep the commandments of God and to walk uprightly before him." (Alma 53:20-21.) Helaman further shared the observation that "they had been taught by their mothers, that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them. And they rehearsed unto me the words of their mothers, saying: We do not doubt our mothers knew it." (Alma 53:47-48.)

The age of these young warriors is not stated, but Helaman once referred to them as "men" (Alma 53:20), sometimes as "striplings" (Alma 53:22; 56:57), other times as his "little sons" (Alma 56:30 and 56:39), but most frequently as "my sons" (Alma 56:10, 27, 44, 46, 57:22). Regardless of the young men's ages, their parents' permission to leave home was certainly not given without sacrifice. Their numbers began with an even two thousand but eventually increased to two thousand and sixty. (Alma 57:6.)

Just as the mothers reared sons of great faith and courage, the fathers sacrificed in delivering provisions to their sons. (Alma 56:27.) Though the Ammonite fathers would not bear arms, they gave "a large portion of their substance" in support of the Nephite armies. (Alma 43:13.)

Helaman and his "little sons" were under the command of Antipus, who ordered them to divert the attention of the Lamanites by marching to a neighboring city near the seashore. As the Lamanites began to pursue the stripling warriors, Antipus's troops marched in hot pursuit of the Lamanites. Just as the weary troops "were about to fall into the hands of the Lamanites," Helaman's little army came to the rescue, surrounding the enemy. As the dust settled, the Nephites were clearly victorious, and the Lamanites were taken prisoner. (Alma 56:30-54.)

With typical paternalistic concern, Helaman surveyed his army and was overjoyed to discover that not a single one of his stripling soldiers had "fallen to the earth." (Alma 56:56.)

Shortly thereafter, Helaman's army received, in addition to fresh provisions, sixty more Ammonite sons to strengthen their numbers. (Alma 57:6.) Through a fortuitous set of circumstances, the supply line to the Lamanites was interrupted by the Nephites, and for want of food the Lamanites surrendered the city of Cumeni. Now the troops of Helaman were overburdened with an excessive number of prisoners to guard, and they were ultimately compelled to slay many of those who persisted in fighting, while the other prisoners were escorted by a contingent of Helaman's troops back to the land of Zarahemla. (Alma 57:7-16.)

Meanwhile, Ammoron's army had received new provisions, and "a numerous army of men" had engaged the remaining stripling soldiers in a desperate battle. In the moment of greatest despair, those who had escorted the prisoners to Zarahemla returned to the battlefield and successfully drove the Lamanites back to the city of Manti. This time, the census of wounded revealed that two hundred of Helaman's army "had fainted because of the loss of blood; nevertheless, according to the goodness of God . . . there was not one soul of them who did perish," notwithstanding the fact that, without exception, every stripling had been wounded. (Alma 57:25.) Referring once again to their unshakable faith, Helaman described his sons as "young, and their minds are firm, and they do put their trust in God continually." (Alma 57:27.)

The joy of previous victories was short lived, however. Helaman wrote in an epistle to Moroni that their supply line had been most unreliable for several months, and that they "were about to perish for the want of food." (Alma 58:7.) But in their hour of affliction, Helaman wrote that "we did pour out our souls in prayer to God, that he would strengthen us and deliver us out of the hands of our enemies . . . and it came to pass that the Lord our God did visit us with assurances that he would deliver us." (Alma 58:10-11.)

Although greatly outnumbered by the Lamanites, Helaman again employed a strategy of dividing and conquering. One of the Nephite captains, Gid, led his troops into the wilderness on the right, while Teomner and his troops entered the wilderness on the left.

As the Lamanites attacked Helaman's army, the armies of Gid and Teomner cut off the Lamanite spies, hurried to the Lamanite-occupied city of Manti, and overwhelmed the guards who had been left behind. Helaman led his troops in the direction of Zarahemla, and while the Lamanites slept, the striplings changed course and continued marching toward the city of Manti, thus taking possession of it before the Lamanites returned. (Alma 58:16-29.)

After recounting their successes in a letter to Moroni, Helaman then broached the subject of an unreliable supply line, suspecting "that there is some faction in the government, that they do not send more men to our assistance," adding with typical faith: "We trust God will deliver us." (Alma 58:36-37.)

Reproof and Reconciliation

Upon receiving Helaman's request for aid, Moroni, ever the great advocate for his army, "immediately sent an epistle to Pahoran," asking for reinforcements. (Alma 59.) When the city of Nephihah was lost because the expected help never arrived, Moroni sent another epistle to Pahoran, expressing his anger with the seeming indifference of the government. (Alma 60.)

The 121st section of the Doctrine and Covenants contains some of the greatest counsel in holy writ regarding the proper exercise of authority. The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith that "no power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge. . . . Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost." (D&C 121:41-43.)

Some readers may be surprised at the sharpness of Moroni's epistle to Pahoran, the leader of the land. It may be well to examine Moroni's letter within the context in which it was written. Moroni had served as chief captain of the Nephite armies for more than a dozen years, and he was weary of war. Secondly, he was writing as an advocate for Helaman and his army. Thirdly, he told Pahoran that they would not complain if their afflictions had been confined to "hunger, thirst, and fatigue" (Alma 60:3), but his greatest concern was the unnecessary "slaughter among our people" (Alma 60:5).

Congruent with the Lord's counsel to be patient and long-suffering, Moroni had suffered various afflictions for over twelve years. But now his emotions were brimming with anger, and he did, indeed, reprove Pahoran with sharpness. There is one crucial element that Moroni overlooked: pure knowledge. That is to say, before reproving with sharpness it is well to have all the facts straight. The suspicions of Helaman and Moroni about the intrigue and dissension on the home front were all well founded; however, Moroni's aspersions against Pahoran were not grounded in truth.

Nevertheless, the magnanimous, charitable Pahoran received Moroni's scorching letter in the spirit in which it should have been written and accepted it with joy and a forgiving heart.

Another important element of the Lord's counsel on exercising power and authority involves "reproving betimes with sharpness." Many English-speaking people assume that the meaning of this archaic word, betimes, means "frequently" or "sometimes," but this is not the case. Betimes means literally "before it is too late." It is significant in this context that Pahoran responds to Moroni's letter by saying, "I do joy in receiving your epistle, for I was somewhat worried concerning what we should do, whether it should be just in us to go against our brethren." (Alma 61:19; emphasis added.)

One gathers the impression that Pahoran, perhaps like the great high priest Eli of old, knew full well that remedial action should be taken but lacked the motivation to follow through until the message was sent in an unmistakable fashion that could not be misunderstood. Not until he received Moroni's sharp message did Pahoran make the firm resolve to clean house on the home front in order to be unified against the Lamanite armies.

Even while castigating Pahoran in his letter, Moroni nonetheless addressed the loftier side of Pahoran's character as he challenged him to "come out and show unto me a true spirit of freedom." (Alma 60:25.) Moroni's sharp epistle was the catalyst in overcoming Pahoran's indecisiveness.

Strength Through Unity

After Moroni received Pahoran's gracious reply, "his heart did take courage." He began to march toward the land of Gideon, and "thousands did flock unto his standard, and did take up their swords in the defence of their freedom." (Alma 62:1-5.) As Moroni and Pahoran united their forces, "they became exceedingly strong" and successfully rooted out the king-men, the internal dissenters who would have toppled the government from within. After being placed on trial in accordance with the laws of the land, "those king-men, whosoever would not take up arms in the defence of their country, but would fight against it, were put to death." (Alma 62:6-9.)

As Pahoran and Moroni's troops engaged the Lamanites in battle, they influenced the defeated Lamanites "to enter into a covenant that they would no more take up their weapons of war against the Nephites." (Alma 62:16.) Underscoring the binding power of verbal promises, those who made this covenant were sent to live with the Ammonites in peace.

A series of dramatic, successive victories occurred as the ranks of Moroni and Pahoran were joined by the armies of Lehi and Teancum. Filled with exceeding anger toward Ammoron, Teancum stealthily cast a javelin into Ammoron's heart just as he had done with Ammoron's brother, Amalickiah. But this time he was pursued and slain. (Alma 62:35-36.) A mighty warrior had fallen.

With the demise of Ammoron, the Nephites were able to drive the Lamanites from the land, and peace was at least temporarily restored. Pahoran returned to his rightful place in the chief judgment-seat. Helaman began again "to preach unto the people the word of God," and the church was reestablished throughout the land. (Alma 62:44-46.) Captain Moroni relinquished his military command to his son, Moronihah, and retired in peace. (Alma 62:43.)

And the Nephite people "did pray unto the Lord their God continually, insomuch that the Lord did bless them, according to his word, so that they did wax strong and prosper in the land." (Alma 62:51.)

An Exceedingly Curious Man

Two years following the death of Helaman and the year following Moroni's death, "an exceedingly curious man" by the name of Hagoth built and launched a large ship "into the west sea, by the narrow neck which led into the land northward." (Alma 63:5.) John L. Sorenson builds a rather persuasive case for locating this launching point at the Gulf of Tehuantepec in Mesoamerica. His careful reasoning is well worth consideration. [^5]

After taking several provisions and people with him, Hagoth returned the next year to build other ships and to take "many more people" and provisions with him to the land northward. "And it came to pass that they were never heard of more." (Alma 63:7-8.)

Students of Polynesian cultural history have sought to examine a possible link between Hagoth's voyages and the origins of the peoples of the South Pacific. R. Lanier Britsch has concluded that any such relationship "is not clear," [^6] and Sorenson contends that available anthropological information neither confirms nor refutes it. [^7] Still, Church leaders have taught from time to time that Polynesians are descendants of Lehi, through Hagoth's voyages or other such travels of the Nephites and Lamanites. [^8]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Daniel C. Peterson is assistant professor of Arabic at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Probably the best example of what we are discussing here is 4 Nephi 1:6. This verse has been greatly ridiculed by some critics of the Book of Mormon, but it is, in fact, an exceptionally good illustration of the annalist, Mormon, at work. Manifestly, he was summarizing other chronicles that he had before him. However, so little was happening in this period that even the conscientious Mormon began to omit annual accounts. It is apparently difficult even for inspired authors to make good and happy times live up to our taste for the sensational and the horrific. ''May you live in interesting times!'' is, in fact, an old Chinese curse. And Leo Tolstoy began his great novel Anna Karenina with the marvelous line: ''Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.'' As a glance at the headlines of supermarket tabloids or five minutes listening to gossip will show, we fallen humans tend to find negative news much more interesting than positive.
[^3] This would, of course, be a time when the chief judge would be easily accessible to a would-be assassin. (One thinks of the similar murder of Saudi Arabia's King Faisal in 1975.) It would also make for a memorable public ''statement,'' if such were the motive of Kishkumen's handlers.
[^4] The Assassins offer, in fact, a remarkably close parallel to the ''secret combinations'' of the Nephite and Jaredite traditions. Similar groups are also attested in ancient Mesoamerica. See, on the latter, John L. Sorenson, An Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, and Provo, Utah: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1985), pp. 300-309.
[^5] On Amalickiah's rise to power and his subsequent career, see Alma 46-49, 51.
[^6] Hugh W. Nibley, Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1967), p. 367. Hitler's attack on the Soviet Union was likewise an initial triumph but foolish and disastrous in the long term-as Napoleon could have predicted from personal experience.
[^7] One cannot fail to be reminded of the takeover of an already-existing conspiratorial group in the Weimar Republic-the National Socialist German Workers' Party-by an ambitious young ex-corporal named Adolf Hitler. If anyone could be said to be ''exceedingly expert in many words,'' it is he. Yet the pattern holds with remarkable consistency wherever such conspiracies arise: Lenin, Mussolini, and Castro also come to mind. All were leaders of revolutionary organizations; all were given to seemingly endless speeches.
[^8] This would not be anachronistic. We need only mention the Ping-fa (''The Art of War''), written about 400 B.C. by the Chinese military thinker, Sun-tzu. Its discussion of intelligence-gathering techniques shows that they are very ancient indeed.
