Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

9

THEIR OWN WORST ENEMIES

(Helaman 1-6)

Daniel C. Peterson [^1]

Chapters 1-6 of Helaman cover fully thirty years and offer us a fairly good glimpse into how Mormon the editor worked. This section of the Book of Mormon is largely an example of what is often termed "annalistic" writing. "Annals," a type of historical record-keeping with many Near Eastern parallels, feature a narrative of events listed year by year. This is precisely what we find in these chapters. With only a single exception, every one of the thirty years extending from the fortieth year of the judges up to the sixty-ninth (from 52 to 23 B.C.) is explicitly mentioned in these chapters. Sometimes, it is true, the year is cited very briefly, with only the most perfunctory indication of the state of the Nephites or of some event that occurred. Consider, for example, Helaman 3:1-2: In these verses, Mormon tells us very briefly that 49 B.C. was characterized by a small problem with pride which was settled in that same year, and that the years 48 and 47 saw little or no contention. Likewise, Helaman 3:32-33 chronicles very briefly the years 43-40 B.C., which saw the Nephites decline from "peace and exceedingly great joy" to a cancerously growing pride, and Helaman 4:1-10 carries us from 38 to 31 B.C. [^2]

We know already from the title page of the Book of Mormon that it is "an abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi," and we know that it was Mormon himself who was responsible for most of the condensation. It is possible, almost, to picture him at his task: He sits at a sort of writing table, surrounded by centuries of the records of his people. (Perhaps, given his central role in the violent events of his time, he does most of his writing in stolen moments in a military commander's field tent.) As he reads through the chronicles that have come to him, he knows he can include only a small portion in his abridgment. Therefore, under the inspiration of the Lord, he chooses what he thinks important and interesting, making occasional comments on the material he selects. However, he is too honest, too conscientious and thorough, to simply leave whole periods out of the record. Thus, for example, when he comes to his sources for the years 43-40 B.C., he finds a host of events and details that he cannot put into his book. But he can draw a lesson from them, and in this case the moral he distills from his source-chronicles is the evil of pride.

Rarely did Mormon go into an event or a sermon in great detail. Much of the record briefly summarizes what must have been a vast archive of source materials. (This is, of course, one of the frustrations of those who would read the Book of Mormon as an archaeological guidebook or as a geographical manual—such historical, archaeological, and geographical details as exist in it are there incidentally and sketchily. Mormon was serious about his assignment.)

Sedition and Invasion

Two spectacular events dominate the first chapter of the book of Helaman—a succession crisis accompanied by an assassination, and a successful but short-lived Lamanite seizure of the central Nephite lands. However, neither of these events proved as significant in the long term as the rise of a terrorist group that came to be called the "Gadianton robbers."

In 52 B.C., the great chief judge Pahoran I, who had presided over the Nephites during the recent period of wars, was dead. He left behind him a number of sons, among whom three—Pahoran, Paanchi, and Pacumeni—offered themselves as candidates to succeed their father. Each had his supporters, but Pahoran was chosen to occupy the judgment seat. Pacumeni gave up his claims and fell in behind the leadership of his brother, but Paanchi and his faction refused to reconcile themselves to their defeat. Instead, they began to plot a coup d'etat. This was, of course, something that the government could not tolerate, and Paanchi was arrested and condemned to death. (And, although the record does not explicitly say so, it is likely that he was, in fact, executed.)

Furious over the failure of their attempt at sedition, a group of Paanchi's partisans dispatched an assassin, one Kishkumen, to eliminate their triumphant rival. Pahoran II, whose reign can have lasted at the most only a few months, was murdered as he sat upon the judgment seat, apparently while giving audience. [^3]

Successful, Kishkumen escaped and returned to those who had sent him. The conspirators then swore an oath of silence. Intriguingly, the Nephite record tells us that it was a religious oath, "swearing by their everlasting Maker." (Hel. 1:11.) This seems odd to those of us unaccustomed to thinking of murder as a religious act. But the very word assassin was given to us by a religious sect of the medieval Near East who bore it as a name. The "Assassins" carried out daring murders for many years from mixed religious and political motives. [^4] And it would seem, from the story of Cain and Abel as recorded in the book of Moses, that such "religious" oaths go back to the very beginning of human history. (See Moses 5:29.) Indeed, the Book of Mormon declares that the origin of such murderous conspiracies can be traced back to Lucifer through Cain, "who was a murderer from the beginning." (Ether 8:15; cf. Hel. 6:26-30.) Following their strange, quasi-religious meeting, the successful conspirators dispersed to their various ordinary pursuits, blending into Nephite society in such a way that the government could find only some of them. So religiously—if we may use that word—did they keep their oaths, that many of the group, including Kishkumen himself, remained at large.

In that same year, Pacumeni, the last of the three sons of Pahoran the First who had contested the judgment seat, was chosen to govern the Nephite nation. His reign was destined, however, to be just as short as that of his assassinated brother. The king of the Lamanites, perhaps sensing that the turmoil at the heart of the Nephite government offered him a major opportunity for success, chose the year 51 B.C. for a major invasion. It may be remembered that this king, named Tubaloth, was not really a Lamanite. Rather, he was the son of Ammoron, the brother and successor of the notoriously unscrupulous Nephite adventurer, Amalickiah. [^5] Tubaloth had chosen yet another dissenter from the Nephites, by the name of Coriantumr, to lead his warriors. It was certainly a common practice of those who would lead the Lamanites into battle against the Nephites to choose apostates as their assistants. (See, for an example of this, Alma 43:6-7.) These apostates could be counted upon to feel a powerful hatred for the Nephites, which made them very useful to the great manipulators who appear with such appalling frequency in the pages of the Book of Mormon.

Tubaloth's apparent guess that the Nephites' contentions had given him an opening was quite correct. Security in the Nephite heartland was almost nonexistent, owing to the breakdown in the government. Moronihah, the supreme commander of the Nephite armies, evidently faced with a shortage of troops, had chosen to place those that were available to him on the perimeter of Nephite territory. That is, they were stationed all about the lands of the Nephites, on the borders. Under the circumstances, this was the reasonable thing to do. But it also had its risks, since, as in the case of the notorious Maginot line in World War II, any invader who could get past the initial resistance at the border would find few obstacles from that point on.

And that is precisely what happened. Coriantumr launched a kind of blitzkrieg, piercing the Nephite border defenses, and seized the capital city of Zarahemla. The conquest was quick and, for the moment, total. Pacumeni, the chief judge, was killed. Perhaps somewhat astonished himself at the scope of his victory, Coriantumr then marched toward the other chief Nephite city, Bountiful. En route, he mopped up what disorganized opposition he encountered—the Nephites having been taken so completely by surprise that they did not even have time to mobilize a challenge to him.

But Coriantumr would not reach Bountiful. As Hugh Nibley points out, his drive "had been successful because it was completely unexpected; and it had been unexpected because it was utterly foolish." [^6] It was utterly foolish because, having penetrated the Nephite defense on the circumference and seized the center of the land, Coriantumr was now, by the very nature of his own success, surrounded. Moronihah and his loyal subordinate officer, Lehi, caught the Lamanite intruders from before and behind, and, following a bloody battle in which Coriantumr was killed, left them no alternative but surrender. It was a humiliating defeat.

The Nephites must surely have breathed a massive sigh of relief at this point. If so, they were premature. For the remnants of the conspiracy that had killed Pahoran II were still at large, and, having previously tasted success, were apparently little disposed to go into retirement. While Coriantumr's daring invasion had been spectacular, it was to have little if any lasting effect; the future belonged, rather, in a very real sense, to the conspiracy that had begun the year before.

Gadianton

In the aftermath of the Lamanite invasion of 51 B.C., the Nephite government began to reconstitute itself. With all of the politically active sons of Pahoran I now dead, the choice of the people fell upon Helaman, the son of Helaman, to lead them. There was another, though, who wanted to rule. One Gadianton, who, like so many of the great agitators in the Book of Mormon, "was exceedingly expert in many words" (Hel. 2:4), at this point insinuated himself into the leadership of the old Paanchist conspiracy. If they would put him on the judgment seat, he said, he would reward them with power and authority. [^7] They agreed to make the attempt. And, although they would never be successful in Gadianton's lifetime, so complete was his control over them and so completely were they identified with him that ever afterward they were known among the Nephites as "Gadianton's robbers."

Kishkumen, therefore, their tried and tested instrument in the case of Pahoran II, was dispatched to assassinate Helaman. But the new chief judge had not forgotten about the seditionists still on the loose among his people, and he had inaugurated a partially successful plan to infiltrate their organization. As Kishkumen proceeded toward the judgment seat to reprise his earlier triumph, he was stabbed to death by one of Helaman's operatives, who then ran to the chief judge to alert him to the developing situation. (The smooth way in which Kishkumen is taken care of—in total silence; see Hel. 2:9—makes us suspect that this "servant" of Helaman's was more than an ordinary domestic helper or government office-worker. Indeed, he may well have been the ancient equivalent of a professional intelligence specialist. [^8])

Helaman's men were, however, unable to apprehend the wily Gadianton and his partisans. When Kishkumen did not return within the expected time, Gadianton did not wait around to be caught. Instead, he and his followers escaped from the city into the wilderness, where they and their successors would operate frequently in the next several centuries—offering a textbook illustration of guerrilla warfare. [^9] They did not fade away. "More of this Gadianton shall be spoken hereafter," wrote Mormon. "And behold, in the end of this book [by which he meant the Book of Mormon as a whole] ye shall see that this Gadianton did prove the overthrow, yea, almost the entire destruction of the people of Nephi." (Hel. 2:12-13.)

A Season of Emigration to the North

Helaman 3 records that many people left the land of Zarahemla in 46 B.C. and made their way into the land to the north. (In this northward emigration, they were following the precedent that had been set a decade earlier by Hagoth and his people. See Alma 63:4-10.) They traveled a great distance to a region of "large bodies of water and many rivers." (Hel. 3:4.) [^10] This area had previously sustained a large population that the Nephites identified with the earlier people known as the Jaredites (see Ether 1:1), and it had (in a situation we today can well imagine) been stripped of its timber. [^11] Thus, given the fact that they could not rely upon wood for their construction materials, these colonists resorted to working with cement, although they also imported wood from the south and attempted, as a long-term solution to the problem, to reforest the land. (Hel. 3:7-10.)

Meanwhile, back in the central Nephite lands, the affairs of the people alternately prospered and decayed. In 43 B.C., for example, peace had been established and the church was flourishing. Referring to this time, Mormon noted that such blessings were—and always had been—open to all. "Thus," he wrote, "we may see that the Lord is merciful unto all who will, in the sincerity of their hearts, call upon his holy name. Yea, thus we see that the gate of heaven is open unto all, even to those who will believe on the name of Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God. Yea, we see that whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a straight and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked—and land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out." (Hel. 3:27-30.) There was never any need in Nephite history—and there is none in our own time—for the suffering and misery that inevitably accompany wickedness. Yet we are prey to the same temptations as our ancestors. One of the hopes of the scriptural writers who so frankly recorded the sins and errors of their own times was that we of a latter day might profit from their experiences, and, in many cases, avoid repeating them. (See, for example, Morm. 9:31 and Ps. 78:5-8.)

How are we to avoid falling into the same snares as did many of those before us? In his entry for 41 B.C., Mormon gave us a large portion of the answer to that question. In that year, class distinctions began again to appear within the church, and some members of the church gave themselves over to pride and arrogance, and to mistreating the more humble among their brothers and sisters. But amidst all the pain and despite all the discomfort that must have attended this situation, these humble saints remained faithful to God and to their covenants. We are told that "they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God." (Hel. 3:35.) Thus, in the face of adversity and perhaps even pain, the Lord's true saints drew yet closer to him, through fasting, prayer, and humble obedience. His true saints do so today, as well.

"Except the Lord Keep the City . . ."

For the year 38 B.C., Mormon's abridgment refers briefly to the rise of contention within the church, which became so severe that it eventually resulted in violence and bloodshed. "And the rebellious part were slain and driven out of the land, and they did go unto the king of the Lamanites. And it came to pass that they did endeavor to stir up the Lamanites to war against the Nephites." (Hel. 4:2-3.)

However, the Lamanites had been beaten too many times in the memory of many still living to be very enthusiastic about yet another assault on the Nephites; they were, in fact, "exceedingly afraid." (Hel. 4:3.) The great war narrated in the Book of Alma had ended in utter Lamanite defeat only a little more than two decades earlier, and the spectacular campaign led by Coriantumr had concluded disastrously just thirteen years before. And both of these military catastrophes had been set in motion by dissenters from the Nephites, who often seemed more than willing to fight their erstwhile brethren down to the last drop of Lamanite blood. Thus, the Lamanites did not respond favorably to the incitements of this particular group of dissenters.

But yet another wave of apostates arrived in Lamanite territory in the following year, and, with them fanning the flames kindled by the earlier group, the resistance of the Lamanites began to weaken. Finally, in 35 B.C., the Lamanites again launched an invasion of Nephite territory. By the next year, they had taken Zarahemla, the Nephite capital. Moronihah and his armies attempted a counterattack, but by 31 B.C. they had managed to recover only half of their original possessions.

It is at this point that Mormon, himself a great military commander, interrupted his narrative to offer some observations on the reasons behind the Nephites' inability to respond effectively to this invasion. It is highly interesting, however, that his remarks not only do not center on military strategy and tactical considerations, but indeed do not raise such issues at all. Rather, he wrote, the cause of the Nephites' weakness was their wickedness—a wickedness that extended even into the church of God. "And it was because of the pride of their hearts, because of their exceeding riches, yea, it was because of their oppression to the poor, withholding their food from the hungry, withholding their clothing from the naked, and smiting their humble brethren upon the cheek, making a mock of that which was sacred, denying the spirit of prophecy and of revelation, murdering, plundering, lying, stealing, committing adultery, rising up in great contentions, and deserting away into the land of Nephi, among the Lamanites—and because of this their great wickedness, and their boastings in their own strength, they were left in their own strength." (Hel. 4:12-13, emphasis added.) [^12]

Mormon, of course, was sufficiently astute as a military strategist to know what it would mean for the Nephites to be left to merely their own strength. They had been vastly outnumbered by the Lamanites for many generations. If it came to a struggle of numbers, there could be only one outcome. Even the contemporary Nephites, wicked as they were, could see the disastrous implications of their course: "And they saw that they had become weak, like unto their brethren, the Lamanites, and that the Spirit of the Lord did no more preserve them; and they saw that the Lamanites were exceedingly more numerous than they, and except they should cleave unto the Lord their God they must unavoidably perish. For behold, they saw that the strength of the Lamanites was as great as their strength, even man for man." (Hel. 4:24-26.)

The greatness of Mormon, as well as of Moroni, consisted at least partially of the fact that, competent as the Nephites were, they continued to recognize that the Lord is the ultimate arbiter of human affairs. And they never became so obsessed with military tactics and technology as to forget that it is a nation's moral and spiritual resources that will most surely and fundamentally determine its fate. "Except the Lord keep the city," wrote the Psalmist, "the watchman waketh but in vain." (Ps. 127:1.) [^13]

Roots, Not Branches

Nephi, son of Helaman, knew, fully as well as would the later chronicler Mormon, that the fundamental problem of the Nephites at this period was spiritual rather than military. [^14] For this reason, he decided to devote all his energies to a spiritual solution. In that same year, 30 B.C., he resigned the judgment seat and, with his brother Lehi, undertook full-time preaching of the gospel.

The task was urgent if the Nephites were to be saved from themselves. "For as their laws and their governments were established by the voice of the people, and they who chose evil were more numerous than they who chose good, therefore they were ripening for destruction, for the laws had become corrupted." (Hel. 5:2.) This was precisely the situation King Mosiah II had foreseen as a frightening but remote possibility six decades earlier, when he abolished the monarchy and established the Nephite system of judges. The laws of the Nephites, he had said, were correct and divinely given. Further, he had said, placing the direction of the nation in the hands of a more representative form of government would tend to ensure the continuation of those laws in their correct form, since the majority of the people were unlikely to choose evil over good. But, he had continued, "if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you." (Mosiah 29:25-27.) And now, probably within the lifetimes of some who had heard him give that historic address, his fears had been realized. [^15]

The two brothers, Nephi and Lehi, began their missionary tour at the city of Bountiful and went through a number of the settlements still under Nephite rule. Finally, they entered the territories that had been under Lamanite control since the war of four years earlier. There, in occupied Zarahemla, they preached with such power that they were able to win over many of the Nephite dissenters who had stirred up that war in the first place. But their success did not end with that. They were also able to convert fully eight thousand of the Lamanites who had settled in the former Nephite lands.

Perhaps heartened by this almost unprecedented success, Nephi and Lehi crossed over into Lamanite country itself, into the old land of Nephi. There, however, the reception was rather more chilly. They were captured by a Lamanite army and were almost immediately cast into prison under sentence of death. (After all, they were Nephites, hereditary enemies of the Lamanites—and very prominent ones at that.)

But when their keepers came to fetch them for execution, the Lord intervened. "Nephi and Lehi were encircled about as if by fire, even insomuch that they durst not lay their hands upon them." (Hel. 5:23.) Encouraged by this, the brothers began to preach to their would-be killers—accompanied by earthquakes, a preternatural "cloud of darkness," and a voice from heaven. Quite evidently, the Lord was working here in a major way, for purposes important to him. And, indeed, his intervention in this instance would be of major historical importance, as succeeding chapters of Helaman make clear. [^16]

In the face of this supernatural display, the Lamanites were immobilized. Fortunately, one of the apostate Nephites was nearby. Such apostates could be the most bitter and implacable of enemies to the truths of God, but they were also capable—as in the case of this man, one Aminadab—of dredging up from deep in their memories the childhood teachings that would allow them to receive the gospel and teach it to others. [^17] Aminadab was able to answer the now earnest inquiries of the Lamanites, and to explain to them how they could be delivered from the cloud of darkness that had engulfed them.

Calling upon the Lord, the newly humbled Lamanites were delivered—and not only so, but they were visited by angels and commended by the heavenly voice. This powerful experience created an instant missionary force of three hundred eager converts. Within a short time, "the more part of the Lamanites were convinced of them." (Hel. 5:50.)

The Tables Turned

Nephi and Lehi had apparently had little success preaching among the Nephites, but they had triumphed spectacularly with the Lamanites and their sympathizers. There ensued now a period that explodes the oversimplified view of the Book of Mormon held by some who do not know it well. For them, the book is a long but uncomplicated tale of white-hatted Nephites and black-hatted Lamanite villains. Certainly, however, for the period under discussion here nothing could be further from the truth.

Helaman 6 describes a time when the Lamanites were righteous, and the Nephites wicked. The Lamanites even sent missionaries among their former enemies and were able, at least temporarily, to bring many of them to the truth and to repentance. And their prosperity was not simply spiritual. With many Nephites and Lamanites converted to the Lord, peace was established, barriers to free trade fell, and—as a predictable consequence—the entire land became prosperous. (Hel. 6:7-9.) [^18]

Wealth, however, carries with it major risks to the spiritual well-being of those who possess it. It can, in fact, come to possess them. Sometimes, oddly, those who have more than enough of worldly goods can become more obsessed with them than those who must struggle just to make ends meet. So it was with the Nephites at this time. "They began to set their hearts upon their riches." (Hel. 6:17.) They resurrected the old conspiratorial oaths and plans of Gadianton's band. The Lamanites were horrified at this new outbreak of Gadiantonism and made every effort to eradicate it. The Nephites, on the other hand, took to the new possibilities for organized evil with notable enthusiasm. By 24 B.C., their government was firmly in the hands of a revolutionary sect that had taken its immediate beginning in the political turmoil of a quarter of a century earlier.

Chapters 1-6 of Helaman end, thus, on a rather depressing note. From the gospel of Christ, the Nephites had turned to a set of practices and doctrines originating with his archenemy. Of these, Mormon wrote, "They were put into the heart of Gadianton by that same being who did entice our first parents to partake of the forbidden fruit—yea, that same being who did plot with Cain, that if he would murder his brother Abel it should not be known unto the world. And he did plot with Cain and his followers from that time forth." (Hel. 6:26-27; cf. Moses 5:29-33, 47-51.)

Nevertheless, Mormon did not leave us without hope. Under the inspiration of the Lord he gave us important keys for avoiding, individually and as a society, the fate of the Nephites, and he stressed to us that the Lord's blessing and help is available freely, and to all. Surely the counsel of Helaman to his sons, Nephi and Lehi, was preserved on the golden plates because of its continuing relevance to our day: "My sons," said Helaman, "remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall." (Hel. 5:12.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Foolish Rex C. Reeve, Jr., is assistant professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Vain Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 4:461.
[^3] Evil and devilish Mormon explained that it is the earth that revolves around the sun, and not vice versa. (Hel. 12:14-15.)
[^4] Quick to do iniquity
[^5] Slow to do good
[^6] Quick to hearken to the words of the evil one
[^7] Quick to set their hearts on the vain things of the world
[^8] Quick to be lifted up in pride
[^9] Quick to boast
[^10] Slow to remember the Lord their God
[^11] Slow to give ear to God's counsels
[^12] Slow to walk in wisdom's paths
[^13] Not desirous that the Lord their God, who created them, should rule and reign over them
[^14] Eager to set aside God's counsel
[^15] Not desirous that God should be their guide
[^16] For much of the remainder of the Book of Helaman, it is the Lamanites and not the Nephites who were the righteous followers of the Lord. This was, of course, the period of Samuel the Lamanite.
[^17] One recalls also the dissenters at Zarahemla. (See above, and Hel. 5:17.) This thought can be of comfort to parents who have watched their children reject their teachings and drift from or rebel against the Church. Gospel seeds once planted can bear fruit even many years later.
[^18] The principle underlying this situation is put in modern terms by the Nobel laureate economist Paul A. Samuelson, in his famous textbook, Economics, 8th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970), p. 668: ''There is essentially only one argument for free or freer trade, but it is an exceedingly powerful one, namely: Unhampered trade promotes a mutually profitable international division of labor, greatly enhances the potential real national product of all countries, and makes possible higher standards of living all over the globe.'' (Emphasis in the original.) That the Book of Mormon so well depicts the operation of an economic law that was not generally recognized in Joseph Smith's time-and perhaps is not yet, even today-is a good illustration of its plausibility as authentic historiographical material.
