Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

10

GOD'S WAYS OR MAN'S: THE ULTIMATE CHOICE

(Helaman 7-12)

Rex C. Reeve, Jr. [^1]

The struggle between good and evil in the pre-earth life has continued on this earth since the days of Adam. Men and women in each generation have again been faced with the opportunity to choose good over evil. The Lord in his wisdom has provided a plan whereby each individual can be instructed sufficiently. Then all are free to choose according to the desires of their heart, either the path leading to eternal life or the path leading to eternal misery. They are not free, however, to choose the results. They must receive the consequences unalterably decreed of God that are attached to the path of their choice.

In the plan of the Lord, sufficient knowledge is revealed so that both paths, with their consequences, are clearly defined. Men and women are then invited to come unto Christ and partake of the rewards prepared for the righteous. The Book of Mormon is unequaled in all literature in outlining both paths and their consequences and then inviting and leading people to Christ if they desire to follow him. Joseph Smith said, "I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." [^2] After someone has read and understood the Book of Mormon, he or she has been instructed sufficiently to know good from evil. The final judgment, with reward or punishment, will hinge on the person's choices based on knowledge received from this book. The Book of Mormon is a book of contrasts: Nephi versus Laman, Jacob versus Sherem, Alma versus Korihor. As the Book of Mormon defines these contrasts, it shows clearly the rewards for good and the punishments for evil. The plan and the path leading in both directions with immediate and long-range consequences are clearly defined.

In abridging the records from the large plates of Nephi, Mormon included a classic example of the contrast between good and evil in Helaman 7-12. These chapters paint the picture of the wickedness of the Nephites contrasted with the righteousness of Nephi. On the one hand Mormon was moved to decry forcefully the terrible disobedience of the natural man. (Hel. 12.) On the other hand he included the great blessings and powers the Lord gave to Nephi because of his personal righteousness and his consistent obedience.

In Helaman 7-12 Mormon abridged the record of Nephi, the son of Helaman. The events of this portion of the Book of Mormon took place shortly before the birth of the Savior, between 23 B.C. and 7 B.C. The condition among the Nephites was one of wickedness. Gadianton robbers filled the judgment seats and were using the powers of government to further their purposes. They condemned the righteous because of their righteousness and let the wicked go unpunished because of their money. (Hel. 7:4-5.) This great iniquity was a cause of sorrow to Nephi; he wished that he could have lived in the days of father Lehi and Nephi when they first came out of Jerusalem. Then he could have had joy because of the righteousness of his brethren. Yet he realized that he was called to his own day and was destined to experience sorrow his whole life because of his people. (Hel. 7:6-9.)

The wicked would not soften their hearts even after Nephi's preaching, his miracles, and his prophecies about the murder of the chief judge. The leaders of his people were angry when he spoke plainly about their corruption, their secret works, and their impending destruction. In the hardness of their hearts they even rejected the testimony and doctrine of Christ that had been given by Abraham, Moses, Zenos, Zenock, Ezias, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lehi, and Nephi. (Hel. 8-9.)

About 20 B.C. contention led to war among all the people of Nephi. The Gadianton robbers carried on their secret works, and it seemed that all the people would be destroyed. (Hel. 11:1-2.) In the second year of the war, Nephi pleaded with the Lord to send a famine to motivate the people to repentance rather than let them all die in war. (Hel. 11:4.)

According to Nephi's words, the Lord sent a famine; there was no rain and hence no yield of crops. The war ceased, but the death of thousands among the Nephites and the Lamanites continued because of the famine. (Hel. 11:4-5.) Faced with total destruction, the people began to remember the Lord and pleaded with Nephi to turn away God's wrath. (Hel. 11:7-8.) Seeing their repentance and their humility, Nephi asked the Lord to send rain and again bless the lands to be productive. Even though famine, pestilence, and death forced their repentance and humility, the Lord answered Nephi's prayers and sent rain. (Hel. 11:10-17.)

For some, the return to the Lord was permanent, and with thankfulness they remained faithful and steadfast. For others—a few at first, but the numbers steadily increased—repentance was short lived, and the memory of the goodness of the Lord was soon forgotten. Among those who dissented from their spiritual commitments, wickedness soon replaced righteousness. The secret plans of Gadianton were again sought out, and within a few years robbing, plundering, and murders returned and the people were again heading for destruction. (Hel. 11:24-37.)

The Unsteadiness of the Natural Man

The burden of abridging the records of this unstable and fickle period of Nephite history prompted Mormon to leave the history and make some general observations about humanity in this fallen state: "And thus we can behold how false, and also the unsteadiness of the hearts of the children of men." (Hel. 12:1.) "False" means being disloyal, unfaithful, or not being what one purports to be. "Unsteady" refers to being changeable, inconsistent, erratic in habits, purpose, or behavior.

Mormon continued by noting: "Yea, we can see that the Lord in his great infinite goodness doth bless and prosper those who put their trust in him." (Hel. 12:1.) This was the original promise of the Lord to every group he brought to the promised land: If they would keep his commandments they would be blessed and prosper. (Ether 2:7-9; 1 Ne. 2:20.) Mormon then wrote: "Yea, and we may see at the very time when he doth prosper his people . . . yea, then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy One." (Hel. 12:2.) To trample God under their feet means to set aside his counsels and to be disobedient to his commands. (See 1 Ne. 19:7.)

Mormon's next observation is, "And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him." (Hel. 12:3.) The experience of Nephi and his people with the famine provided ample evidence of the truth of Mormon's observation. Mormon continued by describing in plain terms the almost universal weaknesses in fallen humanity that are so offensive to the Lord.

Fallen men and women are (Hel. 12:4-6):

With the tendencies of fallen people to reject the Lord and not have him be their guide, Mormon declared that they are less than the dust of the earth. At least the dust obeys the voice of God when he commands it to move. At the voice of the Lord the hills and mountains quake and are broken up. By the power of his voice the whole earth shakes and the rocks tremble. In response to a divinely given command the earth actually stops in its rotation, thus lengthening the hours of the day. (Hel. 12:7-15.) [^3] The elements gladly obey the voice of the Lord, but people willingly choose to disobey.

People have the freedom to disobey the Lord, but if they do, they must accept the consequences of disobedience. The Lord has the power to curse people or to cut them off from his presence forever because of their sins. Mormon lamented the fate of those who are accursed of the Lord, for they cannot be saved and shall be consigned to a state of endless misery or everlasting damnation. Though Mormon strongly decried the wicked and inconsistent tendencies of humanity, in a spirit of sweetness he reminded us that repentance has been provided that they may be saved. (Hel. 12:20-26.) In his mercy God has provided the opportunity for all to repent and change. (Hel. 12:22.) For those who will do so and obey the voice of the Lord, the fallen tendencies of disobedience and sin may be overcome. Mormon prayed that people would be brought to repentance and bring forth good works so they could receive the blessings of the Lord, because through the law of justice all will be "restored unto grace for grace, according to their works." (Hel. 12:24.)

The Spiritual Consistency of Nephi

In stark contrast to the wickedness and disobedience Mormon had been reporting, he chose to include in his record a few verses about Nephi. At a time when Nephi was "much cast down because of the wickedness of the people . . . a voice came unto him saying: Blessed art thou, Nephi, for those things which thou hast done." (Hel. 10:3-4.) Almost point for point Mormon showed how Nephi exhibited the exact opposite of the fallen tendencies of most others. By faithful obedience Nephi found favor with the Lord and was given power and great blessings.

The Lord's word continued: "For I have beheld how thou hast with unwearyingness declared the word, which I have given unto thee, unto this people." (Hel. 10:4.) The Lord had been watching, was aware of Nephi as an individual, and knew what he had done. How important it was for Nephi to know that his efforts were known and appreciated. Those lonely years when he quietly withstood temptation or when he stood firm against the tide of sin and wickedness among his people were not in vain. An effective tool of Satan in deceiving people is to make them think that they are alone and that no one knows or cares. For those who will listen, the Lord answers Satan's deceit simply by saying "I have beheld." The thing the Lord beheld that pleased him so was Nephi's consistency. The Lord used the word "unwearyingness" at least twice to describe how Nephi had declared the word. This is in contrast to the observation of Mormon about the unsteadiness of the hearts of others. A sign of spiritual maturity is the tendency to be consistent and steadfast in righteousness or in service.

The Lord continued to tell Nephi why he was pleased with him: "And thou hast not feared them, and hast not sought thine own life, but hast sought my will, and to keep my commandments." (Hel. 10:4.) Nephi did not fear those who opposed the will of the Lord; he did not yield to their demands that he join them; and he did not compromise his standards for fear of losing the favor of the world. This kind of spiritual courage, that displaces the fear of men, is another essential element in gaining favor with the Lord.

In contrast to Mormon's words that the natural man does not desire that God should be his guide or rule over him, Nephi was singled out for his willingness to do the will of the Lord, even ahead of his own will and desires. Putting God's will first in one's life is essential to pleasing the Lord. The first principle of the gospel is faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Faith can be defined as coming to know the true Christ while never having seen him, or coming to know the true Christ well enough (not having seen him) that one desires to do things the Lord's way. The natural result of a successful effort to come to know Christ is the desire to do his will and keep his commandments. (See John 14:15, 23; 1 John 5:3.)

The Lord said to Nephi: "Because thou hast done this with such unwearyingness, behold, I will bless thee forever." (Hel. 10:5.) What does it mean to have the Lord say he will bless someone forever? Could there be a better promise given to anyone? From the Book of Mormon and from other modern revelations we know that eternal life—exaltation in the celestial kingdom—is the blessing the Lord provides forever (in the eternities) for his faithful children. From Mormon's account we learn that Nephi had done two basic things to bring such a treasured reward: First, he had not sought to do his own will, but rather the will of God. (Hel. 10:4.) Nephi brought his own will and desires into complete harmony with those of the Lord. Second, Nephi had unwearyingly labored to deliver the word of the Lord to the people. He had proven that he could be trusted to always fill his assignment, and he demonstrated a consistent concern for the welfare of his people.

In addition to the blessings of the eternities, Nephi was promised blessings and power in this life: "And I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will. . . . Ye shall have power over this people, and shall smite the earth with famine, and with pestilence." (Hel. 10:5-6.) Nephi was given power to have anything he desired: he could control the elements, he could have power over the people, and no one could stand against him. By diligent obedience he had gained the confidence of the Lord. God knew that Nephi could be trusted with this power and that he would not ask for anything contrary to the will of heaven.

The Lord continued by saying, "I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Hel. 10:7; cf. Matt. 16:16-19.) In addition to his other powers and blessings, Nephi was given power to perform acts in this life that would be valid and binding after death and recognized in heaven. For those of his people who would listen and respond, Nephi had the power to seal upon them the blessings of an eternal family and eternal increase.

Nephi continued to prove faithful to the trust and confidence of the Lord. He was instructed to declare to the people that the Lord God, who is almighty, was displeased with them and would destroy them if they did not repent. (Hel. 10:11.) The next verse recorded by Mormon seems to sum up the attitude and commitment of Nephi that was so appreciated by God. "When the Lord had spoken these words unto Nephi, he did stop and did not go unto his own house, but did return unto the multitudes who were scattered about upon the face of the land, and began to declare unto them the word of the Lord." (Hel. 10:12.) Even when faced with the difficult task of bringing his people to repentance, Nephi obeyed immediately. He demonstrated what it really means to have an eye single to the glory of God, to have one's own will swallowed up in the will of the Lord. It would have been natural to want to return to the comfort and security of his own home and family, but on this occasion Nephi did not return to his house until after he had accomplished with exactness the desires of the Lord.

Conclusion

Fallen humanity is an enemy to God. The natural man is quick to do wrong, and slow and unsteady in his obedience to the will of the Lord. The Lord, in order to reclaim his disobedient children, must chasten them with afflictions, suffering, and even natural disasters.

Each person is faced with the choice between good and evil as part of the plan of life. The Book of Mormon outlines the choices available and clearly defines the consequences. In these chapters Mormon gave examples of both extremes. The Nephite people were wicked, and only war, famine, and death could command their attention long enough to bring them to even a temporary state of repentance. Because of their choice to pursue their own desires and follow the wickedness of the world, they were in danger of being cursed forever. In contrast, Mormon included the account of Nephi, which shows that faithfulness is possible even when the majority of the people choose to disobey the Lord.

What Nephi did to gain such great favor and blessings from the Lord could be repeated by anyone in any generation. No insurmountable task is required to please the Lord; steady obedience brings the approval and blessings of heaven. The obedience and blessings of Nephi follow a pattern that is consistent throughout the Book of Mormon and that all true disciples of Christ must follow to gain the same blessings. Nephi, when faced with the choice between convenience and inconvenience, between good and evil, sought for and obtained the things of God. He rejected the allurements of his world and increased his effort to build his faith and be constant in his obedience to the Lord. He sought the welfare of his people and subjected his own desires to those of God.

Nephi was given the assurance that his efforts were pleasing to God and was thus given the right to use the Lord's power for the benefit of his people. He was given the sealing power of the priesthood, the power to bind and loose on earth and in heaven. Finally, he was given the assurance that his consistent obedience had prepared him for the blessings of the Lord throughout the eternities. He had successfully met the challenges of mortality and received the assurance that his salvation was secure. His soul was at rest. And his example is before us.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Sorrow for sin. Mae Blanch is professor of English literature at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Abandonment of sin. The principle of choice in salvation has been emphasized by many prophets. Moses so taught the children of Israel when they were wandering in the wilderness. (See Deuteronomy 30:15-20.) Lehi in his last sermon to his sons before his death made the same declaration. (See 2 Nephi 2:26-29.)
[^3] Confession of sin. Spencer W. Kimball, ''Be Ye Clean,'' Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year (Provo, 4 May 1954), pp. 8-9.
