Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

11

SAMUEL THE LAMANITE

(Helaman 13-16)

Mae Blanch [^1]

As the time of the Savior's birth approached, the Nephite people became increasingly wicked. Following a brief period of repentance after the Lord chastised the people with a famine, they rapidly fell back into their sinful ways. Mormon recorded, "In the eighty and second year they began again to forget the Lord their God. And in the eighty and third year they began to wax strong in iniquity. And in the eighty and fourth year they did not mend their ways. And it came to pass in the eighty and fifth year they did wax stronger and stronger in their pride, and in their wickedness; and thus they were ripening again for destruction." (Hel. 11:36-37.) But the Lord never destroys a people without giving them every chance to return to him. As he had done many times before, he sent a prophet to plead for their repentance and to warn them of the inevitable consequences if they refused to hear his message.

We know little about Samuel except that he was a Lamanite, that he came to Zarahemla to preach the word of God, that he was rejected and cast out by the people and was returning to his own country when he received revelation from the Lord that he should go back to the city and "prophesy unto the people whatsoever things should come into his heart." (Hel. 13:3.) Perhaps the fact that he was a Lamanite—from a people estranged from the Lord and the Nephites until some of them had been converted—would make his message from the Lord more impressive. But such was not the case. When he returned to the city, the wicked Nephites would not let him enter, and he was forced to mount the wall surrounding Zarahemla to tell them what the Lord would have them know. Through Samuel's voice the Lord warned the Nephites of what would befall them unless they repented. Samuel recounted the ways in which they had offended the Lord, warned them of the immediate and long-range consequences of their sins, prophesied of the birth and death of the Lord Jesus whose mission made repentance possible, gave them an account of the faithful Lamanites as an example of true repentance, and made clear the choice the Lord was giving them. The account of Samuel closes with a brief description of the reaction of the people who heard him.

The Sins of the Nephites

The great sin of the people in Zarahemla was that they substituted love of riches for love of God. Samuel told them that they were "cursed because of [their] riches" and that the wealth itself was cursed because they had not heard and obeyed the commandments of God, who gave them the riches. Their materialism was summed up by Samuel: "Ye do not remember the Lord your God in the things with which he hath blessed you, but ye do always remember your riches." (Hel. 13:21-22.) And their materialism brought the usual train of sins: pride, boasting, ostentatious life-style ("great swelling"), envy, strife, malice, persecution, murder, and "all manner of iniquities." If we read current news accounts of crimes committed for the sake of riches, we recognize that, as Ecclesiastes says, there is nothing new under the sun. (Eccl. 1:9-10.)

With such sins on their conscience, the Nephites further offended God by rejecting his prophets. They not only cast them out of their cities, but they also mocked and stoned them, even killing them and doing "all manner of iniquity unto them, even as they did of old." (Hel. 13:24.) But they deceived themselves with the boast that had they lived in earlier days they would not have slain the prophets or cast them out. They maintained that their present action was justified since the prophets like Samuel whom they rejected were false prophets. Samuel pointed out their hypocrisy when he described those they accepted: "Behold, if a man shall come among you and shall say: Do this, and there is no iniquity; do that and ye shall not suffer; yea, he will say: Walk after the pride of your own hearts; yea, walk after the pride of your eyes, and do whatsoever your heart desireth—and if a man shall come among you and say this, ye will receive him, and say that he is a prophet." (Hel. 13:27.) The Nephites then were not willing to take the first step of repentance: to acknowledge their sins. Instead they quieted conscience with the soothing and false counsel of "foolish and blind guides." (Hel. 13:29.)

The Consequences of Unrepented Sin

As Samuel stood on the wall of the city, the Lord "put into his heart" many prophetic warnings of what would befall the wicked who failed to repent. The prophecies deal with immediate consequences and the long-range destruction that would wipe the Nephites from the earth. The first consequence of their sins, which evidently had taken place already, was the withdrawal of the Lord's Spirit. Since the people were unwilling to listen to Samuel, they gave evidence that they had already lost the Spirit of the Lord. Now the Lord warned them that he would "suffer them no longer." (Hel. 13:8.) Nevertheless, immediately after the warning that he would "visit them in [his] fierce anger," the Lord promised mercy to those who would repent. (Hel. 13:10-11.) That there were some righteous individuals in the city was the only thing that saved it from immediate destruction. But when the time came that they would cast out the faithful, the city would be destroyed. The curse placed on the land was an ironically appropriate punishment for the sins of the people. Since they worshipped riches rather than God, the Lord cursed the land so that "whoso shall hide up treasures in the earth shall find them again no more . . . save he be a righteous man and shall hide it up unto the Lord." (Hel. 13:18.) The evil was not in the riches, but in the hearts of those who loved them more than they loved God. Therefore, they would lose the thing they had set their hearts on. Allied to this loss would be the loss of wealth and goods, which would become "slippery"; nothing could be kept safe. "Behold, we lay a tool here and on the morrow it is gone; and behold, our swords are taken from us in the day we have sought them for battle." (Hel. 13:34.) It is not surprising that in a society where wealth is more important than God, stealing should be raised to a fine art. Theft, fraud, deception, loss of treasure buried to keep it safe would bring the people to poverty—the loss of their false god.

It is interesting to note that the first warning from Samuel concerned the "heavy destruction" that would come upon the people when 400 years should pass. We know from the account in 3 Nephi that the wicked then alive would be entirely destroyed at the coming of the Savior, just a few short years away. But Samuel's warning seems to refer to the final battles of the Nephites, when they were destroyed by the Lamanites. We know that the Nephite people had been greatly blessed by the Lord throughout their history, that they had witnessed many miracles and had been taught the true gospel by many great prophets. Yet despite this evidence of God's love, they would fall into evil ways and bring destruction on themselves. Samuel must have seen that this pattern would be repeated until they would finally destroy their whole civilization.

Samuel Prophesies of Christ

Perhaps to give hope to those who may have been turned toward repentance, Samuel prophesied of the coming of the Savior in specific detail. He set an exact time: five years would pass and "then cometh the Son of God to redeem all those who shall believe on his name." (Hel. 14:2.) He told the people that there would be two days with no darkness, although they should see the rising and setting of the sun, but "the night shall not be darkened" on the night before the Savior would be born. There would also be a new star and other "signs and wonders in heaven." (Hel. 14:3-6.) How appropriate that the signs accompanying the birth of the "light of the world" should be wonders appearing in the light of heaven. The fulfillment of Samuel's prophecies is recorded in the first chapter of 3 Nephi. Samuel also told the Nephites the meaning of Christ's birth. "And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall believe on the Son of God, the same shall have everlasting life." (Hel. 14:8.)

Samuel spoke of the Savior's death, its meaning for mankind, and the signs that would accompany it. He taught that Christ "surely must die that salvation may come." (Hel. 14:15.) His death would be necessary to bring about the resurrection—overcoming physical death—which would bring man back into the presence of God. It would overcome the first spiritual death when Adam and Eve were cast out of God's presence for disobedience. Finally, "it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth" shall not be cast out of the presence of God a second time, thus suffering a second spiritual death, "cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness." (Hel. 14:18.) Mortals will now have a choice: "He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye can do good and be restored unto that which is good, or have that which is good restored unto you; or ye can do evil, and have that which is evil restored unto you." (Hel. 14:31.) [^2] Thus the death of the Savior makes repentance and the resulting forgiveness possible; without Christ's sacrifice we would not have that choice.

Despite the necessity of Christ's death, Samuel warned the Nephites that it would be accompanied by terrifying signs. As light was the sign of his birth, so darkness would be the sign of his death: "In that day that he shall suffer death the sun shall be darkened and refuse to give his light unto you; and also the moon and the stars; and there shall be no light upon the face of this land, even from the time that he shall suffer death, for the space of three days, to the time that he shall rise again from the dead." (Hel. 14:20.) Light would be extinguished from the earth and the whole world of nature would be in turmoil. There would be tempests with thunder and lightnings, earthquakes so severe that mountains would become valleys and valleys mountains; many cities and highways would be destroyed. All of these violent signs would be given, said Samuel, "to the intent that there should be no cause for unbelief among the children of men." (Hel. 14:28.) The fulfillment of these prophecies about the death of Christ is found in 3 Nephi 8. If the people of Zarahemla had only accepted Christ and looked forward to his coming, they could have avoided the destruction of which Samuel had been sent to warn them.

The Lamanite Example of True Repentance

Perhaps in an effort to shame the Nephites into repenting, Samuel reminded them that "they have been a chosen people of the Lord; yea, the people of Nephi hath he loved, and also hath he chastened them; yea, in the days of their iniquities hath he chastened them because he loveth them." On the other hand, the Lamanites had been rejected for the evil committed "because of the iniquity of the tradition of their fathers." (Hel. 15:3-4.) But once they had been converted by righteous Nephites, they had proved more faithful than the Nephites. The example of the Lamanites follows the steps of repentance outlined by President Spencer W. Kimball:

Once converted, the Lamanites experienced such sorrow for their killing of the Nephites that their hearts were changed. They gave a clear sign of abandoning their sin by burying their weapons of war. Their fear that they might again be tempted to slay another human being is indicated by their willingness to "be trodden down and slain by their enemies" rather than "lift their swords against them, and this because of their faith in Christ." (Hel. 15:9.) Such action clearly confesses that their former action against those they considered enemies was sinful. They could not restore the lives they had taken, but they would give their own lives rather than commit further sin. Samuel further testified that the Lamanites were now doing the will of God: "The more part of them are in the path of their duty, and they do walk circumspectly before God, and they do observe to keep his commandments and his statutes and his judgments according to the law of Moses." (Hel. 15:5.) Not only did they follow the will of God in their daily lives, but they also sought "with unwearied diligence" and much success to convert the rest of the Lamanites. Samuel said, "There are many who do add to their numbers daily." (Hel. 15:6.) The prophet could rightfully point to the Lamanites as an example of true repentance for the Nephites, since they believed in "the holy scriptures, yea, the prophecies of the holy prophets, which are written, which leadeth them to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto them." (Hel. 15:7.) Their contrast to the Nephites is reflected in Samuel's prophecy on their eventual fate. Unlike the Nephites, they would not be destroyed, but their days would be prolonged. They would suffer "afflictions," they would be "driven to and fro upon the face of the earth, and be hunted, and . . . smitten and scattered abroad, having no place for refuge," yet the Lord would show them mercy. (Hel. 15:12.) Yet their descendants would "be brought to the true knowledge . . . of their Redeemer, and . . . be numbered among his sheep." (Hel. 15:13.) Through Samuel, the Lord offered the same opportunity to the Nephites; if they would repent as the Lamanites had done, they too would be saved.

The Result of Samuel's Message

The great power of Samuel's sermon brought some of the Nephites to repentance. They sought out Nephi to confess their sins and be baptized. But most of the crowd attacked Samuel, throwing stones or shooting arrows at him in their anger at the truth. When Samuel was protected from their missiles by the Spirit of the Lord, many more of the Nephites recognized him as a prophet, believed his words, and also went to be baptized by Nephi. Nephi was likewise prophesying of the same things Samuel had foreseen, and thus those who believed Samuel were once again part of the Lord's people.

But the greater part of those who heard Samuel rejected his warning, rationalizing that the power that protected him from their attack was of the devil. When they called on their captains to seize him, Samuel "did cast himself down from the wall, and did flee out of their lands, yea, even unto his own country, and began to preach and to prophesy among his own people." (Hel. 16:7.) Samuel had followed the Lord's instructions, and some souls had been saved. The rest had assured their own destruction by rejecting God, who had lovingly sent Samuel in a last effort to reclaim them.

Their way of dealing with Samuel's prophecies when they began to be fulfilled is characteristic of those who have ears but will not hear. They "began to depend upon their own strength and upon their own wisdom, saying: Some things they may have guessed right, among so many; but behold, we know that all these great and marvelous works cannot come to pass." (Hel. 16:15-16.) They reasoned themselves into total disbelief, saying that if Christ should come, and if he were the Son of God, he would surely show himself to them as well as to those in Jerusalem, never realizing that had they believed, they would indeed have been privileged to see the Savior, that he would indeed visit his followers in their land.

To explain the courage and persistence of Samuel in bringing God's plea to their hostile ears, they "imagine[d] up in their hearts" a plot conceived by Samuel to keep them in ignorance by trying to convince them of "a wicked tradition," handed down by their fathers, of a "great and marvelous thing" which would happen in a distant land. They could have no firsthand knowledge of such a miracle, but those who maintained that it was so, did so to keep them in ignorance. Since the wicked Nephites would have to depend on the believers to teach them, they would be kept as servants to Samuel and those who taught what he taught. The lack of reason in such an explanation evidently did not trouble them, "for Satan did stir them up to do iniquity continually; yea, he did go about spreading rumors and contentions upon all the face of the land, that he might harden the hearts of the people against that which was good and against that which should come." (Hel. 16:22.)

Speaking the Word of the Lord

With our knowledge of the fulfillment of Samuel's prophecies, we might wonder how the people of Zarahemla could have been so blind to the truth. But Samuel's experience might be considered a typical one for the Lord's prophets. Elder Richard L. Evans once spoke of the general public reaction to the words of a prophet of God:

We find ourselves often quoting the words of the prophets, and, lest there be some doubt as to what a prophet is, we submit that it is one who, under the appointment and inspiration of the Lord God, speaks truth as the spirit moves him, regardless of what the world is thinking and regardless of what men would like to hear.

And, therefore, a prophet is seldom popular, and the cost of being a prophet is always great, for he may be called upon to say those things which are not pleasing, . . . and he may find himself fighting against a tide of mass-misconception, and, as history records, be stoned, crucified, banished, ridiculed, shunned, or rejected. For the truth is not pleasing unto all men, and time has proved that majorities are not always right. . . .

It is not important that a prophet should say those things with which you and I are in full accord. But it is important that you and I should bring ourselves into full accord with those things which a prophet speaks by virtue of his office and calling. [^4]

Samuel fits this description. He spoke the word of the Lord to a people, the majority of whom were unwilling to hear him. But their unwillingness did not change the truth of his words or the fate that would fall upon them because they rejected him. The book of Helaman ends with his account, just one year before the birth of the Savior, which would mark the beginning of the fulfillment of all his prophecies.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Terrence L. Szink is a doctoral student in ancient Near Eastern studies at the University of California at Los Angeles.
[^2] Nephi and Alma in fact led very similar lives. Among other things both were judges (Nephi-Helaman 3:37;Alma HD->- Mosiah 29:42-44), both gave up their judgeship to devote more time to service in the church (Nephi-Helaman 5:1-4;Alma HD->- Alma 4:20), both were thrown into prison because of their preachings but were miraculously delivered (Nephi-Helaman 5:21-44;Alma HD->- Alma 14:22-28), both were granted great power (Nephi-Helaman 10:5-10;Alma HD->- Alma 8:31), and, finally, weary with the wickedness of their people, both wished for something different than the circumstances in which they found themselves: Nephi wanted to live in the days when Lehi and his family left Jerusalem (Helaman 7:7), and Alma wanted to speak with the voice of an angel (Alma 29:1-3).
[^4] Sidney Sperry included verses 4-21 of the first chapter of 3 Nephi in what he entitled ''the American Gospel,'' maintaining that it serves as a prologue to Christ's teachings in the Nephite record in the same way the story of the birth of the Savior is an introduction to the New Testament Gospels. (The Book of Mormon Testifies, p. 286.)
