Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

13

THE DOWNFALL OF THE NEPHITE NATION: LESSONS FOR OUR TIME

(3 Nephi 6-10)

Gary Lee Walker [^1]

During the twenty-five years that passed after the birth of Jesus Christ in Bethlehem, both the Nephites and the Lamanites were greatly troubled by the Gadianton robbers. By A.D. 13, this band of thieves and murderers "had become so numerous, and did slay so many of the people, and did lay waste so many cities, and did spread so much death and carnage throughout the land, that it became expedient that all the people, both the Nephites and the Lamanites, should take up arms against them." (3 Ne. 2:11.) Amid this great crisis, "the converted Lamanites" joined the Nephite nation.

The next eight years were times of wars and great trials for the Nephites. Lachoneus, the righteous governor of the land, gathered his people into the central areas of Zarahemla and Bountiful and appointed Gidgiddoni, a great military and spiritual leader, to guide the Nephite army. (3 Ne. 3:13-19.) Hearkening to the counsel of their inspired leaders, the Nephite people repented "of all their sins; and they did put up their prayers unto the Lord their God, that he would deliver them in the time that their enemies should come down against them to battle." (3 Ne. 3:25.)

The faith of the righteous was rewarded, for all the Gadianton robbers were either captured or slain by the Nephite armies. (3 Ne. 5:4-6.) Thus, the Nephites "put an end to all those wicked, and secret, and abominable combinations, in the which there was so much wickedness, and so many murders committed." (3 Ne. 5:6.)

The years between A.D. 26 and A.D. 29 saw the Nephites prosper and again become an industrious people. Demonstrating that they were true Saints, the Nephites preached the word of God to the incarcerated robbers and gave them the opportunity to "repent of their sins and enter into a covenant that they would murder no more." (3 Ne. 5:4.) The repentant prisoners were mercifully allowed to work on their own lands so that they might provide for themselves and live peacefully with the Nephites. (3 Ne. 6:3.) Law and order was established because "they had formed their laws according to equity and justice." (3 Ne. 6:4.) Building programs ensued that included the establishment of new cities and the repair of many old ones. (3 Ne. 6:7.) Transportation improved by way of new roads and highways that were "cast up" (3 Ne. 6:8), suggesting that the latter were major construction projects that provided significant routes to important centers throughout the land.

Pride: A Tool of Satan

Within three short years, however, the great wealth and prosperity enjoyed by the people became a burden with which they could not cope, and pride began to enter into the hearts of the rich and the powerful. (3 Ne. 6:10-11.) Many years before, the prophet Jacob had warned: "Wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the world. For because they are rich they despise the poor, and they persecute the meek, and their hearts are upon their treasures; wherefore, their treasure is their god. And behold, their treasure shall perish with them also." (2 Ne. 9:30, 42.) The words of Jacob would find part of their fulfillment in the punishments that were soon to be meted out to the proud and boastful Nephites.

The record states that class distinctions developed and that learning became more important to the rich than humility. (3 Ne. 6:12-13.) The resulting feelings of inequality caused not only class distinctions but an emergence of church factions, "insomuch that the church began to be broken up" (3 Ne. 6:14) in A.D. 30. With the exception of a small group of faithful, steadfast Lamanites (3 Ne. 6:14), a general apostasy from the church resulted from the insidious pride of the people. This self-exaltation blinded the multitude from the truth as taught by the Lord's servants and provided the key for Satan to again have "great power, unto the stirring up of the people to do all manner of iniquity, and to the puffing them up with pride, tempting them to seek for power, and authority, and riches, and the vain things of the world." (3 Ne. 6:15.) With this power, the Evil One was given unlimited license to lead the Nephites to "a state of awful wickedness." (3 Ne. 6:17.)

More condemnation was brought upon the heads of the Nephites because they rejected the teachings of the brass plates and the servants of the Lord. "Now they did not sin ignorantly, for they knew the will of God concerning them, for it had been taught unto them; therefore they did wilfully rebel against God." (3 Ne. 6:18.) The high and mighty of the land joined in numerous conspiracies and had the inspired prophets murdered, which was not only an offense against God but also against the laws of the land. (3 Ne. 6:21-24.) These servants of the Lord had both warned the people of their sins and testified of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, which was shortly to take place. (3 Ne. 6:20.) Pride and wealth had closed the eyes and ears of the haughty Nephites and had opened the gate for Satan to seduce them into doing his bidding. Secret combinations were formed again, and covenants were made to destroy the people of God and the established government of the land. (3 Ne. 6:27-30.)

The Fruits of Rejecting God's Servants

As the wickedness of the people increased and those who had made covenants in the secret orders gained more power, the government collapsed and the chief judge was murdered. The resulting chaos brought the Nephite society into disorganization. (3 Ne. 7:1-2.) With no centralized government, the people turned to a tribal organization. Mormon recorded that they separated "one from another into tribes, every man according to his family and his kindred and friends; . . . and every tribe did appoint a chief or a leader over them; and thus they became tribes and leaders of tribes." (3 Ne. 7:2-3.) [^2] Although a greater stability would be restored after the appearance of the resurrected Lord, it is interesting to note that this "tribal" organization would again prevail after the final collapse of the government around A.D. 400. One thousand years later, when the Americas were "discovered" by the Europeans, a tribal organization would still exist among the descendants of these people.

The secret combinations, now in full power, managed to elevate a leader called Jacob to the position of king. He is described by Mormon as "one of the chiefest who had given his voice against the prophets who testified of Jesus." (3 Ne. 7:10.) Although a disjointed social structure now existed in the land (3 Ne. 7:14), the various groups were united against the secret combination that terrorized them (3 Ne. 7:11). This is not to say that these tribal units were righteous, for we are told that "their hearts were turned from the Lord their God, and they did stone the prophets and did cast them out from among them." (3 Ne. 7:14.)

This period in Nephite history was a time of terror, anarchy, and bloodshed. Into this maelstrom came one of the greatest prophets of all time. Nephi, son of Nephi and grandson of Helaman (3 Ne. 1:2-3), had been given custodianship of the records by his father in A.D. 1. Greatly blessed and endowed with many spiritual gifts, this great Nephite prophet bore a final witness to the wicked of his generation. His ministrations and preachings were attended by great miracles that he performed in the name of the Lord. (3 Ne. 7:15-26.) The wicked recognized the power and authority of this great prophet, but, as is tragically true in all generations, the truth only made the wicked angry. Thus, they rejected the word of the Lord from his authorized servant. (3 Ne. 7:18, 20.) Nephi labored for three years among his people, crying repentance and baptizing those who would heed his words. By A.D. 33, he apparently experienced some success, for he ordained "men unto this ministry, that all such as should come unto them should be baptized with water." (3 Ne. 7:23-25.) The number of converts would have been relatively small, however, when one considers the destruction that would shortly befall this wicked generation.

Hundreds of years earlier, Nephi, son of Lehi, was given a vision of the great calamities that would befall the Nephite nation in A.D. 34. (1 Ne. 12:2-5.) Forty years before the crucifixion of the Messiah, Samuel the Lamanite enumerated in glorious prophecy the exact nature of the events that would accompany the voluntary death of the Savior on the cross at Golgotha, outside Jerusalem. (Hel. 14:20-28.) As A.D. 34 dawned, the people were now ripe in iniquity for the judgments of God.

On the other side of the world, at the appointed hour, the Master hung on the cross and voluntarily gave up his life with the words: "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit." (Luke 23:46.) As the veil of the temple was torn asunder by a great earthquake, the American continent also experienced great calamities—storms, tempests, earthquakes, thunders, and lightnings "as never had been known in all the land." (3 Ne. 8:5-7.) The severity of these natural calamities cannot be overemphasized. Mormon wrote that they continued for three hours (3 Ne. 8:19), an incredible span of time when one considers the damage done to many great cities by earthquakes lasting only a few seconds. [^3]

Through the violence and destructive powers of these elements, controlled and used by the Lord to fulfill His purposes, [^4] "the face of the whole earth became deformed." (3 Ne. 8:17.) The destruction was devastating: great cities were destroyed by fire or covered by the sea or with earth; plain areas, once level and smooth, were rippled and disfigured and covered with rocks and boulders thrown up from the bowels of the earth; great chasms swallowed entire towns and their populations; buildings were leveled; people were carried away in great whirlwinds, never to be seen again. (3 Ne. 8:8-18.) Jacobugath, the center of government of king Jacob and the secret combinations, was burned with fire "because of their sins and their wickedness, which was above all the wickedness of the whole earth, because of their secret murders and combinations; for it was they that did destroy the peace of [the] people and the government of the land." (3 Ne. 9:9.)

After the three hours of destruction had passed, a thick darkness fell over the land, "insomuch that the inhabitants thereof who had not fallen could feel the vapor of darkness." (3 Ne. 8:20.) As terrible as the natural calamities had been, the ensuing darkness must have been equally horrifying if not more so, for it lasted for three days. (3 Ne. 8:23.) During this time, the darkness was so oppressive that no light shone from the sky and no fire could be kindled. (3 Ne. 8:21-22.) Recognizing their sins and the evils that they had allowed to consume their lives, the survivors howled and lamented. (3 Ne. 8:23-25.) We are not told how many of the Nephites perished, but the number must have been great when one considers the magnitude of the natural disasters unleashed by the Lord. Mormon wrote: "It was the more righteous part of the people who were saved, and it was they who received the prophets and stoned them not; and it was they who had not shed the blood of the saints, who were spared." (3 Ne. 10:12.)

The Voice of the Lord to a Stricken People

As the remaining Nephites lamented their tragic state in the oppressive darkness, the voice of the Lord was heard throughout the land, dispelling the spiritual darkness that had so long engulfed the nation. (3 Ne. 9:1.) The extent of the destruction was revealed to the survivors. The Messiah stated that he had caused the deaths of the wicked. His purpose, he said, was "to hide their wickedness and abominations from before my face, that the blood of the prophets and the saints should not come up any more unto me against them." (3 Ne. 9:8.) After promising eternal life to all who would repent and follow him, Jesus declared his divinity and announced that the preparatory law of Moses was now "fulfilled." (3 Ne. 9:14-17; 15:5.) The new requirement of a broken heart and a contrite spirit was declared. (3 Ne. 9:20.) After Jesus attested to his resurrection, silence fell over the land. (3 Ne. 9:22; 10:1.)

The words of the Master had a tremendous impact on the multitude, for "they did cease lamenting and howling for the loss of their kindred which had been slain." (3 Ne. 10:2.) Although there would be more tears and lamentation (3 Ne. 10:8), hope was surely beginning to return to the stricken people. Later, the voice of the Lord again spoke to the Nephites, telling them how many times he had warned them and had tried to save them from the calamities, if only they would have heeded his words spoken by his servants. (3 Ne. 10:4-7; compare D&C 43:24-25.) During this period, there were great noises because the earth was in constant commotion. (3 Ne. 10:9.) As the elements and the earth returned to normal, the people found joy in their survival and in the words spoken by the Lord. (3 Ne. 10:10.)

Mormon concludes his words by testifying that the events of the past three days had been foretold by many prophets, including Zenos and Zenock, whose records are still lost to us. (3 Ne. 10:15-17.) He revealed that the Nephites and Lamanites were descendants of the ancient Israelite prophets, which may help account for the extensive quoting of their words in the Book of Mormon. [^5] He ended his account by announcing the greatest event recorded in the Book of Mormon: the appearance of Jesus Christ to the righteous remnants of the Nephites and the Lamanites.

Lessons for Our Time

President Ezra Taft Benson has stated that the Book of Mormon "was written for our day." [^6] He has counseled us to ask ourselves while studying these scriptures: "Why did the Lord inspire Mormon (or Moroni or Alma) to include that in his record?" [^7] Asking this question can bring great insight as one reads the Nephite history recorded in 3 Nephi 6-10. Although there are many lessons to be learned by carefully studying these chapters, the striking parallels between the ancient Nephite nation and our generation are significant.

The period of Nephite history under consideration took place just a few short years before the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. Our present generation is living in the twilight years before his glorious second coming. The condition of our time is very similar to that of the Nephite nation prior to A.D. 34. They were greatly blessed with learning, and many acquired great wealth and position. Paul, speaking of our time, said that people would be "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth" (2 Tim. 3:7), referring to the gospel plan. These words equally apply to the Nephites before A.D. 34. Their pride and self-aggrandizement blinded them to the teachings of the servants of the Lord. Their achievements in learning caused them to forsake righteousness. How strikingly poignant are the words of Mormon as he described the sorry state of his people who "had turned from their righteousness, like the dog to his vomit, or like the sow to her wallowing in the mire." (3 Ne. 7:8.)

The pride and self-exaltation of the Nephites created an atmosphere of contention that resulted in class distinctions and church factions. Satan was given power to control the minds and actions of the wicked Nephites. Today, he again is exhibiting great strength in disrupting societies and world peace. The earth abounds with false religions, false philosophies, and church factions. Moroni, in speaking of our time, said it would be "a day when the power of God shall be denied, and churches become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts; yea, even in a day when leaders of churches and teachers shall rise in the pride of their hearts, even to the envying of them who belong to their churches." (Morm. 8:28.) He continued on to prophesy that there would be "churches built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins." (Morm. 8:32.) The Nephites allowed wickedness to corrupt and destroy their churches and society. Can we not learn from their bad example and avoid disputations and controversies that might cause contention in our churches, communities, and families?

As the apostasy in the land rapidly increased, the Nephites again entered into forbidden covenants and secret combinations. Prophets and authorized ministers were killed, and Satan ruled supreme. Again, the parallels to our day are obvious. Speaking of our time, the Lord said that "iniquity shall abound" (JS-M 1:30) and that "the whole earth shall be in commotion" (D&C 45:26). Our day witnesses political unrest, terrorist activities, destruction of life and property, wars and riots, and political movements that are committed to the overthrow of righteous institutions. Does not this sound like Nephi's description of his day (compare 3 Ne. 6-7)? As we contemplate these tragic occurrences of our time, we need only to study 3 Nephi 8-9 to ascertain the fate that awaits the wicked of our generation if they continue on their present course.

Moroni, by the gift of prophecy, foresaw our day and wrote in vivid detail about the conditions that would prevail in it. (See Morm. 8:26-40.) In vision, he saw our time plagued by the very problems mentioned in the preceding paragraph. The Doctrine and Covenants explicitly describes the events of the last days and the signs and wonders that will be displayed and recognized by the righteous prior to the Second Coming. The Nephites also had been given prophecy and signs that told of the death and resurrection of the Lord. (3 Ne. 8:3-4.) If the signs had been heeded instead of doubted, many thousands more of the Nephites would have been saved from the destructions and calamities that accompanied the death of the Savior on the cross.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie, in speaking about the details of the events recorded in 3 Nephi 8-10, wrote: "No single historical event in the whole Book of Mormon account is recorded in so great detail or at such extended length as the fulfillment of the signs signifying that Jesus had been lifted up upon the cross and had voluntarily laid down his life for the world." [^8]

The Lord desired that these events be testified of in our generation; this is one of the purposes of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon in our time. We can benefit from the careful reading of the tragic events that befell the major portion of the Nephite nation. Surely these things are a pattern of what is yet to come at the Second Coming. The Lord has preserved these accounts for our generation to learn from and to serve as a warning to the wicked of the world. In the Lord's preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, he said: "The voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated. . . . And the voice of warning shall be unto all people." (D&C 1:2, 4.)

The voice of the Lord can be found within the pages of the Book of Mormon. It is for our day. The catastrophic events that befell the wicked Nephites at the time of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ are a pattern of occurrences yet to come. Our goal is to prayerfully search the Book of Mormon and study the lessons contained therein, that we may be warned and prepared.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (3 Ne. 12:3.) In one sense, to be "poor in spirit" is to realize that we are nothing in mortality without a Savior. Without an atoning sacrifice, none could leave mortality to return to the presence of God. In fact, all would die only to become angels to the devil, to remain in misery forever. (2 Ne. 9:8-9.) How destitute and poor indeed! S. Brent Farley is an instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion at Utah State University.
[^2] "Blessed are all they that mourn." (3 Ne. 12:4.) Who would not mourn at the hopeless prospect of our fallen state? But they shall be comforted. Our lost and fallen state may be overcome. A Savior was provided whereby all will be resurrected and all may be saved in the kingdom of God. What great comfort! A Savior atoned for the sins of all who would accept him. Thus all may become blessed and happy if they so choose. Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1960), vol 3, pp. 205-6.
[^3] "And blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth." (3 Ne. 12:5.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "In the scriptural sense the meek are the God-fearing and the righteous. . . . [They] are those who keep the commandments and are fit persons to associate with Him in whom meekness was perfected." [^3] To be meek is to be mild and gentle. It does not imply weakness, for the prime example of meekness calmed the angry waves, cast out devils, and performed mighty miracles. To be meek is to be humble. It is a characteristic of strength. Bruce R. McConkie, The Millennial Messiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1982), p. 698.
[^4] "And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost." (3 Ne. 12:6.) The closer we grow to God, the greater is our desire to improve. This desire is like thirsting for water or hungering for food. It is a critical longing for nourishment and health: it is the longing for the health of the spirit. Those who sup at the table of the Lord become as dependent upon his words for their spirits as they are upon food for their bodies. The satisfaction of that desire for righteousness is fed by the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost. Losing that closeness is akin to the threat of starvation. Noah Webster, 1828 American Dictionary Of The English Language (San Francisco: Foundation For American Christian Education, 1985), ''merciful.''
[^5] "And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." (3 Ne. 12:7.) The merciful are those who are "compassionate; tender; unwilling to give pain; not cruel." [^4] Such shall receive the blessing of mercy, which "tempers justice, and induces . . . [forgiveness of] trespasses and injuries, and to forbear punishment, or inflict less than law or justice will warrant. In this sense, there is perhaps no word in our language precisely synonymous with mercy. That which comes nearest to it is grace." [^5] Ibid., ''mercy.''
[^6] "And blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see God." (3 Ne. 12:8.) To be pure is to be free from the taint of unrepented sins. This, of course, is only possible through the gospel of Jesus Christ. Though none are perfect in this life (except for the Savior), those who are striving to the best of their abilities qualify for the ongoing and renewable quality of purity of heart. Such may obtain closeness to God and see him. This may be symbolic in the sense of recognizing the hand of God in all things and feeling his influence in life, but its apex is literal. This promise has the seal of God, who testified: "It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie testified: "We have the power—and it is our privilege—so to live, that becoming pure in heart, we shall see the face of God while we yet dwell as mortals." [^6] It is not a requirement that we see God in this life in order to be saved; it is a possible blessing. However, it is a guaranteed right of all who are pure in heart to see God, whether in this life or the next, or in both. Bruce R. McConkie, Conference Report, Oct. 1977, p. 52.
[^7] Robert Young, Young's Analytical Concordance to the Bible (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Companion, 1970), p. 28.
[^8] Marion D. Hanks, Conference Report, Oct. 1973, pp. 15-16.
