Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

14

THE APPEARANCE OF CHRIST TO THE PEOPLE OF NEPHI

(3 Nephi 11-14)

S. Brent Farley [^1]

"I am the light and the life of the world." (3 Ne. 9:18.) The apex of the Book of Mormon is revealed in the personal appearance of Jesus Christ to the more righteous part of Lehi's descendants, who had witnessed the sweet and the bitter in the years preceding this grand event. A night with no darkness had heralded the day of the Savior's birth. Numerous conversions were countered by rampant apostasy. Civil war raged as the Gadianton robbers threatened destruction. Murderous villains took the lives of prophets, while others like Nephi stood with such power that none could disbelieve their words. Finally, God himself rained destruction upon rampant wickedness as city after city was destroyed in the Americas. As the devil laughed in his darkened kingdom, the Savior revealed his word and his will to those who remained upon the earth, saved from destruction by their righteousness.

Soon after the holocaust, a great multitude of people was gathered, marveling about the great changes that had occurred in the earth's surface. Significantly, they were gathered near the temple in Bountiful, a land whose name signifies a plenteous bestowal of gifts. As they were discussing the mission of Christ, "they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven," a small or quiet voice that "did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn." (3 Ne. 11:3.) A solemn awe overshadowed them as they cast their eyes around, not understanding the communication. A second time the voice came. A second time they did not understand. As they attuned themselves in deep concentration, they were prepared by the Father for the introduction of his Son. When the voice came the third time, they listened with more than their physical ears, for they were able to decipher the sound as they gazed intently toward heaven, whence the voice came. "Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him." (3 Ne. 11:7.)

The very reading of such a glorious account brings peace to the heart; but how much more so when we read that "they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them." (3 Ne. 11:8.) None dared to speak; eyes were fixed upon this being they thought to be an angel. But what a glorious thrill must have surged through their souls as they heard the words, "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world." (3 Ne. 11:10.) Before them stood a God; a premortal brother; a perfect man now clothed with a resurrected, immortal body of flesh and bone. He had paid the awful price of the sins of all humanity in the garden of Gethsemane and upon the cross. He was, under the Father, the very creator of the earth upon which he now stood. He was, in the sight of the gathered multitude, the one being in all eternity who could open to them the gates of heaven if they so believed.

Who could possibly comprehend the emotions of those who gazed at their Savior? But imagine further their feelings at his invitation: "Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world." (3 Ne. 11:14.) Obediently and with solemn reverence they went forth "and thrust their hands into his side, and did feel the prints of the nails in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going forth one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come." (3 Ne. 11:15, emphasis added.) The prints of the nails in his hands and his feet! Little children had felt; the aged touched; the sick and the lame reached out to his hands; not one soul was left out. All had come to Christ, one at a time, and gained the sure witness of his divinity. In unity they cried out: "Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High God!" (3 Ne. 11:17.) Then they fell again to their knees in worship.

Authority and Ordinances

What would the Lord do next? How long would he stay? Would he have any more to say to his people? If so, what would have greatest priority? He called Nephi from the congregation. Nephi was the prophet, the mouthpiece of the Lord; he would stand as the representative of Christ upon that continent when Jesus again ascended into heaven. He would speak to the church, as directed by the Lord. Then the Twelve were called forth. As with the old world, so with the new: The Church of Jesus Christ would be directed by a prophet at the head of the church and a quorum of twelve other leaders. (3 Ne. 11:18-22.)

Primary emphasis was placed upon baptism. In just twenty-two verses containing the opening remarks of the Savior, the word baptism (or one of its forms) occurs nineteen times. (3 Ne. 11:22-12:2.) Without valid baptism by one having authority from the Lord, we could not return to dwell with the Father and the Son in heaven. Baptism is, in the literal and eternal sense, a unifying ordinance between God and his people. Hence, the principle of unity as exemplified in the Godhead was connected with the instructions regarding baptism: "After this manner shall ye baptize in my name; for behold, verily I say unto you, that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one." (3 Ne. 11:27.) Given the new church organization (no longer under the law of Moses), all were to be baptized as an entrance into the Lord's newly formed church. [^2]

In the beginning of chapter 12, the Twelve were commissioned and presented to the multitude "to be your servants" (verse 1); they were given power and authority from God to unify his children in harmony with gospel principles and ordinances. If the people accepted the Lord's representatives as ministers of the gospel and complied with their preaching, God himself would baptize them "with fire and with the Holy Ghost." (3 Ne. 12:1.) Believing God's servants was tantamount to believing God.

The Beatitudes

The resurrected Christ next gave to the disciples the unifying course of instruction that he had given to his disciples in Judea, now known as the Sermon on the Mount. This beautiful discourse provides a pattern by which one can follow the example of the Savior and strive for perfection. The prelude is referred to as the Beatitudes.

Being "poor in spirit" is not to feel continuous hopelessness because of our fallen state; it is to feel continuous dependence upon the Savior. We realize the difference between God and his mortal children, appreciate the condescending love of the Savior, and humbly seek to unify ourselves with God. We never attribute greatness to ourselves but seek to emulate the example of the Atoning One to the best of our mortal ability, ever aware of the need to overcome weakness and resist temptation.

When the humble Saints mourn over trial and difficulty, they are promised comfort. They are given the peace that comes from Christ, wherein their hearts are not to be troubled or afraid. (John 14:27.) They are given "the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost" to teach them and guide them. (John 14:26.) When death, trial, or tragedy strikes, their hearts are softened and comforted by the Spirit of Truth, which whispers peace and opens the perspective of eternal joy. If one sins, the mourning is a godly sorrow that brings repentance, forgiveness, and the comfort of restored peace. (2 Cor. 7:10; Mosiah 4:3.)

There follow two more beatitudes (peacemaking and enduring persecution); but what could be a more transcending point than to qualify to do what the Nephite/Lamanite culture was now doing—to see the face of the Lord?

The Higher Plane of the Gospel

Those who follow the path marked by the beatitudes are accounted as "salt" and "light"! (3 Ne. 12:13-16.) Salt has a distinctive property (or savor) that enhances the flavor of foods. Its addition tends to bring out the best of that to which it is added. So would the Saints become the enhancers of those who accept the gospel. The commission to do this had a warning, however. If the savor was lost, then "wherewith shall the earth be salted? The salt shall be thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot of men." (3 Ne. 12:13.) Salt does not lose its savor by age, but rather by mixture and contamination. Correspondingly, the gospel does not lose its savor by age, but rather when it is mixed with the philosophies of men and devils. Salt is also a preservative. The gospel was intended to be preserved in purity. Its effects were to preserve the Saints in righteousness that they might attain their celestial destiny. How appropriate was the Lord's analogy!

The Saints, the "salt of the earth," were to be the lights to which people in a darkened world could seek. In the book of Revelation, the church organizations were compared to candlesticks, and the servants in those organizations were compared to stars. (See Rev. 1:20.) Jesus himself had "his countenance . . . as the sun shining in his strength." (JST, Rev. 1:16.) What was the light that would emanate from the mortal servants? It was not the light of their own development, but rather the light of the master they served. "Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do." (3 Ne. 18:24.) The commission to be a light to the world had two aspects: (1) a missionary charge to guide others to Christ, and (2) a charge to remain faithful and constantly progress until perfect.

The symbolism of light and salt were appropriately placed together in the sacred text. Old Testament sacrificial rituals used salt as a token of gospel covenants. (See Lev. 2:13 and Num. 18:19.) The Lord explained to Joseph Smith: "I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me." (D&C 45:9; emphasis added.) Thus salt represents the gospel covenant, which is a light to the world.

The higher plane of Christianity for which the law of Moses served as a schoolmaster was now contrasted with the letter of the Mosaic law. It was well known that killing was condemned and carried an awful penalty; but short of this heinous sin, anger also carried a condemnation that could bring the punishment of hell. Even the manifestation of contempt ("Raca") or belittlement ("thou fool") toward a fellow being carried a punishment so terrible as to merit a sentence in hell. (3 Ne. 12:22.) To come to God required one's best efforts to live in unity with one's brothers and sisters. (3 Ne. 12:23-26.)

Next to murder in seriousness was adultery, expressly forbidden by God. Jesus also noted the seriousness of lust: "Whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart." (3 Ne. 12:28.) The thoughts precede the actions: "For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) Jesus was teaching accountability for thoughts as well as actions; either of these could cost one's salvation. Controlling the mind and impulses could obliterate the outward commission of serious sin. Knowing that Satan often clothes temptations in attractive apparel, Jesus commanded denial; therein would one take up his cross (3 Ne. 12:29-30), for it would be a battle and a trial to learn to resist the influence of Satan.

What was the ultimate goal the Lord had in mind for those who controlled their thoughts and actions? It was perfection. "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Ne. 12:48.) The gospel is a ladder of progression whose top rung sits in eternity, but whose legs are planted firmly upon the earth. The Savior was teaching how to take the steps on this side of the veil. In so doing, his followers would be building a Zion society. They would be striving to be "of one heart and one mind, and [to dwell] in righteousness." (Moses 7:18.)

Attached to that definition of Zion was the injunction that there be "no poor among them." The Savior expressed his will that "ye should do alms unto the poor." (3 Ne. 13:1.) The giving of alms is most often associated with money; the Greek origin, however, suggests "kindness" and "kind acts." [^7] Monetary support is only a portion of almsgiving. The Saints were to help the unfortunate; but they were not to do it to build their own reputations. They were to do it to build up the poor and help establish Zion. "Take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven." (3 Ne. 13:1.)

The Lord's Prayer

As with the giving of alms, so with the offering of personal prayers. The hypocrites prayed in public for public reward, and that was what they received. The Saints were to pray in secret to their Eternal Father, who, hearing in secret, would reward them openly. Vain (or fruitless) repetitions were unnecessary and unhelpful; lengthy prayers (for the sake of expounding) were not approved. (3 Ne. 13:5-8.) The Lord repeated to his American Saints the concise model referred to as "the Lord's prayer." The total prayer could easily be read in less than thirty seconds. The intent was not to encourage short prayers but to make a valid contrast with the "much speaking" and the "vain repetitions" of the hypocrites, who prayed for show. In doing so, the Lord left a basic pattern to guide the secret prayers of the children of his kingdom.

"Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name." (3 Ne. 13:9.) All prayers were to be directed to the Father of our spirits, the Heavenly Parent from whose presence we came at birth. It was to be a Father/son or Father/daughter relationship between him and his offspring; that attitude and that goal should temper our prayers.

"Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." (3 Ne. 13:10.) (The phrase "thy kingdom come" was dropped, the establishment of the church possibly fulfilling that plea). We typically give thanks early in our prayers for the blessings we have received. We then typically (and rightfully) ask for the Lord's help in our daily concerns. Whatever the plea, whether for self or family, for sacred purpose or secular, the guiding principle is that it should all be in harmony with God's will. That is a guiding principle of prayer.

"And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." (3 Ne. 13:11.) Since "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" (Rom. 3:23), then all need the redemptive power gained through repentance and forgiveness. The debts we would most want to be relieved of are our debts to justice when we have sinned. Such relief is available through repentance. And, as we are seeking mercy, we are required as a prerequisite to extend mercy to others. "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all." (D&C 64:10.) This relieves the one offended of the destructive burden that resentment and anger can cause. [^8]

"And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil." (3 Ne. 13:12.) Or, as the Joseph Smith Translation of Matthew 6:14 clarifies, "And suffer us not to be led into temptation." A basic and regular element of our prayers should be a plea for help in avoiding the pitfalls and snares laid by Satan. He is a major adversary to God, and thus to God's children. Temptation is a constant threat, and the devil a constant foe; it is necessary and wise in our prayers to seek guidance to follow the path of the Lord and avoid the crossroads offered by Perdition. Our plea is that in the end we will be delivered from evil forever to dwell with God in his kingdom of glory.

"For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever." (3 Ne. 13:13.) We acknowledge that God's plan is perfect and that his kingdom is the greatest reward for the human race. His is the glory forever, which he is willing to share with those who humbly and diligently seek to do his will on earth. As thoughts precede actions, so do prayers precede progress.

Building upon the Rock of Christ

When harmony exists between prayers and actions, mortal endeavors build eternal rewards "where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal." (3 Ne. 13:13.) But it requires the commitment of the heart; if the heart is set on earthly treasures, then the reward will be that of the hypocrites: an earthly reward. When the heart is set upon the things of heaven, then the light of heaven is borne in upon that soul until the fullness of light is attained. No compromise is possible between light and darkness. "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." (3 Ne. 13:24.) "Mammon" refers to riches. The problem is not that a good person cannot be rich and righteous; the problem is that if the person serves riches, he or she has crowded out the true God for a false one of worldly origin. (3 Ne. 13:19-24.) How many souls have been purchased by Satan through wealth!

After giving special instructions to the Twelve (3 Ne. 13:25-34), Jesus addressed the topic of judgment. In the familiar words of the biblical account, he said, "Judge not, that ye be not judged." (3 Ne. 14:1; Matt. 7:1.) The Joseph Smith Translation adds an important qualification: "Judge not unrighteously, that ye be not judged: but judge righteous judgment." (JST, Matt. 7:1-2.) Life is a series of judgments, but caution is especially needed when we judge our fellow beings. Misjudgment is common because we know not the hearts, minds, and intents of those around us. Jesus asked: "Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?" (3 Ne. 13:3.) The mote referred to a speck or chip, whereas the beam referred to a large wooden beam used in constructing buildings. Before we can judge another and offer help, we must be rid of the impairments to our own vision, which may consist of false information, hypocrisy, sin, or any number of things. Being in tune with the Spirit is the only safe basis for judgment: "He that is spiritual judgeth all things." (1 Cor. 2:15.) Some priesthood leaders (such as bishops and stake presidents) are given a special commission of judgment; they are to judge under the inspired direction of their Master, to whom all judgment is given. (John 5:22.)

The Savior promised that to those who asked would be given; to those who knocked, the door would be opened. (3 Ne. 14:7-8.) What were the qualifications for worthy asking and receiving? The golden rule (3 Ne. 14:12) and the keeping of the commandments (referred to as a strait or narrow gate and a narrow way—verses 13-14). Those who entered therein and remained upon the path of obedience would obtain. Those who led in other directions were "false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves." (3 Ne. 14:15.)

Their fruits would give them away (3 Ne. 14:16-23), for many of their hearts would be set on mammon, whether of money, of public acclaim, or of Satanic obedience. Their homes would be upon sandy foundations and would fall when the storms came. (3 Ne. 14:26-27.)

Those who brought forth good fruit would be solidly anchored, for they followed the teachings of the Savior. They listened and applied; they progressed along the narrow way as explained in the Sermon on the Mount; they judged righteous judgment and were humble. They sought from the Lord and obtained from his hand. They were the ones who heard the Lord's sayings and did them. They were likened "unto a wise man, who built his house upon a rock." (3 Ne. 14:24-25.) The rock upon which they built was Christ. The Christ now stood before them, teaching eternal truths with eternal rewards. God himself translated heavenly concepts into language appropriate to the understanding of his listeners. His truth was consistent and constant. It was intended for all: for those who were listening firsthand, and for those millions who would later read the account. The scripture produced came directly from the lips of the Savior of the world; he knew whereof he spake. And so do those who follow his teachings, for the Spirit of Truth enters their hearts just as readily as in the days of the Nephite and Lamanite congregation there, in his presence. [^9]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Robert J. Matthews is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] See also the chapter heading to Moroni 2, and Joseph Smith, the ''Wentworth Letter,'' History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev., edited by B. H. Roberts (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 4:538.
[^7] Robert Young, Young's Analytical Concordance to the Bible (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Companion, 1970), p. 28.
[^8] Marion D. Hanks, Conference Report, Oct. 1973, pp. 15-16.
[^9] For further information on the Sermon on the Mount, see Robert A. Cloward, ''The Sermon on the Mount in the JST and the Book of Mormon,'' pp. 163-200 in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. M. S. Nyman and R. L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985); Catherine Thomas, ''The Sermon on the Mount: The Sacrifice of the Human Heart,'' pp. 236-50 in Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels, ed. Kent P. Jackson and Robert L. Millet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1986).
