Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

15

CHRIST'S AUTHORITY, HIS OTHER SHEEP, AND THE REDEMPTION OF ISRAEL

(3 Nephi 15-16)

Robert J. Matthews [^1]

Jesus was speaking to about twenty-five hundred assembled Nephites on his first visit to them after his resurrection. (3 Ne. 17:25.) He had just shown them his glorified body and told them he was the promised Messiah whom the prophets had testified would come. They had examined the marks of the crucifixion in his hands, feet, and side. He selected twelve special disciples and testified to the multitude of their divine calling. (3 Ne. 12.) These twelve were, in fact, apostles, although the record does not specifically so designate them. (See Moroni 2:1-3.) [^2]

Jesus then gave the Nephite twelve and multitude instructions similar to the Sermon on the Mount, with some important variations due to the different setting and circumstances of this sermon compared to the one in Palestine. (Compare Matt. 5-7 with 3 Ne. 12-14.)

The Authority of Jesus

That portion of the Savior's instruction that parallels the Sermon on the Mount seems to have a natural ending at the close of 3 Nephi 14, concluding with the parable of the houses built on sand and on rock. However, readers of the New Testament will remember that Matthew 7:28-29 adds a comment that Jesus' hearers in Palestine were "astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes." The JST records this as: "He taught them as one having authority from God, and not as having authority from the Scribes." (JST Matt. 7:37.) At first glance it appears that this item concerning Jesus' authority is missing in the 3 Nephi account. Its parallel however, is in fact found in the subsequent chapter, in 3 Nephi 15:1-10. The two-verse, one-sentence observation of 28 words in Matthew is in 3 Nephi a ten-verse, thirteen-sentence, 364-word declaration by Jesus. The 3 Nephi expression includes several concepts dealing with Jesus' authority. First Jesus affirmed that the instruction he had just given them contained "the things which I taught [in the Holy Land] before I ascended to my Father" (v. 1). He then explained: "I am he who gave the law" to Moses, and "the law in me is fulfilled" (vv. 3-8). He further established his identity, and thus his authority, by saying that he, Jesus, was the God who covenanted with Israel (v. 5). Earlier, at the beginning of this visit, he had declared to the multitude that he was "the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth," and had "been slain for the sins of the world." (3 Ne. 11:14.)

Jesus further attested to his authority by saying, "I am the law, and the light. Look unto me . . . and ye shall live," and he promised that unto those who obey him to the end, he would "give eternal life." (3 Ne. 15:9.) The authority theme is continued with Jesus saying: "I have given unto you the commandments; therefore keep my commandments. And this is the law and the prophets, for they truly testified of me" (v. 10, emphasis added).

It would be difficult to miss the point that Jesus in these verses was giving an unqualified statement of his authority and primal position (under the Father) both on earth and in heaven. As noted, this is a much stronger statement than the brief comment by Matthew at the close of the Sermon on the Mount, yet it is parallel to it in its placement at the end of the Sermon.

Other Sheep

The remaining fourteen verses of chapter 15 deal chiefly with a detailed explanation that the Nephites and the Lamanites are the "other sheep" once spoken of by Jesus to the Jews in Palestine, as recorded in John 10:16. Most readers of the Book of Mormon are aware that Jesus visited these "other sheep" in America. However, the Savior was so definitive on this point that it deserves particular attention. The passage in John 10:16 was cited by Jesus in 3 Nephi 15:16-17 as follows: "This much did the Father command me, that I should tell unto them: That other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd."

Jesus said that the Father had commanded him to teach the Jews about the "other sheep," but when he did so (as explained in this verse), the Jews failed to understand the meaning. It appears that it was not only the multitude of the Jews but even the brethren in the Jewish Church who missed the meaning. This failure came from "stiffneckedness and unbelief." Therefore Jesus was "commanded to say no more of the Father" to the Jews about the subject. (3 Ne. 15:18.)

The Jews thought that the "other sheep" were the Gentiles. (3 Ne. 15:22.) This is suggested also in John 7:35, when the unbelieving Jews said, "Will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles?" This misconception has been a popular interpretation by modern biblical scholars also. [^3]

It is at this point in Jesus' explanation that the doctrine becomes extremely valuable to our understanding of Jesus' worldwide mission, and also as an aid to the interpretation of scripture. Jesus' words to the Nephites are as follows:

Verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. And they [the Jews] understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching. And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost. But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me, and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me. (3 Ne. 15:21-24.)

The crux of the statement is that Jesus will not at any time manifest himself personally nor by his audible voice to a Gentile nation. Such an event is declared to be a blessing reserved for those who are of the house of Israel. The Gentiles are to be converted through the preaching of those who are of Israel, and Jesus will manifest himself to the believing Gentiles through the Holy Ghost. This same concept is referred to in 1 Nephi 10:11, wherein Lehi said that Jesus would "make himself manifest, by the Holy Ghost, unto the Gentiles." This procedure is a provision of, and is in harmony with, the covenant to Abraham, as stated in Abraham 2:9-10, that Abraham's descendants have the responsibility of the ministry and will carry the priesthood and the gospel unto all nations.

Emphasis on the covenant of Abraham, which places a responsibility for the ministry on his literal seed, does not mean that a faithful Gentile has less access to the blessings of heaven than do those of Abraham's seed. Once a Gentile has the gospel and obeys it, all the blessings of eternal life are offered to that person. But in the timetable and economy of the Lord, in the meridian of time and even before, those of literal Israelite lineage had the first opportunity to receive the gospel, and also the responsibility to carry it to the other nations. It is a priority of opportunity, not only in the time of Jesus, but ever since the time of Abraham himself.

The Sheep of Yet Another Fold to Be Visited

In addition to clearly establishing the identity of the Book of Mormon peoples as the "other sheep" of John 10:16, the Savior told of yet other "sheep" of Israel whom he would visit. He had already alluded to this third group in 3 Nephi 15:20 with the words: "The other tribes hath the Father separated from them [the Jews]; and it is because of their [the Jews'] iniquity that they [the Jews] know not of them." In other words, because of their own unbelief the Jews did not know of the Nephites or of the other tribes.

The Savior then told the Nephites about the third group, the so-called "lost tribes," by saying precisely these things about them: (1) "I have other sheep, which are not of this land [America], neither of the land of Jerusalem, neither in any parts of that land round about whither I have been to minister." (3 Ne. 16:1.) (2) These other sheep had never been visited personally by the Savior, but (3) they were about to receive such a visit. This would probably be similar to his visit to the Nephites. We read: "They of whom I speak are they who have not as yet heard my voice; neither have I at any time manifested myself unto them. But I have received a commandment of the Father that I shall go unto them, and that they shall hear my voice, and shall be numbered among my sheep, that there may be one fold and one shepherd; therefore I go to show myself unto them." (3 Ne. 16:2-3; emphasis added.)

General information concerning the "lost tribes" need not be a mystery. They were captured and led away from the land of Palestine about 735-721 B.C. by the Assyrians. (2 Kgs. 15-17.) They consist primarily of all the tribes of Israel except Judah and Benjamin, which are the Jews. Nephi makes reference to them in his own day, about 130-150 years after the tribes had departed from Palestine: "It appears that the house of Israel, sooner or later, will be scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations. And behold, there are many who are already lost from the knowledge of those who are at Jerusalem. Yea, the more part of all the tribes have been led away; and they are scattered to and fro upon the isles of the sea; and whither they are none of us knoweth, save that we know that they have been led away." (1 Ne. 22:3-4.)

And Jacob added: "The Lord God has led away from time to time from the house of Israel, according to his will and pleasure. And now behold, the Lord remembereth all them who have been broken off." (2 Ne. 10:22.)

Later Nephi quoted the Lord as saying:

I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it.

And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews. (2 Ne. 29:12-13.)

In 3 Nephi 17:4 Jesus told the Nephites he was ready to visit the "lost tribes of Israel" and to "show" himself unto them, "for they are not lost unto the Father, for he knoweth whither he hath taken them." The Tenth Article of Faith speaks also of the restoration of the ten lost tribes. Furthermore, the keys for gathering them were given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836. (D&C 110:11.)

It seems natural to conclude that when we receive the record of the lost tribes, it will contain an account of Jesus' visit, showing his body to them with the same unmistakable evidence as he did to the Nephites, whereby they saw him, touched him, heard him, and knew for a certainty that he is the God of Israel and was slain for the sins of the world and raised from the grave as a resurrected personage.

Ask and Ye Shall Receive

It is very clear in the material we have covered that the Savior revealed much more to the Nephites (and thus to all who read the Book of Mormon) than he did to the Jews, and he was desirous that a record should be kept of this visit. Therefore Jesus commanded the Nephites to write an account of it. A major concept at work in this whole episode is that one must seek for spiritual knowledge. The rule, as given in 3 Nephi 14:7-8, and in many other places, is that knowledge is given to those who ask, seek, and knock. If we do not ask for gospel knowledge, we probably will not receive it. Hence the Lord's instructions were as follows:

I command you that ye shall write these sayings after I am gone, that if it so be that my people at Jerusalem, they who have seen me and been with me in my ministry, do not ask the Father in my name, that they may receive a knowledge of you by the Holy Ghost, and also of the other tribes whom they know not of, that these sayings which ye shall write shall be kept and shall be manifested unto the Gentiles, that through the fulness of the Gentiles, the remnant of their seed, who shall be scattered forth upon the face of the earth because of their unbelief, may be brought in, or may be brought to a knowledge of me, their Redeemer. (3 Ne. 16:4.)

The Lord wanted the various groups of scattered Israel to be known, especially in the last days, and if the Jewish New Testament apostles didn't ask, and therefore didn't learn of these groups (and consequently would not include it in the New Testament), the world could, in the last days, receive an awareness of these groups from the Book of Mormon.

Since the New Testament contains only the one brief mention in John 10:16, and since no explanation or further identification is given, then in light of the Savior's instruction in 3 Nephi 16:4 (cited above), we conclude that the New Testament people did not ask and did not receive the information. We are therefore doubly indebted to the Book of Mormon for its singular ability to enlarge our comprehension of the Savior's worldwide mission and personal visits to the various groups of Israel—the Jews, the Nephites, and the lost tribes.

Pattern Prophecies of Isaiah

The Lord continued his instruction by saying that since those peoples who are on a national basis primarily descendants of Israel (the Jews, Lehi's descendants, the other tribes, etc.) will have rejected the gospel, in the "latter day" the truth shall come first to the Gentiles and from them to the house of Israel. (3 Ne. 16:7.) This is a reversal of the order in earlier days.

However (the Lord continued), if the Gentiles do not honor the gospel after having so great a blessing offered to them, and after having scattered the remnants of Israel (the Lamanites) in the Americas, the Lord will then remember the covenants he made with the forebears of present-day Israel (that is, the covenants with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Lehi, Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Mormon, etc.) and will put judgments upon the Gentiles and take the fullness of the gospel away from them. He will bring forth his people Israel out of obscurity, out of oppression, and Israel will be gathered and restored to the true Church and fold of God. Israel will then be blessed with the same knowledge and the same promises of salvation that were given to their righteous fathers. (3 Ne. 16:8-16.)

Jesus informed his hearers that at the time of gathering and restoration of Israel, these words of Isaiah would be fulfilled: "Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion. Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem. The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of God." (3 Ne. 16:18-20; Isa. 52:8-10.)

There is a lesson to be observed here. Blessings once offered become cursings if they are rejected. The Gentiles will be given great opportunity, but if they "sin against" the gospel and treat it lightly, they will lose it and have to bear the consequences.

The events spoken of in this chapter dealing with the Gentiles and the reclamation and restoration of Israel, whether it be the Jews, the Nephites and Lamanites, or the lost tribes, is a pattern that will be repeated wherever there are Gentiles who do not believe and Israelites who do believe. In the foregoing passage, Isaiah speaks of "Jerusalem," yet Jesus used these verses with reference to the Nephites. Much of Isaiah's prophesying can be termed what I call "pattern prophecies." They can and will be fulfilled at different times and in different places, among the various groups of Israel. Therefore, Nephi wrote, "Hear ye the words of the prophet [Isaiah] . . . and liken them unto yourselves." (1 Ne. 19:23-24; 2 Ne. 11:8.)

"Gentiles" in the Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon speaks of the Gentiles on the American continent, in contrast to the Nephites and Lamanites, who are Israelites. It is the Gentile who will bring the gospel to the Lamanites. The Book of Mormon will come forth "by way of the Gentile." (See 1 Nephi 15:17; also title page.) The early settlers of North America of European heritage are spoken of as Gentiles. (1 Ne. 13:13-19.) Yet, Latter-day Saints of European descent hold that they are of Israel, particularly descended through Joseph and Ephraim. They learn this through their patriarchal blessings. This merits additional discussion.

Two terms frequently appearing in the scriptures are Israel and Gentile. These were originally used to designate distinct peoples. Israel meant the literal descendants of Jacob and the twelve sons of Jacob, or house of Israel. The Gentiles, as the word literally means, were "the other people." The word "Gentile" first appears in Genesis 10:4-5 with reference to the descendants of Japheth. Eventually both of these words were enlarged in their scope to include land designations—the land where the Israelites lived, and the land where the Gentiles lived. Still a third meaning eventually developed, so that "Israel" designated those who by covenant accept the true religion, and "Gentiles" meant those who did not. This is evident in Paul's statement, "They are not all Israel, which are of Israel." (Rom. 9:6.) That is, Paul says there is believing Israel and there is blood Israel, and sometimes these two conditions are not found in the same people. Thus a Gentile, one not genealogically of the blood of Israel, may become an Israelite by adoption through his or her belief, baptism, and the action of the Holy Ghost. [^4]

America, as is the case with Europe, has been peopled by those who have been without the fullness of the gospel for many centuries, yet they have much of the blood of Israel in their veins. They are not easily identified or recognized as Israelites and therefore are spoken of as Gentiles, in contrast to those of more recognizable Israelite identity such as the Jews and the Lamanites. Hence, the great American nation is spoken of in the Book of Mormon as a Gentile nation, even though we, as Church members, know we have the blood of Israel in us. This condition is described by the Prophet Joseph Smith in D&C 109:58, 60, saying we are "the sons of Jacob" but are "identified with the Gentiles."

It is actually a fact that the membership of the Church is largely of the literal seed of Abraham through Joseph, by blood descent. This is the message of D&C 86:9-10: "Ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, . . . and the priesthood . . . must needs remain through you and your lineage." The same concept is continued in D&C 90:10; 96:7; 98:32; 113:8; 132:30-31. [^5]

The Lord is using the descendants of Joseph, through Ephraim and Manasseh, being drawn out of Gentile society, to bring the gospel to the world in the last days. As Joseph fed his brothers with bread in ancient times and thus was a blessing to them—although for a long time they did not know or recognize him—so in the last days the seed of Joseph, ordained and clothed with the gospel of salvation, has the "bread of life" to nourish the inhabitants of the earth who are in an impoverished spiritual condition.

As it was anciently, so is it now. The recipients have hardly recognized or sensed that their benefactors are the literal descendants of Joseph, fulfilling their responsibility under the covenant of Abraham. That Joseph's seed should have such a mission is the message of an informative textual restoration found in JST Genesis 48:8-11, with Jacob speaking to his son Joseph:

O my son, [God] hath blessed me in raising thee up to be a servant unto me, in saving my house from death; in delivering my people, thy brethren, from famine which was sore in the land; wherefore the God of thy fathers shall bless thee, and the fruit of thy loins, that they shall be blessed above thy brethren, and above thy father's house; for thou hast prevailed, and thy father's house hath bowed down unto thee, even as it was shown unto thee, before thou wast sold into Egypt by the hands of thy brethren; wherefore thy brethren shall bow down unto thee, from generation to generation, unto the fruit of thy loins for ever; for thou shalt be a light unto my people, to deliver them in the days of their captivity, from bondage; and to bring salvation unto them, when they are altogether bowed down under sin. (JST Gen. 48:8-11.)

The "bondage" spoken of in verse 11 must not be confused with the bondage of Israel in Egypt, for it was Moses (of the tribe of Levi) and not Joseph's seed who led Israel out of that. It is a spiritual bondage of the last days, a universal apostasy, from which Joseph's seed rescues his brothers and sisters in the fullness of times. A careful reading of the passage makes this clear, as does the subsequent chapter of Genesis wherein Joseph, speaking to his brethren, prophesies first of Moses and of Aaron, and then of a latter-day seer named Joseph as found in JST Genesis 50:24-38. This prophecy, which was in the plates of brass, is the basis of Lehi's words in 2 Nephi 3:6-18, and is also restored to us through the Joseph Smith Translation of Genesis by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (V. 19.) We pray to the Father of our spirits in the name of Christ, who is the Father of our spiritual rebirth. Our first Father holds the power of exaltation (Matt. 20:23; 3 Ne. 27:14-16); our second Father, Christ, holds the power of our spiritual rebirth on the path to our exaltation. Catherine Thomas is a doctoral student in ancient history at Brigham Young University.
[^2] (V. 20.) (a) Ask aright, (b) believe, (c) receive: Prayer is labor in the spirit. Casually done, it has no power. We strain upward in spirit to grasp the answers we seek. We live for the Holy Ghost so that when we pray, we know what to ask for. Having power in the Holy Ghost, we have assurance that what we pray for will be granted. We believe, that is, we envision the realized blessing and actively receive it. "Believing," as it is used in the scriptures, signifies powerful confidence born of personal righteousness. (Hel. 14:13.) ''Adversus Haereses,'' 10.3. The Ante-Nicene Fathers (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1885).
[^3] (Vv. 21-23.) We learn that we may draw down the blessings of heaven on our loved ones, on the community of Saints, and on those who come to investigate. Prayer is not optional. We simply cannot move forward on the path of light without the Holy Ghost to illuminate the way. ''De Principiis,'' 4.4.1, in G. W. Butterworth, ed., Origen: On First Principles (New York: Harper & Row, 1966), pp. 313-14.
[^4] King Follett Discourse (Willard Richards's account) in The Words of Joseph Smith, Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook eds. (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, 1981), p. 340.
[^5] Edwin Hatch, The Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the Christian Church (London: Williams and Norgate, 1914), p. 69; for anthropomorphisms in the Old Testament, see Cecil Roth, ''Anthropomorphism,'' Encyclopaedia Judaica, vol. 3 (Jerusalem: Keter Publishing House, 1972), p. 53.
