Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

17

THE FINAL GATHERING TO CHRIST

(3 Nephi 20-22)

Joseph F. McConkie [^1]

The instruction given by Christ to the Nephites included a prophetic description of the most singular events of the last days. In teaching of such things, the Savior affirmed that the Father had not forgotten the covenant he had made with his people—the house of Israel—and that his word would be fulfilled, every jot and tittle. Briefly stated, that promise was that they would be gathered in from "the east and from the west, and from the south and from the north," and that they would "be brought to the knowledge of the Lord their God, who hath redeemed them." (3 Ne. 20:13.) This latter-day gathering, Christ testified, would be first spiritual and then temporal. Israel, he said, must return first to their covenants and then to their covenant lands.

The Sword of God's Justice

Christ commanded the Nephites to record the things he said to them. He prophesied that what was written would eventually come forth through the Gentiles [Joseph Smith and the tribe of Ephraim] to the remnant of Israel who had been scattered throughout the earth for faithless rejection of the Messiah. Christ affirmed that in the last days they would be gathered on condition of faithful acceptance of him. That is, through the testimony of the Nephite record they would obtain a knowledge of their Redeemer and "then" be gathered in, that Christ might fulfill the covenant he had made with "all the people of the house of Israel." (3 Ne. 16:4-5.)

Christ gave the Nephites a prophetic description of the restoration of the fullness of the gospel in the last days, announcing that it would come through the Gentiles. The word Gentile is used in this context to emphasize that it would not be the nation of Israel—that nation formed by God—who would bring forth the word of life, but rather those possessing believing blood who had been scattered among Gentile nations. Thus Gentiles as used in the Book of Mormon includes faithful descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob who are not of the tribe of Judah or who are not transplanted Jewish nationals; that is, citizens of the Southern Kingdom. This time of restoration is known to us as the "times of the Gentiles." When the time comes that the Gentiles partake of that same dark spirit known to the tribe of Judah in the meridian of time, they too, the Savior said, would come to know the chastening hand of the Lord and know it in the same measure. Of that day and time the resurrected Christ said, "Then will I remember my covenant which I have made unto my people, O house of Israel, and I will bring my gospel unto them." (See 3 Ne. 16:11, 6-14.) Thus the Savior explained that in the final dispensation the gospel would go first to the Gentiles; after they had rejected it, it would be taken to the Jews.

We learn from the Joseph Smith Translation that Christ foretold these same events to the inner circle of faithful Saints in the Old World. In a private explanation of the parable of the householder, he said that the kingdom of God would be taken from the Jews in the meridian day and given to the Gentiles. He said that in the last days, he would "let again his vineyard unto other husbandmen," also Gentiles, who would "render him the fruits in their seasons." Nevertheless, wicked Gentiles would also be destroyed, he prophesied, "when the Lord should descend out of heaven to reign in his vineyard, which is the earth and the inhabitants thereof." (JST, Matt. 21:47-56.)

This day of vengeance is millennial; it refers to the Second Coming. Christ used the words of Micah to describe it: "The remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver." (Micah 5:8; 3 Ne. 20:16; 21:12.) The prophecy has no reference to the Lamanites or any other remnant of Israel waging war against Gentile oppressors. Such is not the Lord's system. At his coming, the wicked will be destroyed and the righteous preserved; those who have rejected his prophets "shall be cut off." Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "It shall be with power, as though a young lion went forth rending and tearing in pieces a helpless flock of sheep. And so, if the Gentiles do not repent and believe in Christ after the gospel is restored among them, then, when the Lord comes, they will be destroyed and the triumph of Israel—because they kept the commandments and did receive the gospel—that triumph will be complete." [^2]

Christ further emphasized that this final gathering was to be his doing and not that of mortals—a matter of making bare his arm in contrast to the arm of flesh. He said, "I will gather my people together as a man gathereth his sheaves into the floor." He then added to the imagery of the ferocious lion that of a goring bull. Again the prophetic promise is given in the words of Micah: "I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass: and thou shalt beat in pieces many people: and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth." [^3] (Micah 4:13.) Christ's commentary was simple and direct: "And behold, I am he who doeth it." The sword of God's justice, he declared, shall hang over all the nations of the Gentiles, and unless they repent it shall fall upon them. As for the house of Israel—it would be for God to establish his own people. (3 Ne. 20:19-21.)

The New Jerusalem

As to the establishment of his people, the Savior told the Nephites that their land would be the place of a New Jerusalem. The Americas—apparently the whole land—had been promised to the seed of Joseph, for such was the covenant Christ made with Joseph's father, Jacob. Jacob had prophesied that Joseph's branches (Ephraim and Manasseh) would cross the waters to inherit "the utmost bound of the everlasting hills." (Gen. 49:22, 26; see also Deut. 33:15.) Yet long before that day, Enoch had written of a time when the Lord would gather his elect from the four quarters of the earth, to a place he would prepare, a holy city, wherein his people would ready themselves for his coming, and wherein would be found his tabernacle (the temple). This place was to be "called Zion, a New Jerusalem." (Moses 7:62.) At that time, and again this is clearly millennial, Christ said, "The powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you." (3 Ne. 20:22.)

A little later in this same discourse, Christ again quoted Micah relative to the ravishing lion and the destruction of the unrepentant Gentiles. Again he announced that the rebellious were to be cut off from the house of Israel, while promising that the righteous would be numbered among his church. "And they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance," he said. (3 Ne. 21:12-22; Micah 5:8-15.) Thus the believing and obedient will be called on to build the New Jerusalem. "And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem." (3 Ne. 21:23.) All such labors, we learn from the Doctrine and Covenants, are to be accomplished by the authority of the priesthood and under the direction of those holding its keys. (D&C 42:8-9, 30-42; 45:66-71; 52:2, 42-43; 57:1-5; 58:7, 44-58; 84:2-5.) "And then shall they [those who have embraced the restored covenant through baptism] assist my people that they may be gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in unto the New Jerusalem." As we shall yet see, the greater part of the gathering will take place after the building of the New Jerusalem, for only then "shall the power of heaven come down among them" and Christ reign personally upon the earth. (See 3 Ne. 21:20-25.)

Thus, this New Jerusalem shall become "a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God; and the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion. And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety. And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another. And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand. And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy." (D&C 45:66-71.)

All of Israel's Prophets Testified of Christ

Surely the reader of Christ's discourse on the gathering will not overlook how closely he tied the Nephites to their ancient forebears in the Old World. Though they would have their own Zion, their own Jerusalem, their own prophets, and their own scripture, they were to be united with the faithful of all nations and all ages. There is but one Shepherd and one fold—one Christ and one message of salvation. All prophets speak with the same voice. "I am he of whom Moses spake," Christ declared, and thus it follows that to profess Moses is to profess Christ. "Verily I say unto you, yea, and all the prophets from Samuel [the first prophet of the nation of Israel] and those that follow after [and this is everlastingly so], as many as have spoken, have testified of me." (3 Ne. 20:23-24.) We have no greater evidence of the taking of the "plain" and the "precious" from the records of the Old Testament than the expunging of the testimony of its prophets relative to Christ.

Blessings of the Covenant

Joseph Smith's translation of the Abraham papyrus opens to us a flood of knowledge about the covenant God made with our ancient father—knowledge now lost to those whose understanding is limited to the Bible. From the record we learn that Abraham was promised that his seed—his literal descendants—were to hold the priesthood and carry the message of salvation, even the blessings of eternal life, to all nations. (Abr. 2:9, 11.) This right has not been given to those of any other lineage. In our present text, Christ reminds the Nephites that they are the children of the prophets and thus inheritors of the promises made to Abraham. It was because of that covenant that Christ had come to them and sought to turn them from their iniquities. (3 Ne. 20:25-26.)

Amplifying the Abrahamic covenant over that preserved for us in the Bible, the Savior said that he had promised Abraham that through his posterity all the families of the earth would be blessed by the "pouring out of the Holy Ghost," which blessing would make the Gentiles "mighty above all, unto the scattering of . . . [the] house of Israel." The Gentiles, he said, would be a "scourge unto the people of this land," meaning Lehi's descendants in the last days. Nevertheless, after the fullness of the gospel had gone forth among the Gentiles, if they hardened their hearts and returned to their iniquities all these evils would return to them. (3 Ne. 20:27-28.)

The Day of Jewish Conversion

When the day of the Gentile has been fulfilled, that is, when the gospel will be taken from them because of their iniquities, the Savior will remember the covenant he made with those of Judah to return them to their ancient covenant land. Of this yet future day, he said, "The fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them; and they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and shall pray unto the Father in my name." After their conversion to Christ, after that time when their "watchmen" come to see "eye to eye" with their Savior, "then will the Father gather them together again, and give unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance." (3 Ne. 20:29-33.)

Of this matter Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "As all the world knows, many Jews are now gathering to Palestine, where they have their own nation and way of worship, all without reference to a belief in Christ or an acceptance of the laws and ordinances of his everlasting gospel. Is this the latter-day gathering of the Jews of which the scriptures speak? No! It is not; let there be no misunderstanding in any discerning mind on this point. This gathering of the Jews to their homeland, and their organization into a nation and a kingdom, is not the gathering promised by the prophets. It does not fulfill the ancient promises. Those who have thus assembled have not gathered into the true Church and fold of their ancient Messiah. They have not received again the saving truths of that very gospel which blessed Moses their lawgiver, and Elijah their prophet, and Peter, James, and John, whom their fathers rejected." [^4]

It will be in this future setting, the Savior explained, that the prophecies of Isaiah relative to Zion putting on her strength (the authority of the priesthood), and loosing herself from the bands of her neck (returning to the Lord and receiving revelation) shall be fulfilled. (See Isaiah 52:1-2; D&C 113:7-10.) This is to be a day in which "my people shall know my name; yea, in that day they shall know that I am he that doth speak." In that day they will rejoice in those who have brought the message of salvation to them and invited them to depart a wicked world to once more worship their God with pure hearts and clean hands and to clothe themselves in white garments, having been washed in the blood of the Lamb. (See 3 Ne. 20:39-42; 2 Ne. 25:16; Ether 13:10-12.)

The Great Prophet of the Restoration

To this point Christ was describing the restoration of the gospel, Israel being clothed again with the priesthood, and the coming of the revelations of heaven, all of which are requisite to the gathering of Israel in the last days. It is natural at this point that some reference be made to the servant-prophet who would represent the Lord in accomplishing such a marvelous work and wonder. This is precisely what Christ did, though he went about it in an unusual way. He quoted four verses from Isaiah that are obviously Messianic—verses descriptive of his mortal ministry, which was now complete. (See 3 Ne. 20:42-45; Isa. 52:12-15.) The context in which Christ used these verses and the manner in which he returned to phrases from them a little later in this discourse make it obvious that he was applying them to the great prophet of the Restoration, who, like himself, was to be a suffering servant. Obviously these verses, like many others—and this is particularly so in the writings of Isaiah—were intended by the spirit of revelation to embrace multiple fulfillment. [^5]

Concluding his prophetic description of the return of those of Judah to their ancient land, Christ testified: "All these things shall surely come, even as the Father hath commanded me. Then shall this covenant which the Father hath covenanted with his people be fulfilled; and then shall Jerusalem be inhabited again with my people, and it shall be the land of their inheritance." (3 Ne. 20:46.)

Jesus then gave his Nephite congregation a sign so they would know when these things—specifically the gathering of Israel and the establishment of Zion—"shall be about to take place." The sign embraced a series of events including the establishment of a free people in the United States of America; the restoration of the gospel; the taking of the gospel to the Lamanites; and the martyrdom of the prophet-servant of the Restoration and his eternal triumph in the kingdom of God. Commenting on this prophecy, Moroni later wrote: "When ye shall receive this record [the Book of Mormon] ye may know that the work of the Father has commenced upon all the face of the land." (3 Ne. 21:1-10; Ether 4:17.)

At this point in the Savior's remarks it becomes evident why he quoted Isaiah's prophecies about a suffering servant to identify the great prophet who would stand at the head of the latter-day gathering of Israel. The prophet was to be "hurt" or "marred," even as the Savior had been "hurt" and "marred" in his mortal ministry by the enemies of truth. How perfect the parallel between Joseph Smith and Jesus Christ—both were hounded and rejected by the religious leaders of their day; both were scorned and accused of being possessed by a devil; indeed, both were accused of blasphemy; and of course both sealed their testimony with their blood as martyrs, having given offense to none but the legions of darkness.

The Magnitude of the Gathering

The greatness of Israel's gathering must match the greatness of its scattering. For thousands of years the children of Abraham have been sifted among the nations of the earth. Even today the scattering of the chosen seed continues. Israel has been scattered for rebellion against their God; for rejecting his prophets; for breaking their covenants; indeed, for crucifying their Messiah. The gathering, which comes in answer to the scattering, must be equally extensive. It must reach to the ends of the earth, center in obedience to the God of heaven, call forth living prophets, and demand acceptance of Jesus as the Christ.

By what voice is scattered Israel to be called back to the covenants and lands of their fathers? Should it not be by the voice of their fathers? A voice from the dust? A voice bearing the testimony common to all the holy prophets since the world began? Ought it not to center in the testimony of Christ? Such was the promise of the Savior—a book to come forth—a book containing the testimony of Christ and the true points of doctrine, a book bringing those of the latter days to the knowledge of their forebears, a book containing the knowledge of the covenants of salvation. Such was the promise of the Savior, a promise with a warning that all who reject the book and its witness "shall be cut off from among the people who are of the covenant." (3 Ne. 21:11.)

"But if they will repent and hearken unto my words," the Savior declared, "and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob"—having reference to Lehi's seed; for they and as many as shall come to the covenant shall help build the New Jerusalem. "Then shall the power of heaven come down among them" and the Savior be in their midst. (3 Ne. 21:22-25.)

The text then declares that at this time—and it is clearly millennial—the work of the Father shall "commence" in gathering the dispersed of Israel—the tribes that have been lost—back to the land of their inheritance. There is no mistaking the intended meaning. Four times in three verses the Lord said that the labor of gathering Israel will "commence" at this time. (See 3 Ne. 21:26-28.) Having so declared, Jesus then sustained his point by quoting Isaiah 54, with the announcement that this is also the time of its fulfillment. This chapter tells the story of returning Israel using the metaphor of the marriage covenant. "More are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord." That is, greater are the numbers of Israel born outside of the covenant than those born within it. "Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations; spare not, lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes." Make ready for the great numbers who will be gathered, that is, join the Church, during the millennium—so great, in fact, that the number of those who joined before is not even a beginning in comparison. "For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles and make the desolate cities to be inhabited." (3 Ne. 22:1-3; Isa. 54:1-3.)

"And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. . . . No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall revile against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." (3 Ne. 22:13, 17; Isa. 54:13, 17.)

Conclusion

We have no more authoritative or informative source on the latter-day gathering of Israel than the words of Christ recorded in 3 Nephi 20-22. The discourse has not received its proper due among those who have taught and written on the subject. In fact, it has often been the source of doctrinal mischief. As is so often the case where faulty interpretations are concerned, those claiming these teachings of the Savior as their source practice what could be termed theological kidnapping—taking a passage out of context and holding it hostage to sustain some speculative view. Perhaps the greatest error in the interpretation of the Savior's words has been the failure to read them as a unit.

These comments of the Savior certainly affirm that neither he nor his Father has forgotten the covenants made to our ancient progenitors. The promises God made to the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are real! The Abrahamic covenant is not an allegory; it is not a Bible story that is to be spiritualized away. The gathering of Israel will be literal, and it is literal Israel that is to be gathered. The promises given to the seed of Abraham are as real as the dirt and dust upon which he set his feet of flesh and blood, they are as real as the brick and mortar with which the New Jerusalem is to be built, as real as the sweat and tears with which the Jerusalem of old is to be rebuilt.

Yet, as is always the case, a spiritual gathering must precede the physical gathering—a gathering that centers in the restoration of the "fulness of the gospel," the "pouring out of the Holy Ghost," the reestablishing of the "true points" of Christ's doctrine, the believing in his words, the repentance of sin and coming unto the "Beloved Son." "I will establish my church among them," Christ declared, "and they shall come in unto the covenant."

The heart of the gathering is the testimony of Jesus. Those who reject that testimony particularly and specifically as it comes forth in the record of the Nephites and at the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith are to be cut off from among the Lord's people. One can hardly overstate the importance of the Book of Mormon in this epic drama of Israel's gathering. "What, then, is the power of the Book of Mormon?" Elder McConkie asked. "It will build the New Jerusalem; it will prepare a people for the Second Coming; it will usher in the Millennium—at least it will play such an important part in all of these that its value and power can scarcely be overstated." [^6]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Kent P. Jackson is associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] See the discussions in chapters 14-19 in this book.
[^3] For a discussion of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon, see Kent P. Jackson, ''Nephi and Isaiah,'' in Studies in Scripture, Vol. 7: 1 Nephi to Alma 29, ed. Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1987), pp. 131-45.
[^4] See Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1979-81), 4:365-68.
[^5] Bruce R. McConkie, ''The Doctrinal Restoration,'' in The Joseph Smith Translation: Restoring Plain and Precious Truths, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), p. 18.
[^6] See Kent P. Jackson, ''The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith,'' in Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Randall Books, 1985), p. 341.
