Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

19

BUILT UPON CHRIST'S GOSPEL

(3 Nephi 27-30)

Kent P. Jackson and Darrell L. Matthews [^1]

After the Savior appeared to the Nephites and established his church among them, the twelve disciples went through the land preaching the gospel and baptizing into the church those who repented. While traveling they became aware of disputes among the members of the church concerning the name by which it should be called. In order to obtain from the Lord an answer to the matter, they "united in mighty prayer and fasting." (3 Ne. 27:1.) In response to their prayers, Christ appeared to them and taught them. This visit of Jesus to his disciples is his last recorded visit to them.

The Name of the Church

While the disciples were praying to know by what name the church should be called, "Jesus came and stood in the midst of them, and said unto them: What will ye that I shall give unto you? And they said unto him: Lord, we will that thou wouldst tell us the name whereby we shall call this church; for there are disputations among the people concerning this matter." (3 Ne. 27:2-3; see Isa. 58:9, 11.) In response to this question, Jesus asked why the people should dispute over this issue: "Have they not read the scriptures?" (3 Ne. 27:5.)

The Savior then taught his disciples that those who wish to follow him must take upon themselves his name. He gave specific instructions concerning the name of the church: "Therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake. And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel." (3 Ne. 27:7-8.) In this explanation of the importance of the name of the church, two major points are emphasized. The first is that the true church must be named after Christ; the second is that it must be "built upon" his gospel. If only the first criterion were mentioned, any church using Christ's name could possibly be the true church. When the second requirement is added, it eliminates all churches that possess Christ's name while not containing his gospel in its fullness. It limits the true church to only one; The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints meets both of these requirements. (D&C 115:4; 1:30.)

In addition to these requirements, Christ told the disciples: "If it so be that the church is built upon my gospel then will the Father show forth his own works in it." (3 Ne. 27:10.) From other scriptures we learn that some of the Father's works are spiritual gifts (1 Cor. 12:8-14; D&C 46:10-26), living prophets, service, and love—characteristics found in the Lord's church.

Christ continued by warning the disciples what would happen if the church were not built on his gospel: "But if it be not built upon my gospel, and is built upon the works of men, or upon the works of the devil, verily I say unto you they have joy in their works for a season, and by and by the end cometh, and they are hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence there is no return. For their works do follow them, for it is because of their works that they are hewn down; therefore remember the things that I have told you." (3 Ne. 27:11-12.) People who follow a false or incomplete gospel may have joy in their activities for a time during this life, but when the end comes they will not enjoy an inheritance in the celestial kingdom. Thus the Lord has placed upon us the calling of missionary work, to make the blessings of the fullness of the gospel available for all people.

The Gospel

After Christ taught his disciples about the name and importance of his church, he taught them plainly what the true gospel consists of. In 3 Nephi 27:13-22 the Lord gave us the scriptures' fullest definition of his gospel. Christ taught his disciples: "This is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me." (3 Ne. 27:13.) He continued by teaching that his Father had sent him to be lifted up on the cross in order to draw the people of the world to him. "As I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil." (3 Ne. 27:14.) Jesus affirmed that those who repent and are baptized in his name will be blessed: "If he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world. And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father." (3 Ne. 27:16-17.) This is the gospel of the Father, who "fulfilleth the words which he hath given, and he lieth not, but fulfilleth all his words." (3 Ne. 27:18.) Jesus taught that only those who repent of their sins and endure to the end will be worthy of God's kingdom.

The Savior continued: "Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day." (3 Ne. 27:20.) This statement is at the core of the gospel. Repentance allows Christ's atonement to become an active part in our lives, and those who live with and follow the promptings of the Holy Ghost will have the assurance that they have washed their garments in Christ's blood and will have a place at his right hand. Jesus then concluded: "This is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do; therefore, if ye do these things blessed are ye, for ye shall be lifted up at the last day." (3 Ne. 27:21-22.) These few verses contain the most concise and clear definition of the gospel, given by the Lord himself. It can be summarized as follows: (1) the atonement, (2) faith, (3) repentance, (4) baptism, (5) reception of the Holy Spirit, (6) enduring to the end, and (7) judgment. It is significant that in Christ's own definition the gospel consists essentially of two parts—the atonement of Christ, and the principles and ordinances required of us to make the atonement effective in our lives.

Jesus commanded his disciples to write the things they had been taught, "save it be those which are forbidden." (3 Ne. 27:23.) Because of the disciples' faithfulness in carrying out this command, we today have this beautiful section of scripture.

Results of Living the Gospel

After Jesus had commanded his disciples to write his teachings, he told them that their people would be judged out of their writings: "Write the works of this people, which shall be, even as hath been written, of that which hath been. For behold, out of the books which have been written, and which shall be written, shall this people be judged, for by them shall their works be known unto men." (3 Ne. 27:24-25.) He then taught his disciples that the Father keeps a record of all things and that all the world will be judged from those records. He also told them that they would be the judges of their people: "Ye shall be judges of this people, according to the judgment which I shall give unto you, which shall be just. Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.) This command is given to us all, to live our lives so we can be like Christ. In this instance, his disciples were specifically commanded to be like their Lord so they would be ready to be the judges of their people, following Jesus' example in judgment. To accomplish this assignment, they would need to become like their Savior, and by so doing their judgment would be just. (Cf. Moro. 7:18-19.)

The final verses of 3 Nephi 27 make clear to us some of the results of obeying or disobeying God's commandments. First Jesus spoke about prayer: "Whatsoever things ye shall ask the Father in my name shall be given unto you. Therefore, ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for he that asketh, receiveth; and unto him that knocketh, it shall be opened." (3 Ne. 27:28-29.) Evidently these disciples had reached the point in their worthiness that they would not ask for anything unrighteously; Christ placed no conditions on this statement. Thus whatever they asked would be granted. (See also Nephi's example in Helaman 10:4-10.)

Christ told his listeners some of his joys and sorrows. We learn that he was pleased with those whom he was visiting: "My joy is great, even unto fulness, because of you, and also this generation; yea, and even the Father rejoiceth, and also all the holy angels, because of you and this generation; for none of them are lost." (3 Ne. 27:30.) Readers should pay special attention to the fact that our personal actions can cause Christ, the Father, and angels to rejoice or sorrow. Knowing God's feelings for us and his intense concern for each of us as individuals, we should conduct our lives so as to bring honor and joy to those heavenly beings who care so much for our welfare.

In 3 Nephi 27:30, we find an excellent example of what can be achieved in this mortal life. These people had achieved such righteousness that if they continued in it they would be saved in the Father's kingdom. After expressing his joy about those whom he visited, Christ told of his sorrow concerning the future generations of the Nephites: "It sorroweth me because of the fourth generation from this generation, for they are led away captive by [the devil] even as was the son of perdition; for they will sell me for silver and for gold, and for that which moth doth corrupt and which thieves can break through and steal. And in that day will I visit them, even in turning their works upon their own heads." (3 Ne. 27:32.) The Lord knew that the righteousness achieved by those he visited would not continue in all the later generations. He knew that it would decay as people became proud and materialistic, and he sorrowed for those who would be lost.

The Three Nephites

When Christ finished explaining his gospel to the Nephite disciples, he spoke individually to each of the Twelve: "What is it that ye desire of me, after that I am gone to the Father? And they all spake, save it were three, saying: We desire that after we have lived unto the age of man, that our ministry, wherein thou hast called us, may have an end, that we may speedily come unto thee in thy kingdom." (3 Ne. 28:1-2.) Jesus granted their request and told them that when they had reached the age of seventy-two they would join him in his kingdom.

The Savior then turned to the three who had not yet requested anything of him and asked them again what they desired of him. These three disciples still did not reply, because

they sorrowed in their hearts, for they durst not speak unto him the thing which they desired. And he said unto them: Behold, I know your thoughts, and ye have desired the thing which John, my beloved, who was with me in my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of me. [See John 21:21-23; D&C 7.] Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven. (3 Ne. 28:5-7.)

The three would not "taste of death." While they continued in their earthly ministry, they would not experience pain of the flesh; the only pain they would feel would be sorrow for the sins of the world. "And all this will I do because of the thing which ye have desired of me, for ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the world shall stand. And for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy shall be full." (3 Ne. 28:9-10.) In Doctrine and Covenants 7, we learn that the Lord told John that his desire was greater than that of the others because he had desired to continue to bring souls unto Christ while the others had wanted to finish their ministry and enter the kingdom of God. Both were righteous desires, but John and the Three Nephites desired a "greater work." (D&C 7:6.) Then "the heavens were opened, and they were caught up into heaven, and saw and heard unspeakable things." (3 Ne. 28:13.) The things which they saw and heard are not recorded because they were commanded not to reveal them to anyone. (3 Ne. 28:14.) This experience was so wonderful that the disciples were not even sure if "they were in the body or out of the body," because they were transfigured so "they could behold the things of God." (3 Ne. 28:15.)

Following this glorious experience, all of the disciples continued their ministries. The nine, when they had reached the age of seventy-two, were received into God's kingdom. The three who had chosen to continue their ministry until Christ's coming in glory remained. Mormon reported that these three "did go forth upon the face of the land, and did minister unto all the people, uniting as many to the church as would believe in their preaching; baptizing them, and as many as were baptized did receive the Holy Ghost." (3 Ne. 28:18.) In later generations, in spite of the works of righteousness that the Three Nephites performed, there were some who hated them. Because of this they were persecuted, but they were delivered by the hand of God. (3 Ne. 28:19-22; 4 Ne. 1:30-37; Morm. 1:13-16.)

Years later the Three Nephites ministered to Mormon. He wrote that they will also minister unto the Gentiles, the Jews, "the scattered tribes of Israel, and unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, and shall bring out of them unto Jesus many souls, that their desire may be fulfilled, and also because of the convincing power of God which is in them." (3 Ne. 28:26-29.) Their great righteousness makes it possible for them to show themselves to whomever they desire. Because of this, the work that they will perform before Christ's coming will be "great and marvelous."

At this point in the record, Mormon warned those who would reject the teachings of Jesus and those whom he sends to warn the world: "Wo be unto him that will not hearken unto the words of Jesus, and also to them whom he hath chosen and sent among them; for whoso receiveth not the words of Jesus and the words of those whom he hath sent receiveth not him; and therefore he will not receive them at the last day; and it would be better for them if they had not been born." (3 Ne. 28:34-35.)

Mormon's Counsel to the Gentiles

In the last two chapters of 3 Nephi, Mormon gave inspired counsel to his future readers, particularly the Gentiles. In the Book of Mormon, the term Gentiles generally refers to those who are neither Jews nor descendants of Lehi. Thus most Latter-day Saints today are Gentiles according to Book of Mormon terminology. Mormon's message has great relevance for us today; he saw our day and the pitfalls into which many of our time would fall. These last two chapters of 3 Nephi warn us of specific things against which we need to protect ourselves.

Mormon wrote that when the Book of Mormon would come forth, the restoration of scattered Israel would be starting: "When the Lord shall see fit, in his wisdom, that these sayings shall come unto the Gentiles according to his word, then ye may know that the covenant which the Father hath made with the children of Israel, concerning their restoration to the lands of their inheritance, is already beginning to be fulfilled." (3 Ne. 29:1.) The restoration of the house of Israel must of necessity follow the restoration of the gospel, the priesthood, the covenants, and true doctrine. The coming forth of the Book of Mormon played a vital role in this process.

Mormon followed with the assurance that although many would doubt that God could fulfill his promises to his covenant people, he would in reality do just that: "Ye need not imagine in your hearts that the words which have been spoken are vain, for behold, the Lord will remember his covenant which he hath made unto his people of the house of Israel." (3 Ne. 29:3.) Then he gave specific warnings of problems prevalent in our day. We are told that many would spurn the doings of God, "deny the revelations of the Lord, and . . . shall say the Lord no longer worketh by revelation, or by prophecy, or by gifts, or by tongues, or by healings, or by the power of the Holy Ghost." (3 Ne. 29:5-6.) Mormon continued:

Yea, and wo unto him that shall say at that day, to get gain, that there can be no miracle wrought by Jesus Christ; for he that doeth this shall become like unto the son of perdition, for whom there was no mercy, according to the word of Christ! Yea, and ye need not any longer hiss, nor spurn, nor make game of the Jews, nor any of the remnant of the house of Israel; for behold, the Lord remembereth his covenant unto them, and he will do unto them according to that which he hath sworn. Therefore ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand of the Lord unto the left, that he may not execute judgment unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel. (3 Ne. 29:7-9.)

These words speak directly to our day. Mormon saw our time and warned us that many would deny revelation and the various gifts of the Holy Ghost; many would say that no miracles can be performed. Among the greatest of the miracles to which he referred would be the restoration of the house of Israel, which takes place in a miraculous fashion in the Church today, in accord with the ancient promises.

For centuries, many have believed that revelation and the gifts of the Spirit were lost from the world with the death of the early apostles and thus are no longer needed. Some believe that God has revealed all that will ever need to be revealed and is no longer active in the affairs of humanity: "He hath done his work." (2 Ne. 28:5-6.) Some who deny the existence of miracles and the gifts of the Spirit are also found within the Church and fail to see the hand of the Lord directing its affairs today. Some, still claiming to be Latter-day Saints, engage in personal or public opposition to doctrines and policies established by the Lord's prophets. This is one manifestation of the lack of faith foreseen by Mormon.

After Mormon had recorded the warnings to the Gentiles, he made a plea for repentance. He urged them to put away their wicked ways and accept the gospel:

Hearken, O ye Gentiles, and hear the words of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, which he hath commanded me that I should speak concerning you, for, behold he commandeth me that I should write, saying: Turn, all ye Gentiles, from your wicked ways; and repent of your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your whoredoms, and of your secret abominations, and your idolatries, and of your murders, and your priestcrafts, and your envyings, and your strifes, and from all your wickedness and abominations, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, that ye may receive a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that ye may be numbered with my people who are of the house of Israel. (3 Ne. 30:2.)

In Mormon's plea for repentance he wrote to all the world. Since the problems of our generation, which Mormon saw, exist among some in the Church today, his call for repentance is also to us.

Conclusion

Before Jesus left the people of the American continent, he challenged them to accept his teachings and direct their lives accordingly. "Enter ye in at the strait gate; for strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it; but wide is the gate, and broad the way which leads to death, and many there be that travel therein, until the night cometh, wherein no man can work." (3 Ne. 27:33.) The events recorded in the Book of Mormon serve as a witness to us in the latter days that living by the principles of the gospel leads to temporal and eternal joy: "There was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (4 Ne. 1:15-16.) In 4 Nephi we have an example of a people who overcame their sins and obeyed the commandments of the Lord, which brought great joy into their lives. Because of this example we know that it is possible for us also to reach that high state of righteousness.

The Book of Mormon, which witnesses to the results of righteousness, is also a witness that rejection of gospel principles brings sadness and destruction. The final fate of the Nephites testifies to that truth. Since we decide by our actions if we will follow the Lord or not, let us choose to follow the righteous example of those among whom the Savior ministered in the Book of Mormon.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Tremendous prosperity brought unrighteous pride and haughtiness. The people forgot the source of their prosperity. (4 Ne. 1:23-24.) Andrew C. Skinner is instructor of history at Metropolitan State College, Denver, Colorado.
