Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

20

THE COURSE OF PEACE AND APOSTASY

(4 Nephi-Mormon 2)

Andrew C. Skinner [^1]

Nephi's prophecies concerning the condescension of God (1 Ne. 11:16; 2 Ne. 4:26) had been fulfilled to the fullest measure as Christ concluded his post-resurrection sojourn among his New World disciples. (3 Ne. 28:12.) A God had come to earth now on two continents. The pure gospel plan had been taught by its executor, old prophecies had come to pass and new ones been given, miracles had been performed, and people had been changed. The book of 4 Nephi is a testament of the profound effects of the Savior's visit on the lives of the American people.

Fourth Nephi is a record of great righteousness as well as tremendous wickedness. With the first two chapters of Mormon's personal account of his experience, it forms a cohesive unit that constitutes a classic study on the course and structure of apostasy, showing human beings at their best and worst. Perhaps this is the most significant contribution to our theological and spiritual education made by 4 Nephi, Mormon 1, and Mormon 2.

However, 4 Nephi is of singular importance in another distinct but related aspect. Nowhere is Mormon's inspired editorial ability and prophetic mantle better demonstrated or more apparent than in 4 Nephi. It cannot be doubted that Mormon was a great prophet. He received a personal visit from the Savior at age fifteen (Mormon 1:15) and, thus, retained from his youth the spirit of prophecy. For, as John wrote, "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10.) From Mormon's work of abridgment on the records that make up 4 Nephi, we might well conclude that one of the most important aspects of a true prophet's responsibility involves not just the prediction of the future, but also the presentation of the past in such a way as to reveal and teach the lessons of life needed to be learned for exaltation. Thus, Mormon desired to open up the past and the future to the understanding of generations who would follow. He wrote, for example: "It came to pass that two hundred years had passed away; and the second generation had all passed away save it were a few. And now I, Mormon, would that ye should know that the people had multiplied, insomuch that they were spread upon all the face of the land, and that they had become exceedingly rich, because of their prosperity in Christ." (4 Ne. 1:22-23.)

Here Mormon testified that though he was not an eyewitness, he knew that the source of prosperity in ancient times was Christ, with the implication that it is Christ who can also point the way to well-being in every age.

The actual eyewitnesses to the events recounted in 4 Nephi (those who kept the sacred records before Mormon became their custodian) include Nephi, son of Nephi the disciple of Christ and the person for whom the book was named; Nephi's son and grandson—both named Amos; and Ammaron. We do not know the size of the original records or the amount of information kept by these brethren. But we do know that it was Mormon's inspired and prophetic redaction of all the records that would bring to future generations the essential spiritual lessons of Nephite and Lamanite history in distilled form and, thus, by its very succinctness make those lessons more concentrated, compact, and poignant to us.

In forty-nine short verses we are shown the heights and depths of a civilization's spiritual and moral condition. In forty-nine short verses we are shown the practical workings of the law of the celestial kingdom, the true order of heaven on earth, and the ideal pattern of welfare service. Also, in forty-nine short verses the reader is shown the basest impulses of a telestial society. Also in these verses we are shown the circumstances and atmosphere that will exist during Christ's millennial reign in stark contrast to Satan's avowed purposes, influence, and workings. And, finally, in these short verses we are taken through almost one-third (approximately 300) of all the years covered by the entire Book of Mormon (approximately 1,000). Truly the magnitude of Mormon's prophetic task and accomplishment is shown clearly here.

Some readers may lament the fact that one of the greatest periods of Nephite civilization—an era of ultimate earthly peace, prosperity, and spirituality—was given such relatively sparse historical treatment. Sidney Sperry observed that "it is unfortunate—at least vexing that the great Golden Era of Nephite history . . . should be so sparingly treated by Mormon, the abridger." [^2]

However, it must be remembered, first, that sometimes things were commanded by the Lord not to be discussed in the records. (3 Ne. 26:11, 18.) A similar injunction may have applied to this portion of the abridgment. Second, Mormon's purpose was not the writing of history, nor was it historical embellishment or even enlargement. His abridgment was guided by inspiration and was first and foremost intended to teach the most important truths of the kingdom as they could be culled from history. Mormon said at one point:

I do this for a wise purpose; for thus it whispereth me, according to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me. And now, I do not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will. And my prayer to God is concerning my brethren, that they may once again come to the knowledge of God, yea, the redemption of Christ; that they may once again be a delightsome people. And now I, Mormon, proceed to finish out my record, which I take from the plates of Nephi; and I make it according to the knowledge and the understanding which God has given me. (Words of Mormon 1:7-9.)

It has been noted in commentaries that when originally published, 3 and 4 Nephi were both called "Nephi." [^3] In 1879 Elder Orson Pratt added the separate titles, 3 and 4 Nephi, to help distinguish the works from one another. Each has a different emphasis and intent—one being an American Gospel recording the Savior's visit and physical presence, the other recounting the effect of that visit and the eventual decline of an entire culture.

Effect of the Savior's Visit

As 3 Nephi testifies, dramatic physical changes occurred on the American landscape immediately preceding the coming of the resurrected Christ to the New World. (3 Ne. 8.) They were some of the most impressive events ever to occur on the Western Hemisphere. And, yet, as significant as those changes were, even greater changes took place after the Savior finished his visit and departed. These greater changes occurred in the hearts, minds, and souls of the Nephites and Lamanites for one hundred and sixty-seven years after Jesus left.

As 4 Nephi reports, so powerful an effect did the Savior's presence and testimony have on the people that they were all converted to the Lord, joined the one true church that had been formed "in all the lands round about" (a phrase likely indicating the establishment of several branches or units of the Church in various geographic sectors), and began living the celestial law. There were no disputations among the people, justice everywhere prevailed, all earthly possessions were distributed equitably, and distinctions between rich and poor were eradicated. Such a condition recalls a similar circumstance found at the same time in the Old World when, after the Lord's ascension, members of the Church of Jesus Christ also enjoyed the blessings of the gospel, though perhaps to a lesser degree: "With great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them all. Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the apostles' feet: and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need." (Acts 4:33-35.)

Of course, the greatest difference between the New and Old World church is that the latter still had to contend with an outside culture in the throes of wickedness, while the former flourished in circumstances where all people were converted to the Lord. (4 Ne. 1:2.) Thus, the Book of Mormon peoples enjoyed their blessed state for a long time. As Mormon wrote: "How blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no contention in all the land." (4 Ne. 1:18.)

Still, eventually the New World church succumbed to the same fate that befell the Old. Satan got hold upon the hearts of men and women (4 Ne. 1:28), and great apostasy ensued. We are left to lament and wonder whether or not the adversary is so powerful as to always triumph over good in the hearts of mortals if given enough time. After all, the people of Nephi had lived the Order of Zion for one hundred and sixty-seven years. Why not longer?

If we look at the example of the people of Enoch, we are taught that evil need not always conquer good, that mortals are capable of continuing to live in righteousness until they can no longer be withheld from God's abode. Witness the testimony of Moses: "The Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them. And Enoch continued his preaching in righteousness unto the people of God. . . . And it came to pass that the Lord showed unto Enoch all the inhabitants of the earth; and he beheld, and lo, Zion, in process of time, was taken up into heaven. And the Lord said unto Enoch: Behold mine abode forever." (Moses 7:18-19, 21; emphasis added.)

These examples show that in every age or dispensation when the Spirit of the Lord rests mightily upon God's children, and is heeded, the same unifying social and economic order predominates and produces a Zion society. This is confirmed by latter-day history and scripture. The order is called the law of the celestial kingdom. (D&C 105:4-5.) Fourth Nephi shows that it is a law of unity: "There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God." (4 Ne. 1:17; emphasis added.)

In modern times the Lord has confirmed the importance of unity as an essential aspect of the law of the celestial kingdom. Said he: "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.)

The most striking thing about the law of the celestial kingdom as it operated among the Nephites and Lamanites, and others as well, was the economic equality that prevailed. The scriptures use the phrase "all things common" to describe the condition. This was not a system of communal ownership such as has been advocated by nineteenth- and twentieth-century secular political theories. Nor did it mean that each person had exactly the same amount of personal goods. As the Lord explained in latter-day revelation concerning his divine law of economic equality: "You are to be equal, or in other words, you are to have equal claims on the properties, for the benefit of managing the concerns of your stewardships, every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch as his wants are just." (D&C 82:17.)

The following instruction may help to further clarify the matter:

The scriptural phrase "they had all things common" (Acts 4:32; see also Acts 2:44; 3 Nephi 26:19; 4 Nephi 1:3) is used to characterize those who lived the law of consecration in ancient times. Some have speculated that the term common suggests a type of communalism or "Christian Communism." This interpretation is in error. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught clearly the true nature of having all things common: "I preached on the stand about one hour on the 2nd chapter of Acts, designing to show the folly of common stock (holding property in common). In Nauvoo every one is steward over his own (property)." [^4]

Each stewardship is considered private property, and the residues and surpluses consecrated for the storehouse became the "common property of the whole church" (D&C 82:18). It is referred to as the "common property" because every covenant member of the order had access to it, according to his just "wants" and "needs," including the need to improve his stewardship. [^5]

Millennial Conditions Foreshadowed

Conformity to the law of the celestial kingdom (under which all were economically prosperous and without social distinctions) brought the combined Nephite and Lamanite people many blessings, not the least of which was peace in all the land. In fact, of all the varied things Mormon could have chosen to include in the highly abridged record, it is most significant that he chose to repeat the fact that peace pervaded the land. In the initial twenty-three verses of 4 Nephi, Mormon reported no fewer than five times that there were no contentions in the land and that peace abounded.

This peace resulted, directly, in great prosperity as well as the working of mighty miracles. These phenomena were centered in Christ. We learn that "the Lord did prosper [the people] exceedingly in the land" (4 Ne. 1:7) and that no miracles were done "save it were in the name of Jesus" (4 Ne. 1:5). Of course, Christ is the Prince of Peace, and when any of God's children at any time live the gospel of Christ then the peace of Christ is promised. In fact, the Lord said to the Nephites: "The mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee." (3 Ne. 22:10; emphasis added.)

The conditions spoken of in 4 Nephi parallel and foreshadow those that will exist during the thousand-year period of Christ's millennial reign, the hallmarks of which are also righteousness, peace, and prosperity. During that future era, just as in bygone times described by Mormon, enmity shall cease (D&C 101:26), and nation will no longer lift up sword against nation (Isa. 2:4).

In other respects, too, the millennium and the celestial-like era described in 4 Nephi will be very much alike. Immediately after the Savior's departure from the American continent, his disciples formed the one true church of Christ in the lands round about, and many were baptized. Eventually all people were converted to the Lord (4 Ne. 1:1-2) and each received the Holy Ghost, which testified personally of the Savior. Regarding missionary activity during the millennium, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

With the destruction of the wicked and the fall of the great and abominable church (D&C 29:21; 88:94)—events destined to accompany the ushering in of the millennium—the conversion of men to the truths of the gospel will become easy. In due course every living soul on earth will come to the knowledge of the truth. . . . This means that when "all things shall be made known unto the children of men" (2 Ne. 30:15-18), they all shall accept the gospel. . . . This will be the day when the great promise to Israel is fulfilled: "And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them." (Jer. 31:34.) [^6]

Mormon wrote "that the people of Nephi did wax strong, and did multiply exceedingly fast." (4 Ne. 1:10; emphasis added.) We also gather from the record that all, except for a very small portion, of the second generation born after the coming of Christ to America grew up in the ways of the Lord (4 Ne. 1:18-22.) Concerning the millennium, we read about those same conditions that are to exist again: "They shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation." (D&C 45:48; emphasis added.) Thus, the people of the great Nephite golden age already had what the righteous of our day yearn to see—a millennial-like existence.

Zion Lost

It is one of the greatest tragedies of human history that what could have been a story with an ending very similar to that of the city of Enoch so quickly and thoroughly turned into one of complete iniquity. The Nephites and Lamanites from A.D. 36 to A.D. 200 possessed every good thing. As Mormon stated, "Surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (4 Ne. 1:16.) However, after a time this great happiness was lost forever, and the decay of their civilization was absolute.

Just as spiritual rebirth is a process (see Alma 5), so too is spiritual death. The last half of 4 Nephi as well as Mormon 1 and 2 chronicle the course and structure of the final great Nephite apostasy, whose most striking features seem to be the loss of humility, the loss of unity, and the growth of greed and hardness of heart among the people. We may outline the progress of this spiritual death in a general way.

Mormon recorded that things eventually became so bad that all life and property were in jeopardy. (Morm. 2:10.) Such a condition produced sorrow and mourning. Yet, it was not sorrowing unto repentance, "but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin." (Morm. 2:13.) Thus, the fate of a nation—indeed, a civilization—was sealed because they would not repent! (See Morm. 2:8.)

The More Sure Word

In the midst of recounting the course of Nephite apostasy and spiritual death, Mormon took time to tell us a little about himself. He recorded that he was a sober child, which we may take to mean one full of reason, self-control, and emotional balance, who was not extreme or frivolous but serious-minded and educated. (Morm. 1:2.) Like Nephi of old, he was large in stature while still a young man. But he was also like Nephi in one other important respect; he, too, was a living witness of the reality of Christ's divinity. As he testified: "I, being fifteen years of age and being somewhat of a sober mind, therefore I was visited of the Lord, and tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus." (Morm. 1:15.)

In this regard, Mormon is reminiscent of others who had similar experiences. We have already mentioned Nephi, who, being very young, large in stature, and desirous to know the mysteries of God, cried unto the Lord and was visited by him. (1 Ne. 2:16.) The Old Testament prophet Samuel was another young man who was visited by the Lord. (1 Sam. 3:4-21.) In modern times, of course, we have the testimony of Joseph Smith, who, as a teenager, beheld the Father and the Son. (JS-H 1:17.) As these prophets and others of like experience teach us, young people can accomplish great and marvelous things, and the prophetic call does not depend on age, wealth, or circumstances.

Mormon suffered greatly because of the wickedness of his people. However, he was buoyed up and received some comfort in the sure knowledge that he would be lifted up at the last day just as the Savior had promised. (3 Ne. 27:14.) Said Mormon: "Wo is me because of their wickedness; for my heart has been filled with sorrow because of their wickedness, all my days; nevertheless, I know that I shall be lifted up at the last day." (Morm. 2:19.)

Mormon's knowledge was well founded. He had received the Second Comforter (D&C 88:3-4, 67-68) and possessed the more sure word of prophecy, as did other Nephite prophets including Alma (Mosiah 26:20), Enos (Enos 1:27), and the Twelve on the American continent (3 Ne. 28:3). Modern revelation teaches: "The more sure word of prophecy means a man's knowing that he is sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy, through the power of the Holy Priesthood." (D&C 131:5.) Such was the anchor to Mormon's soul in the face of the worst kind of calamity.

Knowing what he did and having the testimony he did, Mormon endeavored to preach to his people. However, the Lord forbade him from doing so. The people had "wilfully rebelled against their God" and sinned against the light. (Morm. 1:16.) Concerning the final outcome of these willful rebels, only the Lord can say definitively. However, the following statement is instructive and may apply in this situation: "Thus saith the Lord concerning all those who know my power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my power—They are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been better for them never to have been born." (D&C 76:31-32.)

Whatever the eternal condition of the people of Nephi might be, we can say with certainty that their rebellion cost them dearly in this life and in the next.

Conclusion

Mormon's abridged record instructs us clearly on the nature and course of apostasy. Humility brought faith in Christ, which brought unity and peace, which then, in turn, brought pride as people forgot the real source of their achievements. Ultimately, hatred, destruction, and bloodshed filled the land while secret combinations raged against all righteousness. Peace was forever lost. Of these things Mormon's words are at once a report, an urging, and a warning. We can and ought to learn from the Nephites that living the law of the celestial kingdom transforms the world spiritually. But how can we live this law in our modern society? How can we even come close to conformity with the Lord's law when the rest of the world seems to be entrenched in sin, greed, avarice, and hatred?

While we may not be able to do everything, we can do something. Witness the words of President Marion G. Romney:

Full implementation of the united order must, according to the revelation, await the redemption of Zion (See D&C 105:34.) In the meantime—while we are being more perfectly taught and are gaining experience—we should be strictly living the principles of the united order insofar as they are embodied in present Church requirements, such as tithing, fast offerings, welfare projects, storehouses, and other principles and practices. Through these programs we should, as individuals, implement in our own lives the basis of the united order. [^7]

We also ought to learn from the Nephites that pride and envy lead to hatred, the breakdown of society, and the loss of peace. Modern prophets have given similar warnings. Elder Marvin J. Ashton said:

True Christians have no time for contention. Lasting peace cannot be built while we are reviling or hating others. Those who preach hate, ridicule, and untruths cannot be classified as peacemakers. Until they repent they will reap the harvest to which those engaged in the business of hatred are entitled. Feelings of enmity and malice can never be compatible with feelings of peace.

"The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." (Isa. 57:20-21.) [^8]

Mormon's record stands as a witness to his own prophetic calling and testifies of the greatness of the man. From personal experience, Mormon taught us that a witness of the Savior gives one strength and hope, even in the worst circumstances and surroundings. With the Spirit we are strong. Without the Spirit we are "left to ourselves," and we "become weak like unto our [unrighteous] brethren." (Morm. 2:26.) Let us resolve to learn the lessons that Mormon's record teaches.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Know ye that ye are of the house of Israel." (Morm. 7:2.) A correct sense of identity is essential to proper behavior. Pride in one's heritage and future, as prophesied in the scriptures, includes the blessings promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Until you know who you are, you can never reach your potential. In positing this as his first instruction, Mormon combined the insight of the prophet with that of the historian. As long as people are oriented in time, with a historical perspective, they have a sense of identity; and Mormon, as other prophets in the Book of Mormon, always hearkened back to the religious origins of the house of Israel and its prophetic future. Thomas W. Mackay is professor of Greek and Latin at Brigham Young University.
[^2] "Know ye that ye must come unto repentance, or ye cannot be saved." (Morm. 7:3.) Through his account of Nephite history and through his own efforts with his contemporaries, Mormon always put matters into correct perspective: Put your life in order and be forgiven for sins through the atonement, or else all other accomplishments in life are transitory and vain. See also Alma 37:27-32 (about the secret combinations among the Jaredites), Helaman 6:17-32, and 4 Nephi 1:42, 46; also Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), pp. 315-34 (now reprinted in a third edition [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, and Provo, Utah: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1988], pp. 378-99).
[^3] "Know ye that ye must lay down your weapons of war, and delight no more in the shedding of blood, and take them not again, save it be that God shall command you." (Morm. 7:4.) This injunction is stunning. First, it is specific and immediately follows the prophet-historian's call to repentance and his exhortation to understand our true identity. Second, it comes from one who was a military commander for fifty years. Nevertheless, he advocated a position not unlike that of the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi; and certainly his hero Moroni also used restraint and took a defensive stance unless God directed otherwise. For a world with hundredfold overkill capability, what better message, what more apt charge could be written? This injunction is not the fanatical rambling of a demented, antisocial radical; rather it came from an active politician-general of many years. His historical and prophetic perspective also allowed him to deliver to our generation what we need desperately to know. Hugh Nibley, Since Cumorah (Salt Lake: Deseret Book Company, 1967), pp. 330-66.
[^4] "Know ye that ye must come to the knowledge of your fathers, and repent of all your sins and iniquities, and believe in Jesus Christ, that he is the Son of God, and that . . . he hath risen again; . . . and he bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead, whereby man must be raised to stand before his judgment-seat." (Morm. 7:5-6.) In a sense this repeats the first two points and joins to them Mormon's lament to the slain of his people. (Morm. 6:16-22.) We should live so that we will not be ashamed on judgment day; that is, we should repent and be forgiven for past misdeeds, then be inspired to do good in the future. By focusing on the final judgment, Mormon sought to motivate us to view life from an eternal perspective, the very thing the Nephites had lost. The dating system Anno Domini or from the birth of Christ developed very early in Nephite records and accurately records the year as given. However, in the Greco-Roman world it was imposed on the historical narratives and records especially due to the influence of Dionysius Exiguus (sixth century) and the Venerable Bede (early eighth century). Unfortunately historical inaccuracies and lack of precise information apparently led to misplacing the birth of Christ about three to five years late, since Herod died in March, 4 B.C. (F. F. Bruce, New Testament History [2nd ed.; London: Oliphants, 1977], p. 22), so if we wanted to put Book of Mormon dates in a timeline with traditional dating for the Roman world, we would need to adjust them accordingly. The year of the treaty would perhaps be circa 346/47. (For the date of Christ's birth, see Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1979], 1:349-50, note 2; J. Reuben Clark, Our Lord of the Gospels [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1954], p. vii; and Jack Finegan, Handbook of Biblical Chronology [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964], pp. 215-59; for the general problems and source materials for ancient chronology, see Alan E. Samuel, Greek and Roman Chronology, Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft, 1.7 [Munich: C. H. Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1972].)
[^5] "And he hath brought to pass the redemption of the world, whereby he that is found guiltless before him at the judgment day hath it given unto him to dwell in the presence of God in his kingdom . . . in a state of happiness which hath no end." (Morm. 7:7.) With his reaffirmation of the reality of the atonement and of the possibility of endless happiness following the brief period of trial in our mortal existence, Mormon tied back to the most important of the promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: that the Redeemer of the world would come from their posterity and perform the expiatory sacrifice for all, bringing about a universal resurrection, with individual rewards conditional upon faith, repentance, and obedience. Cf. Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites (Salt Lake: Bookcraft, 1952), pp. 229-31.
[^6] "Therefore repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record but also in the record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record shall come from the Gentiles unto you. For behold, this is written for the intent that ye may believe that; and if ye believe that ye will believe this also; and if ye believe this ye will know concerning your fathers, and also the marvelous works which were wrought by the power of God among them." (Morm. 7:8-9.) With the injunction to repent and be baptized, Mormon linked his message to his previous thought. Once acquired, an understanding of the principles of the gospel and of God's concern for his children is best reinforced by continual pondering of the scriptures. Mormon knew well that in our day, two major records, the Bible and the Book of Mormon, would corroborate each other and mutually support the restoration of the true gospel on the earth. Cf. Nibley, Since Cumorah, pp. 330-66 passim, but especially pp. 330, 340-41, 344, 348, 351-52.
[^7] "And ye will also know that ye are a remnant of the seed of Jacob; therefore ye are numbered among the people of the first covenant; and if it so be that ye believe in Christ, and are baptized, first with water, then with fire and with the Holy Ghost, following the example of our Savior, according to that which he hath commanded us, it shall be well with you in the day of judgment." (Morm. 7:10.) Mormon now returned to his first injunction—to know and appreciate what it means to belong to the house of Israel. The historical anchor of personal and group identity not only has strong religious implications, but it is also a psychologically sound principle. By including the specific steps to take to abide by the gospel covenant, Mormon unified and summarized his statement: faith in Christ, baptism of water and of spirit, and constant obedience will lead to happiness when we are finally judged, as we will all surely be. Cf. Hugh Nibley, Lehi in the Desert and the World of the Jaredites, pp. 238-42.
[^8] There is no full parallel in the New Testament for Mormon 9:25 (''Whosoever shall believe in my name, doubting nothing, unto him will I confirm all my words, even unto the ends of the earth'') except James 1:5-6. But Mormon 9:22-24 does give us cause to accept the longer ending of Mark as authentic early Christian scripture, despite textual questions based on manuscript tradition.
