Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

21

MORMON AND THE DESTRUCTION OF NEPHITE CIVILIZATION

(Mormon 3-9)

Thomas W. Mackay [^1]

What Mormon must have felt, after nearly sixty years as general, historian, and prophet, as he helplessly witnessed his nation intent on spiritual suicide and utter annihilation! Although he found the behavior of his people reprehensible, still he had compassion for them. He offered his help, but he was unable to avert the imminent danger. And it was in this society that he had to rear his son and successor, Moroni. Mormon's humanity, his anguish, and his individuality all resound from the pages of the book, especially in that short segment entitled "The Book of Mormon."

Shaping the Historian's Mind

As we analyze Mormon's worldview, we realize from comments he made elsewhere in his abridgment of the historical record that certain people and events affected him deeply. For example, he wrote of king Benjamin in glowing terms, for ideals of industry, compassion, concern for the poor and needy, and a focus on the spiritual needs of people—these all leap out from Mormon's words. Mormon recounted how Alma's unwavering devotion to the gospel developed after he was moved by Abinadi's teachings and how it persisted in the face of adverse circumstances, despite the rebellion of people he loved, including one of his sons. Later, the conversion of the younger Alma—who resigned from political leadership to "preach the word of God" (Alma 4:19; cf. Alma 31:5)—and his experiences in teaching the people provided rich materials for the history. These individuals, with Moroni, Helaman, Nephi, and Samuel, also furnished patterns for Mormon's life.

But negative examples also abound in Mormon's account. What a contrast to these leaders Mormon made when he referred to Benjamin's contemporary, king Noah. But the wicked influence of individual apostates and leaders like Amlici, Nehor, Korihor, and Amalickiah pales in comparison to the social havoc wrought by the Gadianton robbers (contemporaneously, as though part of a worldwide phenomenon, robber bands and social deterioration were also a severe problem in the Roman Empire of the third century and again in the fifth century and later). So the prophet and historian noted at Mormon 1:18, 2:8, 28 the persistent presence of the Gadianton bands, answering his comment in Helaman 1-2, when the practice of a secret combination was introduced among the Nephites. [^2] For at Helaman 2:12-14 Mormon observed, "More of this Gadianton shall be spoken hereafter. . . . And behold, in the end of this book ye shall see that this Gadianton did prove the overthrow, yea, almost the entire destruction of the people of Nephi. Behold I do not mean the end of the book of Helaman, but I mean the end of the book of Nephi, from which I have taken all the account which I have written." Thus we comprehend how Mormon had clearly seen from prophecy and from the social ills of his own lifetime the nature and origin of the destructive forces among the Nephites. This perspective was later echoed by his son Moroni, who lamented that "they [secret combinations] have caused the destruction of this people of whom I am now speaking [the Jaredite civilization], and also the destruction of the people of Nephi." (Ether 8:21.)

Other interests of Mormon included the military exploits of a man he deeply respected, the namesake of his own son: Moroni. [^3] Of this great man Mormon said, "If all men had been and were, and ever would be, like unto Moroni, behold, the very powers of hell would have been shaken forever." (Alma 48:17; see 48:11-16.) This Moroni had delighted in preserving his people, not in shedding blood. Moroni's attitude, augmented by the example of the bravery and faith of Helaman's young warriors, became almost a preoccupation with Mormon.

The visit of the Savior and its effect on people nearly overwhelmed Mormon. And he had a special feeling for the three translated Nephite disciples; he had seen them himself. (3 Ne. 28:26; cf. Morm. 8:11.) In contrast to the three disciples, the response of his contemporary society must have struck Mormon forcibly, for despite his own preaching (Morm. 3:11-5:2), the Nephites refused to repent. Mormon learned how to evaluate society from experience, from abridging the Nephite records, and from heavenly visitants. So he based his historical judgment on the righteousness of the people, not on manifestations of military, political, financial, or cultural success. We discover this interpretation of history everywhere in Mormon's writings.

The first two chapters of Mormon continue the history recounted in 4 Nephi. The account begins with the injunction of the aged prophet Ammaron to the young Mormon, then but "about ten years of age" (Morm. 1:2), that he record the Nephite history of his lifetime. Nevertheless we must recall that this portion of Mormon's writings (Mormon 1-7) and the earlier bridge, "The Words of Mormon," between the small plates of Nephi (1 Nephi to Omni) and Mormon's abridgment of Mosiah from the large plates of Nephi were both made at the end of Mormon's life. Even the three chapters of Mormon's writings and teachings that Moroni inserted (Moroni 7-9) apparently antedate Mormon 7. Mormon's concluding message in Mormon 7 is poignant and direct. It thus reflects the maturity of his development as prophet-historian and offers his conclusion to the whole matter: the spiritual and cultural lessons future generations should learn from the disintegration of a once-flourishing civilization. These lessons are precisely the major motifs of the lengthy account of Nephite history that today bears his name.

An Age of Social Decay

As we pick up the story in Mormon 3, the prophet-historian had been divinely called to succeed the old prophet Ammaron. (Morm. 1:2-4.) Before this time, increasing tensions and conflicts split Nephite society into separate groups, and most people drifted from righteousness. (4 Ne. 1:27-38, 42-46; Morm. 1:7-11, 13-14.) Hence spiritual gifts and manifestations generally ceased (Morm. 1:14; cf. Morm. 9:20), though Mormon himself saw the Lord (Morm. 1:15). But in general the land was cursed; Gadianton robbers abounded; people hid up treasures, never to regain them; magic and witchcraft infected society, just as had been prophesied. (Hel. 13:30-38; 4 Ne. 1:45-46; Morm. 1:17-19; cf. Morm. 2:8, 10.) At fifteen, Mormon became military commander for the Nephites, but he had only limited success. (Morm. 2:1-11, 20-27.) Finally, in A.D. 350 [^4] a major mutual nonaggression pact was established among the Nephites, Lamanites, and Gadianton robbers. It did not last. Although ten years passed without battle, both Nephites and Lamanites made military preparations. (Morm. 3:1, 4.)

During the cessation of hostilities, the Nephites listened to Mormon only as their military and political leader, not as a prophet. (Morm. 3:1-3.) That was the same condition as twenty years previous, when the people lamented the wars and the degeneration of society, but only because those problems interfered with their own pleasures. Mormon pointedly commented that "their sorrowing was not unto repentance, because of the goodness of God; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin." (Morm. 2:13.)

In an epistle intended to intimidate his foe, [^5] the Lamanite king announced his intention to resume war. In response, the Nephites fortified their cities and gathered "at the land Desolation, to a city which was in the borders, by the narrow pass which led into the land southward" (Morm. 3:5)—ironically, where the Jaredite armies had exterminated each other. In successive years (A.D. 361 and 362; Morm. 3:7-8) the Nephites repulsed the Lamanites, and those defensive victories altered Nephite desires: they wanted to go on the offensive against their enemies and utterly destroy them! Both sides were thoroughly infected with the same malady that afflicted the Jaredites and has been recorded of various nations: genocide of the opposition viewed as the only remedy.

In response, Mormon resigned, refusing to lead the offensive. He became "as an idle witness" (Morm. 3:16), as the Lord had commanded him. In the midst of this narrative, Mormon changed his authorial stance and directly addressed his audience, exhorting them to repentance and to an awareness of the impending final judgment. (Morm. 3:17-22.) So he indicated implicitly his disapproval of warfare, particularly for vengeance or for any purpose other than what had motivated Moroni. [^6] Defense, not offense, and compassion, not annihilation, should be the motivating forces. He clearly stated this principle in his final words: "Know ye that ye must lay down your weapons of war, and delight no more in the shedding of blood, and take them not again, save it be that God shall command you." (Morm. 7:4.)

In an all-out offensive, the Lamanites assaulted and captured the key city Desolation, only to lose it again the following year. Lusting for each other's blood, both sides became depraved. Nearly a millennium before Mormon recorded the culmination of hostilities between Nephites and Lamanites, Nephi could boldly state that the invading house of Israel was more righteous than the prior inhabitants: "This people had rejected every word of God, and they were ripe in iniquity; and the fulness of the wrath of God was upon them; and the Lord did curse the land against them . . . unto their destruction, and he did bless it unto our fathers unto their obtaining power over it." (1 Ne. 17:35.) For Nephi, God "raiseth up a righteous nation, and destroyeth the nations of the wicked." (1 Ne. 17:37.) By contrast, to Mormon "the judgments of God will overtake the wicked; and it is by the wicked that the wicked are punished" (Morm. 4:5), for in his day he could discern no people who would qualify as righteous.

The belligerents fought ghastly battles, slaughtering women and children; but in their campaign of A.D. 367, the Nephites, furious because of the enemy's atrocities, drove out the invading and occupying forces of the Lamanites. (Morm. 4:10-16.) The next attack of the Lamanites, in A.D. 375, marked the point of no return for the genocidal war. (Morm. 4:18.) Overwhelming the pivotal stronghold of Desolation once more, the Lamanites quickly drove forward. Despite a repetition of wartime atrocities against their families, the Nephites were so utterly terrorized that they fled, leaving all behind. (Morm. 4:19-22.) Under these circumstances, Mormon retrieved the records that Ammaron had deposited, but we may suppose that he had already abridged much of Nephite history from the various records while he was a nonparticipant in the battles from A.D. 362 (Morm. 3:11) to sometime after the Lamanites commenced their offensive in 375 (Morm. 5:1). He completed the abridgment and hid away his source records just before the final battle. (Morm. 6:6.)

Mormon was not deluded. He realized that the Nephites had not changed, yet his compassion led him to accept command once more. As Mormon and his armies swept by cities, they gathered Nephites into their retreating hosts. Many inhabitants would not believe that the Lamanites sought complete extermination of their enemies. However, the Nephite cities were soon obliterated. (Morm. 5:4-5.) Mormon's fuller account of these years on the plates of Nephi must have sickened him, and he summarizes only briefly for his modern audience. During these bleak days following the renewal of war in A.D. 375, the events described in Mormon's epistle to Moroni, recorded in Moroni 9, likely took place, for both there and in Mormon 5:16-18,Mormon lamented the moral, social, and spiritual degeneration of the Nephites. Their failure to repent left them as chaff blown on the wind, or as a storm-tossed ship without a rudder. (Mormon's similes are almost Homeric here [ Morm. 5:18].) Then, as he did in Mormon 3, the prophet-historian again addressed his future audience, the Gentiles (Morm. 5:19-24), directing them to repent or to face destruction by "a remnant of the seed of Jacob" (Morm. 5:24).

The Final Battle and Its Aftermath

Mormon's account of the horrifying end of the war is brief—fifteen verses. His epistle to the Lamanite king set the battlefield: Cumorah. (Morm. 6:1-3.) The abundance of water in that region was striking enough to merit mention, perhaps indicating that the Nephites were often not in such terrain. The year was A.D. 384, the seventy-third year of Mormon's life. The entire populace, the full spectrum of age and physical strength, awaited the attack of the imposing Lamanite army (Morm. 6:7-8); as they did so, they experienced "that awful fear of death which fills the breasts of all the wicked" (Morm. 6:7).

In the fierce fighting that ensued, Mormon himself was wounded and left for dead amid his army. (Morm. 6:10.) The battle arrangements of the Nephites called for a general for every ten thousand combatants. Mormon named thirteen Nephite generals, including Mormon and Moroni, and noted "that there were ten more who did fall by the sword." (Morm. 6:15.) Every group of ten thousand was slaughtered, usually with their generals. Of the Nephite multitude, numbering roughly 230,000, that fought at Cumorah—and the Nephite host was dwarfed by "the greatness of their [the Lamanites'] numbers" (Morm. 6:8)—only twenty-four people survived, "and also a few who had escaped into the south countries and a few who had deserted over unto the Lamanites" (Morm. 6:15). [^7] We learn from Moroni that those Nephites who escaped "were hunted by the Lamanites, until they were all destroyed." (Morm. 8:2, 7.) Among those slain was his father, Mormon, which left Moroni to a difficult and solitary life for another thirty-five years. (Morm. 8:3-5; Moro. 10:1.) If we may assume that Mormon 8:6 ("four hundred years have passed away since the coming of our Lord") marks the date of Moroni's first record on his father's plates, then Mormon, though aged and wounded, might have survived for a while. Perhaps the twenty-four survivors separated and agreed to rendezvous periodically, but within fifteen years of the battle, Moroni was without family or friend. Curiously, not all the demented fury and blood-lust was directed against the Nephites, for Moroni observed that "the Lamanites are at war one with another; and the whole face of this land is one continual round of murder and bloodshed; and no one knoweth the end of the war." (Morm. 8:8.) That is indeed poetic justice for the victorious nation.

Final Advice from a Dying Prophet, General, and Historian

After briefly recording the outcome of the battle (Morm. 6:1-15), Mormon lamented the insane destruction of his people. They simply refused to repent and to obey God's laws: "O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you! Behold, if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen. But behold, ye are fallen, and I mourn your loss." (Morm. 6:17-18.) As he proceeded, he referred to the last judgment, and this thought turned him to address his future audience directly. Whereas Mormon occasionally imbedded comments in his abridgment (as at 3 Ne. 30:1-2) and also composed an entire chapter on his approach to history (Hel. 12), we may view Mormon 7 as his final plea and loving advice to a civilization that would experience many of the same destructive forces that played out on the Americas anciently. This chapter warrants our careful and complete attention.

Speaking to the remnant of the house of Israel (that is, the descendants of the Lehi-Mulekite civilizations and others from among the Gentile nations who would read this record), Mormon proclaimed the following:

A Son Completes his Father's Work

As he sensed his life was coming to an end, Mormon gave his records to his son Moroni and directed him to complete the book. (Morm. 6:6; 8:1, 3; Moro. 9:24.) How was it not complete? The historical record after the visit of the Savior is extremely brief, by both choice and commandment. (Morm. 5:9; cf. 3 Ne. 26:6-12 [especially 11].) More significantly, when Mormon summarized the Jaredite record that Mosiah had translated, a record preserved for us in Moroni's abridgment under the name of Ether, he said, "This account shall be written hereafter; for behold, it is expedient that all people should know the things which are written in this account." (Mosiah 28:19.) This was one task he marked out for himself that he had not finished, and he perhaps spoke of this with Moroni. At least what Mormon mentioned in his epistle (Moro. 9:23) seems to be contemporary with the last year of the Nephite-Lamanite war, A.D. 384. (Or perhaps Moroni, while reading his father's record, came across the passage quoted above and, with filial devotion, did not want his father's promise to be unfulfilled.)

Moroni did continue his father's record. The trials and difficulties of his solitary existence are poignantly portrayed in Mormon 8:2-11, where even Moroni for some time seemed not to have been visited by the three Nephite disciples, who were translated and who had ministered among the Nephites and Lamanites until the wickedness of the people made it impossible to continue. Moroni dearly wanted his future readers to accept his record without being critical and negative, for he knew of his human weaknesses and failings. (Morm. 8:12-13, 17; cf. Ether 12:23-29, 35-36, 40.) Nevertheless, the record is true. It is divinely inspired. Perhaps he completed his first brief statement at Mormon 8:13 ("I make an end of speaking concerning this people. I am the son of Mormon, and my father was a descendant of Nephi"), for the next verse is almost another colophon that introduces the writer: "I am the same who hideth up this record unto the Lord" (Morm. 8:14). But our verse and chapter divisions are artificial and modern, not ancient, and so it seems that Mormon 8:13-14 is one continuous and unbroken statement. And Moroni's abridgment of Ether (that is, the twenty-four gold plates of the Jaredite record given by Limhi to the seer and king Mosiah, son of Benjamin) was probably accomplished at the same time as Mormon 8-9. However, to judge from Moroni 1:1, some time, perhaps as much as twenty years (Moro. 10:1), passed before Moroni composed the book that bears his name. As his father did, Moroni turned to his future audience and addressed them as though present, a voice crying from the dust. (Morm. 8:13-14.) His description of our days is precise and pointed, for he knew us through the spirit of prophecy. His concern was simple: as a civilization, we are following the same path as the Jaredites and Nephites, so he offered us a strong word of warning.

Just as his father prophesied how the Bible and the Book of Mormon would corroborate each other, Moroni made clear that no desire of personal fame or wealth and no intimidating threat will mar the appearance of the Nephite record in the last days. (Morm. 8:14-22.) But the book will be brought to a civilization where "miracles are done away" (Morm. 8:26) and where there are "secret combinations" (i.e., Gadianton-type groups; Morm. 8:27). Also, the social ills will pervade even the churches; corruption, rampant materialism, selfishness, and pride characterize the people. (Morm. 8:28-41.) Hence, because of social and spiritual problems left unattended, "the sword of vengeance hangeth over you." (Morm. 8:41.)

In the final chapter of Mormon, Moroni wrote with an apocalyptic view to the future. Though his audience was centuries removed, he addressed them directly. His message, echoing his father's warnings, emphasized the reality of the final judgment (Morm. 9:1-6), and Moroni linked together fall, atonement, resurrection, and judgment (Morm. 9:12-14). Disbelief in continuing revelation, miracles, and other religious matters is inconsistent with scriptural accounts of God's dealings with humanity. (Morm. 9:7-18.) For if God, who does not change, did miracles in the past, only a lack of faith can cause miracles to cease. Moroni then cited the Lord's injunction to his Nephite disciples or apostles (Morm. 9:22-25), a passage parallel to Mark 16:15-18. [^8] Thus a cessation of miracles marks out the people as needing to change, to accept the gospel, and to look to the judgment. (Morm. 9:26-30.)

In an aside, Moroni referred to the language of the Nephites as "reformed Egyptian," and he also observed that the Nephites knew Hebrew—but in an altered form. (Morm. 9:32-34.) Since Nephite "reformed Egyptian" had been modified "according to our manner of speech," this was probably their primary written language. It was apparently also the primary language of the brass plates: "He [Lehi] having been taught in the language of the Egyptians therefore he could read these engravings." (Mosiah 1:4.) As we noted above, Moroni was a very self-conscious writer. He wanted people to read and to receive his message without worrying about minute details, for this book was to restore the gospel and its covenants to the house of Israel, particularly the latter-day remnant of Lehi's expedition. (Morm. 9:34-37.) He remained in harmony with his father's general scheme and purpose. Moroni dutifully completed what Mormon had undertaken.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Kent P. Jackson is associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] The book of Omni contains a brief reference to a Jaredite matter, written by Amaleki before Ether's history was discovered. Sometime between the arrival of the Mulekites in the New World and their joining with king Mosiah and the Nephites (Omni 1:12-15), the Mulekites came upon a large inscribed stone. It was written by a man named Coriantumr, who was alive at the time of the discovery and lived for nine months among the Mulekites. (Omni 1:20-22.) This was undoubtedly the same Coriantumr who was a contemporary of Ether and who played a major role in the final events in the history of the Jaredite nation. (See Ether 12-15; especially 15:29-34.)
[^3] We are not informed of Ether's sources for the compilation of his record, which covered over two thousand years. But knowing how other sacred histories were written, including that of Mormon and Moroni, it is certainly possible that Ether had earlier Jaredite writings from which he compiled his account.
[^4] I suppose that it would not be inappropriate to wish that Moroni had included the account of history from Adam's time to that of Jared. Since we know from the Joseph Smith Translation and the Book of Mormon that the Old Testament did not arrive in the latter days without suffering major omissions, it is likely that the Jaredite equivalent of Genesis 1-11 would reveal fascinating information to us that is not available elsewhere.
[^5] Without question, the book of Ether clearly substantiates the historicity of the Tower of Babel and the account of the confounding of the languages that took place because of it. Whatever the exact circumstances may have been, at least we know because of Ether's account-untainted by textual manipulation and uninspired tradition-that there was such a tower and that the Lord did indeed confound the languages of his children in order to scatter them throughout the earth. (Ether 1:33-37.)
[^6] Arab men frequently have secondary names constructed from ''Abu'' (''father of''), often followed by the name of the first-born son (i.e., Abu-Ibrahim, ''father of Ibrahim,'' etc.).
[^7] The account was published in a footnote in the Juvenile Instructor, May 1, 1892, p. 282. It reads as follows: ''While residing in Kirtland Elder Reynolds Cahoon had a son born to him. One day when President Joseph Smith was passing his door he called the Prophet in and asked him to bless and name the baby. Joseph did so and gave the boy the name of Mahonri Moriancumer. When he had finished the blessing he laid the child on the bed, and turning to Elder Cahoon he said, the name I have given your son is the name of the brother of Jared; the Lord has just shown [or revealed] it to me. Elder William F. Cahoon, who was standing near heard the Prophet make this statement to his father; and this was the first time the name of the brother of Jared was known in the Church in this dispensation.''
[^8] Juvenile Instructor, May 1, 1892, p. 284, note. Elder Reynolds also wrote: ''We have no direct information in regard to the locality of Moriancumer, but those who believe that the Jaredites traveled eastward through Central Asia, are of the opinion that it was near the mouth of one of the great rivers that flow through the Chinese empire into the Pacific Ocean.'' (Juvenile Instructor, May 1, 1892, note.)
