Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

22

CHRIST AND THE JAREDITES

(Ether 1-4)

Kent P. Jackson [^1]

As the ancient Jaredite civilization came to its dehumanizing end, the prophet Ether completed the record of his people, which he wrote on twenty-four plates of gold. He had been rejected by his people, as had other prophets, and now he saw their demise—living in a cave while he recorded the last days of a once-great society. (Ether 13:13-14.) Ether became a witness that the prophecies of annihilation had come true. [^2] Once he had recorded that witness, he hid away the book, trusting it into the hands of God and knowing, we can be sure, that it would be made known to others in the due time of the Lord. (Ether 15:33.) [^3]

Years later, a Nephite king named Limhi, son of Noah, sent an expedition of explorers to find the city of Zarahemla from which their ancestors had come. Limhi hoped to reunite his people with their fellow Nephites, from whom his colony had been separated for eighty years. Instead of finding Zarahemla, the explorers found the ruins of an ancient civilization and brought back artifacts to testify to their find. The most noteworthy of the artifacts was a record, written on "twenty-four plates which are filled with engravings, and they are of pure gold." (Mosiah 8:9; see also 8:7-14.) The due time of the Lord had arrived, and Ether's record had been discovered.

Limhi and his people could not read the plates but had an intense desire to know of their contents. Thus when Ammon and his party arrived from Zarahemla and told Limhi about King Mosiah—a seer who by means of some "interpreters" could make known the content of the record—Limhi "rejoiced exceedingly, and gave thanks to God, saying: Doubtless a great mystery is contained within these plates, and these interpreters were doubtless prepared for the purpose of unfolding all such mysteries to the children of men." (Mosiah 8:19; see also 8:12-14; 21:25-28.) Mosiah did translate the record, by means of "those two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow," which had been "prepared from the beginning, and were handed down from generation to generation, for the purpose of interpreting languages." (Mosiah 28:13-14; see also 28:11-18.)

The Nephites, anxious to learn about the nation whose history was on the record, mourned "exceedingly" and were "filled with sorrow" when they heard the tragic story of the Jaredites. Nonetheless, "it gave them much knowledge, in the which they did rejoice." (Mosiah 28:18.) In writing the book of Mosiah, Mormon noted that the Jaredite history would be included later in his record, for "all people should know the things which are written in this account." (Mosiah 28:19.) He died without including it in the Book of Mormon, but his son, Moroni, accomplished the task. "And now I, Moroni, proceed to give an account of those ancient inhabitants who were destroyed by the hand of the Lord upon the face of this north country. And I take mine account from the twenty and four plates which were found by the people of Limhi, which is called the Book of Ether." (Ether 1:1-2.) With these words, Moroni began his abridgment of the twenty-four gold plates of the Jaredite record.

Moroni found, as Mosiah had discovered earlier (Mosiah 28:17), that the Jaredite plates contained a history that extended from the creation of Adam to the time of Ether. He chose to begin his abridgment with the formation of the Jaredite colony at the time of the Tower of Babel, supposing that a record of the earlier period would already be available in the Bible at the time when the Book of Mormon would come forth. (Ether 1:3-4.) [^4]

Jared and Mahonri Moriancumer

Moroni's abridgment of Ether's record devotes a third of its total space to the first generation of Jaredite history—the time of Jared and his brother and the successful establishment of their colony in the New World. The account begins at the time of the Tower of Babel, traditionally believed to be in Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq). [^5] Two great leaders are prominent at the beginning of the account—Jared and his brother, who is called in the narrative "the brother of Jared." There is no suggestion in Moroni's abridgment why he is known by this name. Perhaps his name was not recorded on Ether's twenty-four plates, or perhaps he was actually called "the brother of Jared." [^6] In 1892, George Reynolds wrote that Joseph Smith had identified the brother of Jared's name as Mahonri Moriancumer. [^7] Even though the reference comes from a late second-hand source, it has been accepted widely, and for the sake of convenience it will be used here. The narrative in the first chapter seems to suggest that the leader of the group was Jared. Yet he clearly recognized his brother's tremendous spiritual qualities and often took the initiative to ask him to inquire of the Lord for guidance in their collective mission. (See, for example, Ether 1:34, 36, 38.)

The Travels of the Jaredites

Knowing the intention of the Lord to confound the languages and scatter people over the earth, Jared asked his brother to pray that their language would not be confounded. Then he asked him to inquire about the relocation of their families and friends to another part of the world: "Who knoweth but the Lord will carry us forth into a land which is choice above all the earth? And if it so be, let us be faithful unto the Lord, that we may receive it for our inheritance." (Ether 1:38.) The Lord did, in fact, direct them to a promised land. With their families, their friends, and their friends' families, Jared and Mahonri Moriancumer trusted their future into the hands of God and followed his directions to a new home. With them they took flocks "of every kind," birds, fish, swarms of honeybees, and seeds of every kind. (Ether 2:1-3.) They traveled northward into a valley called "Nimrod," from which the Lord commanded them to travel "into the wilderness, yea into that quarter where there never had man been. And it came to pass that the Lord did go before them, and did talk with them as he stood in a cloud, and gave directions whither they should travel." Their journey included crossing "many waters, being directed continually by the hand of the Lord." (Ether 2:5-6.) It continued until they arrived at the "great sea which divideth the lands," at which point they stopped their journey for four years. It was from this location, which they named Moriancumer (Ether 2:13), that they later sailed across the ocean to their land of promise. The record does not give much specific information about the route of the group's travels from the valley of Nimrod to Moriancumer. Elder George Reynolds suggested: "It is evident that they first traveled northward, but whether they turned east or west is not so apparent. The general idea is that they turned eastward and crossed Central Asia." [^8]

A Promised Land

In his discussion of the journeys of the Jaredites, Moroni took the opportunity to interject some profound information about the land of promise to which Jared and his people were traveling. Certainly he was in a unique position to write about the covenants and curses associated with a promised land. He knew the history of his own people and had himself witnessed their destruction. He also knew the final end of the Jaredite civilization, which makes his comments on their beginning most meaningful. He made his point clearly:

Whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them.

And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity. (Ether 2:8-9.)

Those who desire to live in a land of promise must serve the true and only God. Those who fail to do so will be "swept off" when they reach the point of being "ripened in iniquity," that is, when their wickedness reaches the point at which punishment is inevitable.

Moroni was speaking of the Americas, which was the promised land to the peoples of the Book of Mormon—the Jaredites, the Mulekites, and the Lehites. As he mentioned in verse 10, it was "choice above all other lands." Because the land was so vast, fertile, and rich, both the Nephites and the Jaredites were able to become extremely prosperous within a short time after their arrivals. (1 Ne. 18:24-25; Ether 6:28.) But when Moroni wrote his record, both of those civilizations had already gone to ruin for failing to serve God. He was not writing to them but to us in the latter days, the modern readers of his book.

Since the European discovery of the New World, when people from many lands began colonizing the Americas, they found a land in which God had provided an incredible richness of natural resources. Using those resources, they built, in a relatively short time, a civilization of unprecedented prosperity. Yet Moroni, who saw the world in the last days, gave somber warnings to the people of our time, explaining why the records of these fallen peoples were preserved for our benefit: "This cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God—that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done." (Ether 2:11.)

Perhaps Moroni had in mind specifically those modern readers who would live in the land once promised to his own people—America—whose inhabitants now are already, collectively speaking, "ripening in their iniquity." But his warnings are appropriate for all people everywhere, for all nations are ripening in iniquity. He wrote these words so people in all lands could repent and avoid the calamities to which the Jaredites and his own people had subjected themselves.

Not all covenant people share the same promised lands. Palestine was the promised land and gathering place for the Israelites in ancient times; the Americas were the promised land and gathering place for the ancient Jaredites and the children of Lehi. Today each land is the land of promise and the place of gathering for those who live in it, [^9] and the warnings and promises that Moroni gave in Ether 2:8-12 apply to all Latter-day Saints in their own nations. We can enjoy the blessings and the promises only if we and our fellow citizens, wherever we may live, "serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ." (Ether 2:12.)

Obtaining Light

Having been instructed by the Lord to build boats to convey his people across the waters, the brother of Jared successfully fulfilled the Lord's wishes. Yet God's instructions did not include showing him how light would be provided in the boats. For this he needed to exert his own initiative and make the best use of his God-given intellectual and spiritual resources. The Lord gave the brother of Jared an opportunity to grow. By making it necessary for him to find a way to light the barges, the Lord was challenging him to exercise his agency, his intelligence, and his faith.

The Lord motivated the brother of Jared to exercise his agency by placing on him the responsibility to find light for the barges. He had to make a decision himself rather than expecting God to do all that was needed. Mahonri exercised his intelligence by devising a solution that was functionally possible. His solution was, in fact, a good one; but it still required divine approval (which it received). And it still needed a miracle to make it work; only the Lord himself could create the light. Concerning the experience of the brother of Jared, Elder Harold B. Lee wrote: "It was as though the Lord were saying to him, 'Look, I gave you a mind to think with, and I gave you agency to use it. Now you do all you can do to help yourself with this problem; and then, after you've done all you can, I'll step in to help you.' " [^10] Mahonri's enormous faith was demonstrated when he asked the Lord to touch the stones and provide light. He knew that the Lord would hear his plea, once he had exerted himself as the Lord required: "I know, O Lord, that thou hast all power, and can do whatsoever thou wilt for the benefit of man. . . . O Lord, thou canst do this. We know that thou art able to show forth great power." (Ether 3:4-5.) And the Lord did.

An Encounter with Christ

What followed is one of the greatest events in scriptural history: "The veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood." (Ether 3:6.) Seeing the Lord's finger was a startling revelation to him: "I saw the finger of the Lord. . . . I knew not that the Lord had flesh and blood." (Ether 3:8.) In response to Mahonri's faith, Jehovah decided to reveal more to him about the nature of God: "Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood. . . . Sawest thou more than this? And he answered: Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me." (Ether 3:9-10.) The Lord showed himself to the brother of Jared with these words: "Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image. Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh." (Ether 3:15-16.)

Mahonri was speaking with Jehovah, who later was born on earth, received a physical body, and was called Jesus Christ. Like other ancient prophets, he beheld the Lord's spirit body, in the image of which all men were created. (Gen. 1:26; Moses 1:6; Ether 3:15-16.) We cannot tell from the account exactly what the brother of Jared knew about the nature of God prior to this vision. But it appears in verse 8 that he was startled to see what he thought was a body of "flesh and blood." The Lord's comments in verse 16 make it clear that it was a body of spirit that the prophet saw. His misunderstanding shows that a spirit body resembles the flesh-and-blood body with which we are familiar. (D&C 77:2.)

Moroni provided a valuable summary: "Jesus showed himself unto this man in the spirit, even after the manner and in the likeness of the same body even as he showed himself unto the Nephites." (Ether 3:17.)

A most remarkable aspect of this experience is the powerful demonstration of faith on the part of Mahonri Moriancumer. Because he so completely knew that God would provide the light, the Lord could not keep him inside the veil that separates the earthly realm from the divine. "Never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast," said Jehovah. (Ether 3:9.) The prophet showed even greater faith when he requested, "Lord, show thyself unto me." (Ether 3:10.) He testified that he believed the Lord's words before hearing them, knowing that God cannot lie. (Ether 3:12.) As Moroni reported, "Having this perfect knowledge of God, he could not be kept from within the veil." Indeed, "the Lord could not withhold anything from him, for he knew that the Lord could show him all things." (Ether 3:20, 26, emphasis added; see also Ether 12:20-21.) As a result of this faith, his exaltation was assured. His ultimate return to the presence of God had been given divine confirmation, and he then was permitted to see God and abide in his presence. (Ether 3:12-13.) [^11]

Then came a statement from the Lord that sets the brother of Jared apart from every other person who had ever lived on earth up to that time: "Never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast." (Ether 3:15, emphasis added; see also verse 9.) The uniqueness of Mahonri Moriancumer's faith justified the uniqueness of Jehovah's revelation to him. No one else—including such prophets as Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Noah—had ever experienced in mortality such a manifestation of God, because no one else had ever exercised such faith.

Although the first part of verse 15 is difficult to understand, it is clear that there was something extraordinary about the appearance of the Lord to the brother of Jared, whose faith exceeded that of every other person since the beginning of time. We know from the scriptures that others had seen God, yet the Lord stated to the brother of Jared: "Never have I showed myself unto man." [^12] Perhaps the following discussion will explain the Lord's statement.

The brother of Jared was speaking with Jehovah, "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, . . . the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning." (Mosiah 3:5, 8; see also Alma 11:39.) Under the direction of God the Father, whom we call Elohim, Jehovah is God of the universe, presiding over all things. Having been endowed by Elohim with infinite power, glory, and authority, Jehovah is the Father. He is God who spoke and still speaks to the prophets, who designed and reveals laws for the blessing of his people, and who directs the affairs of mortals on earth.

We know also that Jehovah is the same being who later came into the world as Jesus Christ. He became a being of dual nature: Father and Son, God and Man. (See Mosiah 15.) Prior to his mortal birth, he was the Lord Jehovah (Father, God); while he walked the earth he was the mortal Jesus Christ (Son, Man). Now he sits again on a throne of glory in the heavens. (See Philip. 2:5-11; Col. 1:12-20.) [^13]

Concerning Jehovah's work, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote:

All revelation since the fall has come through Jesus Christ, who is the Jehovah of the Old Testament. In all of the scriptures, where God is mentioned and where he has appeared, it was Jehovah who talked with Abraham, with Noah, Enoch, Moses and all the prophets. He is the God of Israel, the Holy One of Israel; the one who led that nation out of Egyptian bondage, and who gave and fulfilled the Law of Moses. (1 Ne. 19:10; 3 Ne 11:10, 14; 15:2-9.) The Father [that is, Elohim] has never dealt with man directly and personally since the fall, and he has never appeared except to introduce and bear record of the Son. [^14]

President Smith also taught: "The Father has honored Christ by placing his name upon him, so that he can minister in and through that name as though he were the Father; and thus, so far as power and authority are concerned, his words and acts become and are those of the Father." [^15]

Since Jehovah is empowered with the fulness of Elohim and is commissioned to speak in his behalf, he stands in the place of the Father and speaks the Father's words. Thus when he appeared in ancient times he was the Father, filling in every way the role of God. When giving revelation to prophets, he spoke of the mortal mission of Jesus Christ in the third person—that is, with the words of and from the perspective of God the Father, as though Jesus Christ were someone else. This explains Jehovah's discussion of Christ in Moses 1 and in many other scriptures. [^16]

It seems from the scriptures that with one exception, in all the recorded manifestations of Jehovah prior to his birth in the flesh, he appeared in his role as God the Father, speaking the words of the Father. The exception is this appearance to the brother of Jared in Ether 3. He said: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son. In me shall all mankind have life, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall become my sons and my daughters. And never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has man believed in me as thou hast." (Ether 3:14-15.)

It appears that the uniqueness of this situation, brought about because of Mahonri Moriancumer's unparalleled faith, was the fact that Jehovah appeared to him in his role as Jesus—whereas to others he had shown himself as the Father. Never before, as far as we can tell from the scriptures, had Jesus Christ shown himself unto man. And, in fact, nowhere else in the scriptures do we have an example of Jehovah appearing in his role as Jesus until his coming in the flesh. As Moroni reported, "Having this perfect knowledge of God, he could not be kept from within the veil; therefore he saw Jesus; and he did minister unto him." (Ether 3:20, emphasis added.) To the brother of Jared the Lord revealed his complete nature: God who would become Man. Perhaps that is a reason why he commanded that the account of the appearance not be known in the world until after his mortal ministry. (Ether 3:21.)

Exercising Faith in the Lord

Mahonri's vision was not over with the appearance of Christ. The Lord "showed unto the brother of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth." (Ether 4:25, emphasis added; cf. Moses 1:27-28.) [^17] The Lord had told him that if he believed he could be shown all things, it would be so. Because he did, God "could not withhold anything from him, for he knew that the Lord could show him all things." (Ether 3:26, emphasis added.) This was no ordinary man; few people who have ever lived have been greater. Faith is the process of reaching out beyond our knowledge. The more knowledge we possess, the farther we can reach. The faith of Mahonri Moriancumer was so great that nothing could be withheld from him. Nowhere in the scriptures do we have an example of more perfect faith.

The sacredness of the event required that the record of it be kept sacred as well. The brother of Jared was commanded to write down what he had experienced and to seal it up, along with two stones that the Lord provided for interpreting such sacred records. (Ether 3:22-23, 27-28; 4:2.) Moroni, the inspired historian of the account, knew that the record was a treasure of inestimable worth, to be preserved to come forth among a righteous generation. Until humanity is worthy of such an endowment of knowledge, the record will remain sealed. (Ether 4:6-7.) To see what Mahonri Moriancumer saw will require the same kind of faith that he had. Likely that level of faith will not be had in the Church sufficiently until the Millennium. (See D&C 101:32-34.) [^18]

Lack of faith and lack of faithfulness are the sicknesses that create spiritual blindness. No one knew that better than Moroni, who had witnessed it to the fullest extent—in his own lifetime and vicariously through the records entrusted into his care. Using the faith of the brother of Jared as a standard, he recorded the Lord's words that challenge us to enlarge the boundaries of our own faith: "I will show unto you the greater things, the knowledge which is hid up because of unbelief. . . . When ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness, and hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid up from the foundation of the world" be made known. (Ether 4:13, 15.)

Those with such faith will not be kept within the veil that separates the holy from the earthly. They shall see what the prophets have seen and know what the prophets have known.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Andrew C. Skinner is instructor of history at Metropolitan State College, Denver, Colorado.
[^2] Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 2nd ed. rev. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 1:52-53.
[^3] Ibid., p. 55.
[^4] Ibid., p. 56, footnote.
[^5] Josephus reported that women and slaves were disqualified as witnesses. Josephus, Antiquities 4:8, 15.
[^6] J. H. Hertz, ed., The Pentateuch and Haftorahs, 2nd ed. (London: Soncino Press, 1967), p. 830.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 436.
[^8] Jamake Highwater, Native Land, Sagas of the Indian Americas (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1986), p. 16.
[^9] Ross T. Christensen, ed., Transoceanic Crossings to Ancient America (Provo: Brigham Young University, 1970), p. 25.
[^10] John L. Sorenson, An Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, and Provo, Utah: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1985), pp. 116-18.
[^11] Thor Heyerdahl, The Tigris Expedition (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday and Company, 1981), p. 8.
[^12] Ibid., p. 23.
[^13] Ibid., p. 8.
[^14] Hertz, Pentateuch and Haftorahs, pp. 26-27.
[^15] James B. Pritchard, ed., The Ancient Near East Volume 1, An Anthology of Texts and Pictures, 2 vols. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973), p. 66.
[^16] It also helps clarify the identities in Isaiah 53 (see especially verse 10). For a detailed discussion of the role of Christ as Father, see Robert L. Millet, ''The Ministry of the Father and the Son,'' in The Book of Mormon: The Keystone Scripture, ed. Paul R. Cheesman (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1988), pp. 44-72.
[^17] Rodney Turner wrote concerning Moses' similar vision in Moses 1:27-28: ''Nor did he simply view them en masse as one might look at a vast concourse of people without discerning any one individual. By the incomprehensible power of the Holy Ghost he perceived each man, woman, and child comprising the human race at one and the same time! In doing so, he experienced something of the omnipresent nature of the Spirit of the Lord.'' (''The Visions of Moses,'' Studies in Scripture, Vol. 2: The Pearl of Great Price, ed. Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson [Salt Lake City: Randall Book Company, 1985], p. 55.)
[^18] See Bruce R. McConkie, ''The Doctrinal Restoration,'' in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), pp. 15, 20-21.
