Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

23

PROMISES FULFILLED

(Ether 5-8)

Andrew C. Skinner [^1]

Long before the ancient patriarch Abraham, father of the Hebrews, went out from Ur and journeyed to his land of promise as part of the great covenant, others had already left the Near East and traveled thousands of miles in search of yet another promised land. Moroni's abridged account of the voyage and arrival of the Jaredites, found in Ether 5-8, is inspiring as well as instructive theologically, prophetically, historically, culturally, and politically. It provides us with many instances of prophecies and promises fulfilled by the Lord.

Perhaps God sends people to covenant lands so that they might establish a special relationship with him as they struggle in the midst of ungodliness. Five such examples immediately come to mind: the Jaredites, Abraham and his people, the Israelites under Moses, the Nephites, and the nineteenth-century Latter-day Saint pioneers.

That Deity takes seriously the giving of certain lands or territories, viewing them as special gifts and important symbols of favored status, seems certain. (See 2 Ne. 3:2; and 9:1-2, for example.) All the lands of the earth are God's, just as the psalmist wrote: "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof." (Ps. 24:1.) God may give whatever land he chooses to whomever he chooses. But those who receive come under strict requirements of righteous living, as the Jaredite record demonstrates: "But he would that they should come forth even unto the land of promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people. And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them." (Ether 2:7-8.)

Thus, God may also sweep off from the face of his property whomever he chooses; and this he has done in the past. (See Gen. 6:7; Deut. 7:1-2; 1 Sam. 15:3, 8; Ether 15.)

Moroni interrupted the story of Jaredite travel and settlement in the land of promise by inserting some direct and personal instructions to the future translator of the record he had produced. Moroni warned him not to touch the portion of the record that was sealed up unless God so commanded him. (Ether 5:1.) According to Moroni, the sealed portion contained "the very things which the brother of Jared saw" (Ether 4:4) on Mount Shelem; in particular "all the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth" (Ether 3:25). These are some of the things other great prophet-patriarchs have also viewed, as attested to by Enoch (Moses 6:36), Abraham (Abr. 3:22), Moses (Moses 1:8, 28), and even our first father, Adam (D&C 107:56).

Having been instructed by the Lord that this "revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof" (2 Ne. 27:7) would not be given to other people until they became sanctified like Jared's brother (Ether 4:7), Moroni told the future prophet (Joseph Smith) that it was not to be translated. However, Moroni was able to promise him that the plates containing the record would be shown to three witnesses who would help him translate the appointed portion. Their testimony was to stand as evidence to the rest of the world of the record's reality and truth.

The Law of Witnesses

So it was in June 1829, some 1,400 years after Moroni's prophetic instructions to a future prophet, that three men asked Joseph Smith if they could be the special witnesses spoken of by Moroni in Ether 5:2-4. Joseph Smith's own words recount the episode:

In the course of the work of translation, we ascertained that three special witnesses were to be provided by the Lord, to whom He would grant that they should see the plates from which this work (the Book of Mormon) should be translated; and that these witnesses should bear record of the same, as will be found recorded [2 Ne. 11:3; Ether 5:2-4]. Almost immediately after we had made this discovery, it occurred to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and the aforementioned Martin Harris (who had come to inquire after our progress in the work) that they would have me inquire of the Lord to know if they might not obtain of him the privilege to be these three special witnesses; and finally they became so very solicitous, and urged me so much to inquire that at length I complied. [^2]

The revelation that followed promised the fulfillment of Moroni's earlier prophecy; it is set forth in modern scripture as section 17 of the Doctrine and Covenants. It begins with these words: "Behold, I say unto you, that you must rely upon my word, which if you do with full purpose of heart, you shall have a view of the plates, and also of the breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face." (D&C 17:1.)

According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, not many days after the revelation was received, the four men (Joseph Smith, Martin Harris, David Whitmer, and Oliver Cowdery) went into some woods near David Whitmer's house to try to obtain the actual fulfillment of the promises made in the revelations from God. (Ether 5; D&C 5; 17.) Each man, beginning with Joseph Smith, took a turn at praying vocally for an answer or divine manifestation. The same procedure was repeated after the first attempt failed to produce the desired result. After a second failure, Martin Harris withdrew himself, believing that he was the cause of the difficulty. The men, without Martin Harris, again prayed and in a matter of minutes received a glorious manifestation of the plates held by an angel. They also heard a voice from heaven that confirmed the very words Moroni had uttered many centuries earlier when he prophesied precisely that the plates would be "shown by the power of God." (Compare the wording in Ether 5:3 and History of the Church 1:55.)

Joseph Smith left the two in order to check on Martin Harris. Joseph and Martin joined in prayer with the following result, as reported by the Prophet himself: "Before we had yet finished, the same vision was opened to our view, at least it was again opened to me, and I once more beheld and heard the same things; whilst at the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in an ecstasy of joy, ' 'Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld;' and jumping up, he shouted, 'Hosanna,' blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly." [^3]

These episodes constitute the final link in an ancient chain going all the way back to the Jaredites. For it is, in part, the things that happened to Jared, his brother, and their families, that the three witnesses attested to. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris were the physical, literal fulfillment of Moroni's promise. They became living witnesses not only of the things the Prophet Joseph Smith was doing but also of the importance of the law of witnesses itself. Because of this law of witnesses, Joseph Smith did not have to stand alone as he fielded the abuses and injuries inflicted by an apostate world. Thus, we may more fully appreciate his remarks made soon after his experience with the three witnesses: "Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am; the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for themselves that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world." [^4]

At the time Moroni prepared his abridgment of the account of the people of Jared, circa A.D. 400, the law of witnesses was already a very ancient one. It was an integral part of the cultural, legal, and moral heritage carried by Moroni's ancestors from Jerusalem in 600 B.C. Though nothing is said in the Bible about qualification, it is likely that a witness in biblical times was considered to be any free man who had firsthand knowledge of a fact or an event. [^5] During early Christian times, those who had firsthand knowledge of Jesus were called witnesses. Eventually the Greek word for witness, martus, came to denote those who had given up their lives or met violent deaths in pursuit of the Christian cause, martyrs.

Moroni's understanding of the law of witnesses parallels that of the Apostle Paul; that is, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." (2 Cor. 13:1.) The knowledge of both Paul and Moroni regarding the law was undoubtedly based, in part, on several Mosaic prescriptions that required the testimony of at least two witnesses to establish with certainty any claim. (Num. 35:30; Deut. 17:6; 19:15.) It was the intention of the law in ancient Israel to establish as securely as possible any information being attested to. For this reason, three witnesses were preferable to two. Multiple witnesses decreased the possibility of shoddy, perverted, or "plotting witnesses" (edim zummim). [^6] It is significant that where the plates and sacred records are concerned, the Lord provided, first, three witnesses and, later, many more for these latter days. Concerning the law of witnesses, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

Whenever the Lord has established a dispensation by revealing his gospel and by conferring priesthood and keys upon men, he has acted in accordance with the law of witnesses which he himself ordained. This law is: "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." (2. Cor. 13:1; Deut. 17:6; 19:15; Matt. 18:15-16; John 8:12-29.) Never does a prophet stand alone in establishing a new dispensation of revealed truth, or in carrying the burden of such a message and warning to the world. In every dispensation, from Adam's to the present, two or more witnesses have joined their testimonies, thus leaving their hearers without excuse in the day of judgment should the testimony be rejected. [^7]

A Miraculous Journey

After Moroni made an end of his prophecies and promises, he gave an account of the great voyage of the people of Jared. With the many necessary preparations finally completed, the people entered their barges and set forth into the sea, putting their trust in the Lord. We are told that they were in the water an incredible 344 days—almost a full year.

Moroni's abridgment gives us some small idea of the truly miraculous and spectacular nature of the Jaredite adventure, wherein the eight barges were propelled toward their destination by a furious wind, created by the Lord, which "did never cease to blow towards the promised land." (Ether 6:8.) While some may question the veracity of such a story, it should be remembered that God is Lord over all the elements of the earth. As he himself told Moroni, "At my command the heavens are opened and are shut; and at my word the earth shall shake." (Ether 4:9.)

Even those modern-day skeptics who most disbelieve maritime theories concerning the ancient peopling of the Americas admit that some early transoceanic voyages are probable due to oceanic currents and prevailing winds. From the work of one writer we read:

The winds and current of the North Pacific trend eastward. Any craft caught helpless in their embrace can easily be carried across the ocean; in fact, there are records to show that, for example, between 1775 and 1875 about twenty Japanese junks were blown, against their will, to the west coast of America and deposited at various points between Alaska and Mexico. If Japanese vessels in the last century, why not Chinese or Indian or Malaysian during all the long centuries that preceded the arrival of Columbus? There must have been a certain number that ended a storm-tossed journey on this side of the Pacific. Perhaps a few of the hardier spirits among their crews risked the long sail back home, but most must have chosen to live on where they landed. Eventually they either died out or became wholly absorbed, leaving behind only tantalizing indirect reminiscences of their presence such as art motifs, pottery shapes, and the like. [^8]

Other less skeptical scholars have long recognized the reality of transoceanic crossings but have opted to support Atlantic-route theories also based, in part, on the existence of "gentle climatic conditions and extremely favorable ocean currents and prevailing winds." [^9]

In fact, journeys like that of the Jaredites are in harmony with ancient Near Eastern cultural and literary motifs as well as historical circumstances of the late fourth and early third millennium B.C., which is the time-frame posited by recent scholarship for the rise of Jaredite civilization in the New World. [^10] Very early Near Eastern records abound with references to ships and voyages. "No motif is more common in the miniature art of the Mesopotamian cylinder seals than the reed boats used by the legendary heroes in the period of settlement." [^11] Mesopotamia was known for its seagoing excursions, and it is also generally accepted as the land of the tower where the Jaredites originated. The earliest Mesopotamian people, known as the Sumerians, incorporated into their literature the episode of the great flood. Regarding the period of settlement after the flood, Sumerian writings indicate that the survivors landed in a big ship at a place called Dilmun and from there went to Mesopotamia, also by sea. [^12] Thus, seagoing ventures were, early on, a significant part of the Mesopotamian cultural milieu. Some scholars have suggested that the oldest sign for ship in ancient Sumer was the same as the one used for the marine in the hieroglyphic script of Egypt. [^13] These writing systems both date to before 3000 B.C.

The ancient Jaredite record gives us some idea concerning the construction of the barges, which were "tight like unto a dish." The record compares them to the ark of Noah. (Ether 6:7.)

Because the Jaredite barges were watertight, they could be "buried in the deep" without harm to their passengers. It was this construction that made necessary the special system of lighting (sixteen transparent stones) designed by the brother of Jared and put into operation by the finger of the Lord. The King James Version of the Old Testament reports that Noah's ark was to have a "window" for a light: "A window shalt thou make to the ark." (Gen. 6:16.) However, some modern Jewish translators of the Hebrew text render this passage: "A light shalt thou make to the ark." The word in question, tsohar, in the dual form means "noon" or "midday." Ancient Jewish legend relates that it was not just a light in the ark but was actually "a precious stone which illuminated the whole interior of the Ark." [^14]

In another interesting parallel to the Jaredite barges found in ancient Near Eastern literature, one of the heroes of the Gilgamesh Epic is commanded to build a ship in the face of an impending flood. This hero (Utnapishtim) is told by one of the gods to build it according to proper specifications and to caulk or seal it. The boat will take him down into "the (watery) Deep . . . to dwell." [^15]

Suffice it to say that nonscriptural sources provide an important historical and cultural context for the events recounted by Moroni. In Joseph Smith's day, such things as these were almost totally unknown. Nowadays we know that the Jaredite record fits the pattern of the ancient world. And yet our conviction of its truth is a matter of faith.

Jaredite Kingship

Perhaps we cannot appreciate from Moroni's brief account the great joy felt by the people of Jared when they finally landed in the promised land. They stood upon a land that was both promised and promising. It represented, in tangible form, the very fulfillment of the Lord's words: "I will go before thee into a land which is choice above all the lands of the earth." (Ether 1:42.) It represented, in tangible form, a covenant kept. We may only guess at the kind of powerful revelations the people received as they were "taught from on high" in their new home. (Ether 6:17.)

After not too long a time, as the record seems to indicate, the people of Jared voiced their desire to have a king rule over them. History confirms that monarchy has existed since the earliest periods of human culture. Some peoples have believed that kingship was instituted by, and serves as the agent of, divine will. The situation of the Jaredites at this juncture in their history immediately brings to mind the people of Israel, who also clamored for a king. They were told by Samuel the prophet the same thing the brother of Jared told his people centuries earlier: "Surely this thing leadeth into captivity." (Ether 6:23.)

Perhaps because they knew the risks associated with kingship, several of the Jaredites refused the office. Finally, one of the sons of Jared—Orihah—was anointed. He was a righteous and successful king because he "did walk humbly before the Lord, and did remember how great things the Lord had done for his father, and also taught his people how great things the Lord had done for their fathers." (Ether 6:30.)

Orihah is a perfect example of the Lord's teachings on righteous kingship as presented by Mosiah. If just rulers could always be chosen, then kingship would be an expedient form of government. However, not all leaders are just, and it is therefore usually not expedient to have kings rule. As Mosiah taught, "How much iniquity doth one wicked king cause to be committed, yea, and what great destruction!" (Mosiah 29:17.)

Clearly the brother of Jared well understood the Lord's teachings regarding kingship, for it was not long after the reign of Orihah that his prophetic words were fulfilled when Orihah's successor was brought into captivity. (Ether 7:5.) What followed was one of the bright spots in the history of the Jaredite people—a history filled with rebellion, treachery, warfare, and extreme wickedness. That bright spot was the reign of Shule, who "remembered the great things that the Lord had done for his fathers in bringing them across the great deep into the promised land; wherefore he did execute judgment in righteousness all his days." (Ether 7:27.)

Secret Combinations: Freedom Assaulted

Several things made Orihah and Shule successful and blessed rulers, bringing peace and prosperity to the Jaredites. These things include those important institutions to which all of us most owe our loyalties and allegiance: God, family, and fellow beings. After a time, when these things were rebelled against and forgotten, the Jaredite culture began to collapse. The steady slide of the Jaredite people toward destruction began in earnest with the rebellion of one Jared (son of Omer and grandson of Shule), who took his own father into captivity and sought, without moral restraint, "the kingdom and . . . the glory of the world." (Ether 8:7.)

It is significant that Jared's own daughter, following the wicked example he himself had set, provided the impetus to introduce into their society the most insidious and cunning of all Satan's wicked schemes, secret combinations. (Ether 8:9.) She reminded her father that part of the record brought by their ancestors to the promised land contained "an account concerning them of old, that they by their secret plans did obtain kingdoms and great glory." Eventually, one Akish was persuaded to become involved in these secret plans. "And it was the daughter of Jared who put it into his heart to search up these things of old; and Jared put it into the heart of Akish; wherefore, Akish administered it unto his kindred and friends, leading them away by fair promises to do whatsoever thing he desired." (Ether 8:17.)

As to what was contained in that part of the ancient record referred to by Jared's daughter, we have been given an outline from various sources. According to Ether, the secret plans consisted of "oaths which were given by them of old who also sought power, which had been handed down even from Cain, who was a murderer from the beginning." (Ether 8:15.) Nephi reported that these oaths were "administered by the devil, to combine against all righteousness." (3 Ne. 6:28.) The record of Moses confirms the veracity of the previous two statements in a graphic and frightening manner: "Satan said unto Cain: Swear unto me by thy throat, and if thou tell it thou shalt die; and swear thy brethren by their heads, and by the living God, that they tell it not; for if they tell it, they shall surely die; and this that thy father may not know it; and this day I will deliver thy brother Abel into thine hands." (Moses 5:29.)

Moroni testified that secret combinations lead to destruction—the destruction of life, property, and freedom. (Ether 8:25.) The overthrow of freedom or free agency was Satan's plan from the beginning. (Moses 4:1-4.) Thus, secret combinations can be found in many elements of society among all people. (Ether 8:20.) Perhaps this may frighten us in the latter days. But it may also make us more conscious of Moroni's warning for our times—which warning he was commanded to write (Ether 8:26): "Whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold they shall be destroyed. . . . Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in God that these things should be shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of your sins, and suffer not that these murderous combinations shall get above you, which are built up to get power and gain—and the work, yea, even the work of destruction come upon you, yea, even the sword of the justice of the Eternal God shall fall upon you, to your overthrow and destruction if ye shall suffer these things to be." (Ether 8:22-23.)

If there is one lesson we learn from reading Ether 5-8, it is that when the Lord makes a prophecy or promise it must surely come to pass. Latter-day Saints must resolve to fight against Satan through personal righteousness and by avoiding the very appearance of evil. Does something degrade rather than edify? Is it done solely to get gain? Or does it attempt to stay hidden from Deity? If so, we must leave it alone.

Conclusion

The book of Ether is a record of great importance. It teaches of righteous leaders who were surely among the noble and great souls seen by Abraham. (Abr. 3:22-23.) It discloses glimpses of unspeakably glorious matters reserved for a future time of great righteousness. (Ether 4:7.) It bears testimony of the prophet Joseph Smith and three other latter-day witnesses called by God. (Ether 5.) It describes the customs and culture of an ancient people. (Ether 6.) It is full of verifying traditions.

The book of Ether (especially chapters 5-8) is important as well as interesting because it contains a number of parallels to be found in other scriptures. These include a great ocean voyage, barges like Noah's ark, prayers and praises sung unceasingly (compare Enos and others), a great family gathering before the death of the patriarchs (compare Ether 6:19-20 and D&C 107:53), the request for kingship, and secret combinations.

However, the great value of Ether, in particular chapters 5-8, lies in the spiritual lessons it provides: The promises of God are sure and must be fulfilled, and if we are righteous we shall prosper in the land. Just as Moroni wrote these things in his record so that "evil may be done away," let us read and apply them for the same reason.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Catherine Thomas is a doctoral student in ancient history at Brigham Young University.
[^2] For a discussion of Two-Way literature, see A. R. C. Leaney, The Rule of Qumran and Its Meaning (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1966) pp. 46f.
[^3] Ensign, May 1985, p. 11.
[^4] Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938), pp. 346-47.
[^5] See ''Grace'' in ''Bible Dictionary,'' Holy Bible (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979).
[^6] J. H. Hertz, ed., The Pentateuch and Haftorahs, 2nd ed. (London: Soncino Press, 1967), p. 830.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 436.
[^8] Jamake Highwater, Native Land, Sagas of the Indian Americas (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1986), p. 16.
[^9] Ross T. Christensen, ed., Transoceanic Crossings to Ancient America (Provo: Brigham Young University, 1970), p. 25.
[^10] John L. Sorenson, An Ancient American Setting for the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, and Provo, Utah: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1985), pp. 116-18.
[^11] Thor Heyerdahl, The Tigris Expedition (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday and Company, 1981), p. 8.
[^12] Ibid., p. 23.
[^13] Ibid., p. 8.
[^14] Hertz, Pentateuch and Haftorahs, pp. 26-27.
[^15] James B. Pritchard, ed., The Ancient Near East Volume 1, An Anthology of Texts and Pictures, 2 vols. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973), p. 66.
