Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

24

A MORE EXCELLENT WAY

(Ether 9-15)

Catherine Thomas [^1]

The Book of Mormon belongs to that group of ancient religious records known as Two-Way documents. A number of other ancient records may be described as Two-Way documents: the Qumran Manual of Discipline, the early Christian Didache, the Epistle of Barnabas, and so on. [^2] Two-Way literature presents a philosophy that describes life as consisting of only two ways, each antithetical to the other; it identifies only two inclinations in man, also antithetical. For example, 2 Nephi 10:23-24 describes two ways: "Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life. Wherefore . . . reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh." At the end of Ether 8, Moroni anticipated the reader's question as to why he occupied so much space with the grim, nearly unrelieved saga of the fall of the Jaredite nation. He answered with a two-way statement: "I . . . am commanded to write these things that evil may be done away, and that the time may come that Satan may have no power upon the hearts of the children of men, but that they may be persuaded to do good continually, that they may come unto the fountain of all righteousness and be saved." (Ether 8:26.)

We could illustrate the Two Ways on a line, with Evil/Satan's Will on one end and Righteousness/God's Will on the other. The Book of Mormon describes no in-between states. Moroni observed later in his own book that an evil person cannot do good, and a follower of Christ cannot do evil. (Moro. 7:6-11.) One's life is characterized either by directing his energies to the right side where he or she experiences abundant life, or toward the left where he or she suffers a diminution of life and, if undeterred, self-annihilation. A nation's life is characterized by the same polarity. Moroni presented this two-way energy principle in the rise and fall of the Jaredites.

War and Peace

Moroni compressed several hundred years in chapters 9-11 of Ether. We read 9:15-25 carefully because it describes an atypical period of over 225 years of peace, perhaps somewhat similar to that in 4 Nephi. Moroni supplied little description of these years except that the people enjoyed harmony and plenty, with even an appearance of the Son of Righteousness to Emer.

But we do not need Moroni to give us details. All righteous societies have energy flows in common. They direct their energies toward discerning the word of the Lord and supporting and nurturing one another. Their growth in the Lord is unhindered by ego-conflicts and contention. Peaceful societies never happen by accident. They result from steady devotion to selflessness: they take thought on what causes human beings to thrive; they speak to nurture one another; they act to develop each other. They have laid down their natural self-wills and have taken on the image of Christ. They experience loving, sustained closeness.

It is sobering how readily people trade inner peace for something less. These gospel societies would never cease if it were not that people begin to choose something other than peace. Akish, for example, chose power (Ether 9:11); Riplakish chose wives, concubines, and gold (Ether 10:5-8); Shiblom chose secret combinations (Ether 11:7). Before obvious signs of deterioration appear, people begin to think in terms, not of unity and mutual support, but of separateness.

Separation begins in such subtle ways. We unwittingly begin to look for trouble, picking at this, complaining at that. We take offense over a real or imagined slight; we get angry because people around us do not do what we want; we grow cold or irritable, or we retaliate to get what we want; we insist on being right at the expense of precious relationships; we reject others who seem to lack love, failing to perfect love in ourselves. We disturb ourselves with self-seeking. Thus keeping the water rippling around us, we are not still and at rest in the principles of tolerance and love, of overlooking, of letting go, of forgiving, of ceasing to expect anything—except tolerance and kindness in ourselves. In candid moments we may wonder if we would single-handedly dismantle a Zion society.

In achieving separateness, people are left with emptiness and alienation. They try to fill the void with external things, or power, or self-gratification, when the cause of their emptiness is their spiritual death; what they are hungry for is the love of Christ and relationships built on loving commitment. Their misery drives them to create more misery, and finally to destroy life.

This pattern of the pursuit of misery recurs in Ether. By Ether 9:26 the murderous secret oaths had taken root again. From this point the Jaredites traced a familiar curve: up and down from obedient to depraved king, from peace to desperation. Each dip in the curve brought a more severe response from the Lord as the spiritual law of the harvest operated on each generation. The ancient oaths found willing hearts. They gained so great a grasp on the people that the Lord threatened a destruction "as never had been upon the face of the earth, and their bones should become as heaps of earth upon the face of the land except they should repent of their wickedness." (Ether 11:6.) Finally the Lord swore to execute judgment of utter destruction and to bring forth another people to possess the land. (Ether 11:20-21.) This prophecy was fulfilled with the final destruction of the Jaredites and the nearly simultaneous arrival of the Nephites and Mulekites.

As this once so-promising Jaredite world approached genocide, Ether found refuge in visions of a better world; the reader senses that Moroni too was brooding over his own Nephite brethren who faced the same fate. Moroni also gazed soberly forward into the world of latter-day Israel. He provoked his modern reader with this question: How shall we escape the Jaredite and Nephite fate?

How do any people halt their precipitous decline? Ether declared: "By faith all things are fulfilled—wherefore, whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world." (Ether 12:3-4.) Deliverance hangs on a total reversal of mental, physical, and spiritual energy flows. But Ether's people would not believe because (1) they had chosen something other than peace and unity; they did not any longer want a better world, and (2) they could not see the evidence of Ether's promise. (Ether 12:5.)

Faith and Sight

"By faith all things are fulfilled." (Ether 12:3.) Moroni used Ether's thought as the springboard for his own discussion of faith. He illustrated with several examples that the fulfillment of heavenly promises comes only after people have demonstrated their faith. In every apostasy that ever developed on the earth, people declined to that state in which, like Korihor, they declared: "Ye cannot know of things which ye do not see; therefore ye cannot know that there shall be a Christ." (Alma 30:15.) They preferred their own power to God's power, since God's power required of them more than they wanted to give.

"Dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.) In the scriptures, faith assumes faith in Jesus Christ. (See Ether 12:18.) Why is it so important to have a trial—a period of proving—of one's faith in Jesus Christ? Why is one more blessed for believing in Jesus without having seen him? Here we come to an essential spiritual fact: one key purpose of earth life is to develop faith, to learn to "walk by faith, not by sight." (2 Cor. 5:7.) Moroni observed that people first had to have faith in Christ before he could show himself to them. But how can people have faith in that which they have not seen? Why should people believe in Christ more than in Buddha? Why should they believe in any God at all?

God can hold people responsible for faith in Christ for three reasons: (1) Jesus Christ is the Savior of all. (2) God created people such that they could discern truth from error. Their existence and progression involve the divine substances of light, spirit, truth, intelligence, and glory. (D&C 93.) This divinity underlies the nature of God and man. People may enlarge their portion of divinity until like Christ they obtain the fullness, at which point they too become gods. Another term for the divine element in mortals is "Spirit of Christ." (Moro. 7:16; John 1:4.) (3) God can hold people responsible for truth because faith implies a desire, a choosing to know. Many people have sensed spiritual truths but have not wanted to exert the effort leading to personal sanctification. Amulek said, "I knew . . . , yet I would not know." (Alma 10:6.)

Here is the distinction between testimony-seeking and sign-seeking: the sign-seeker wants to keep his disobedient life and still have spiritual power. He wants to reap where he has not sown. The testimony-seeker wants to submit to God, repent, and live by the light that the Lord gives through the Holy Ghost.

When a messenger of God teaches the gospel by the Holy Spirit, that spirit bears witness to the truth. The listener is now responsible; shall he or she accept or reject the witness? We recall that God held Korihor responsible for his deception. Korihor confessed that he chose Satan's lie because it was pleasing to his carnal mind. (Alma 30:53.) When gospel truth has been revealed, deception is a choice; spiritual blindness is self-induced. (Alma 13:4.)

If we have come to earth to develop this inner truth-discernment, then we understand why Jesus told his disciples that he must for their sakes go away. That is, if they were to develop this inner spiritual capacity independent of what they could see, spiritual realities had to be removed behind a veil. Moroni calls this spiritual organ of truth discernment the "eye of faith." (Ether 12:19.) We understand that after one's faith has developed through the power of the Holy Ghost, one may receive the Second Comforter or the tangible and visible presence of the Godhead. Thus one who has developed this inner capacity is more blessed spiritually than one who depends only on the senses for knowledge. Such a one knows more. Elder Bruce R. McConkie bore powerful personal witness to this spiritual knowing:

As pertaining to Jesus Christ, I testify that he is the Son of the living God and was crucified for the sins of the world. He is our Lord, our God, and our King. This I know of myself independent of any other person. I am one of his witnesses, and in a coming day I shall feel the nail marks in his hands and in his feet and shall wet his feet with my tears. But I shall not know any better then than I know now that he is God's Almighty Son, that he is our Savior and Redeemer, and that salvation comes in and through his atoning blood and in no other way. [^3]

"[Christ] prepared a way that thereby others might be partakers of the heavenly gift, that they might hope for those things which they have not seen. Wherefore, ye may also have hope, and be partakers of the gift, if ye will but have faith. . . . In the gift of his Son hath God prepared a more excellent way; and it is by faith that it hath been fulfilled. For if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them." (Ether 12:8-12.) Moroni presented another two-way concept: two kinds of life are available to mortals: natural life and spiritual life. (Cf. Mosiah 3:19.) He referred to this higher life as "the heavenly gift." He meant the quality of life given first through the Holy Ghost as the First Comforter and then through Christ himself.

Men of old, in the beginning having the same standing as their brethren, chose to live so righteously because of their strong confidence in Christ that they entered into the holy order of God, and into the rest of God. (Alma 13:12.) This state of rest does not always refer to some distant state for which we must wait until exaltation; rather, we obtain that state of rest here through our faith in Christ and take it with us into the kingdom. (See Moroni 7:3, where Mormon commended the members for having entered into the rest of the Lord; cf. Alma 33:23.)

Faith progresses from one's having confidence in God to God's having confidence in that person and permitting him or her to witness and even to administer divine power, as did Moses, Alma, Amulek, Nephi and Lehi, Ammon, the three Nephite disciples, and those—like the brother of Jared, whom Moroni described in Ether 12:19-21, whose inner spiritual capacity was so well-developed from obedience—who had obtained Christ's word (or mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2:16) to such a degree that they could, with their immanent oneness in Christ, compel his presence. We will learn before the end of chapter 12 that Moroni himself was such a man.

Students of the scriptures ask how one closes the gap between where he or she is and where such people as Moroni and the brother of Jared were. Joseph Smith said: "Here, then, is eternal life—to know the only wise and true God; and you have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power." [^4] Even Jesus "received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness." (D&C 93:13.)

One does not usually leap ahead from one capacity level to a level much farther away; we usually develop patiently by making small adjustments, gradually increasing our capacity, building a solid foundation on the most simple principles of the gospel: "Ye are not able to abide the presence of God now, neither the ministering of angels; wherefore, continue in patience until ye are perfected." (D&C 67:13.)

We make spiritual progress through two means: our own agency and God's timetable. He does not always reveal his timetable. To possess some capacities, we wait on the Lord. We make a mistake if we think that by going into some kind of spiritual overdrive, we can suddenly assume great spiritual capacity or compel spiritual experience.

Strength in Weakness

The truth is that we were born into an imperfect state in a fallen world. We chafe against our imperfection, but we cannot completely eradicate our humanity in this life. Here power is an attribute of God, not of man. We were created weak so that we would turn to the only source that could develop real spiritual stamina in us. Moroni recorded his conversation with the Lord on this subject in Ether 12:23-37. He feared that the Gentiles would not accept the precious records because of the weaknesses in their writing. (Ether 12:25.) The Lord comforted him with this wonderful principle: "My grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness; and if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they . . . have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:26-27.) When the Lord told the Apostle Paul, "My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness," Paul declared, "Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me." (2 Cor. 12:9.)

The idea of heavenly community continued to direct Moroni's thoughts. He remembered that Christ had said that he had prepared a house for man among the mansions of his Father for which a man must hope [a gift of the Holy Ghost] or he could not inherit that excellent place. (Ether 12:32.) He recalled that Christ secured this excellence by laying down his life. (Ether 12:33.) Moroni was moved by this charity that made the heavenly place possible. Charity is another spiritual gift given to mortals in increments called grace. The Greek word behind grace in the New Testament means "divine gift." It refers to divine gifts of power unlocked by the Atonement. Grace, like all divine gifts, is administered to mortals through the Holy Ghost. It helps them do what they could not do by themselves. [^5]

Moroni prayed that God would endow the Gentiles with grace. Here the Lord taught Moroni another principle: "If they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful; wherefore, thy garments shall be made clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father." (Ether 12:37.)

The Lord confirmed Moroni's calling and election here as he reassured him that because Moroni in his weakness drew on God's strength, he would sit down in the mansion that Christ had prepared for him. (Ether 12:37.) Moroni sealed his prophecies with his witness that they were true because Christ had told him face to face, in plain humility, in his own language. He bade us to seek Jesus, that his grace, his heavenly gifts, would abide in us forever.

New Jerusalem and the End of the Jaredites

The thread of the heavenly community continues to weave through Ether's tale of dissolution. Moroni resumed his narrative (chapter 13) with Ether's description of a new heaven and earth, a world with two centers of heavenly power: the New Jerusalem, that holy sanctuary of the Lord that would descend to the new world, joining with the earthly New Jerusalem, and contain the seed of Joseph. The rebuilt, sanctified city of Jerusalem in the ancient world would be headquarters for other tribes of scattered Israel, gathered from the the whole earth. These heavenly-city dwellers are partakers of the fulfilling of the Abrahamic covenant, or the covenant of exaltation. These cities will stand during the Savior's millennial reign until the celestialization of the earth. (Ether 13:8; D&C 101:16-38; Moses 7:60-64.) Those offered the gospel first, the Jews, have been reserved for redemption last because they were so tardy in accepting their Savior; the Gentiles, last to be taught the gospel in ancient times, will have been saved first. (Ether 13:12.)

Ether witnessed these harmonious scenes with the eye of faith as the Jaredites clamored on in mutual extinction. By day he lived in a cave and at night went out to witness the days' destruction, gathering material to finish his record. War rose in terrible crescendo through the next four years. Besides the prophet Ether, only Coriantumr would survive his people. He would not fall by the sword but would be buried by the very people who would supplant the Jaredite nation in the Lord's favor. (Ether 13:21; 14:24.) The chosen people are only those who choose the Lord.

"The Spirit of the Lord had ceased striving with them, and Satan had full power over the hearts of the people; for they were given up unto the hardness of their hearts, and the blindness of their minds that they might be destroyed." (Ether 15:19.) Ether recorded, "All the people upon the face of the land were shedding blood, and there was none to restrain them." (Ether 13:31.) Civil order had collapsed. In reflection of the slipperiness and the utter perishability of their lives and works, they held on to nothing but their swords; no security offered itself. The relentless law of the harvest rolled upon them, and they lived out their remaining days like specters in a terrifying nightmare of anger—sickness, howling, stench, and blood. The lives they had chosen had filled them, not with desire for peace and abundant, thriving life, but with hatred and self-destruction. The ultimate end of evil is death.

Coriantumr and Shiz shared the last scene together. Ether, looking on secretly from his hiding place, saw Coriantumr behead Shiz in a memorably gory scene, after which Coriantumr fell to the earth "as if he had no life." (Ether 15:32.) But he was not dead, as the Lord foresaw. Coriantumr appeared again among the Mulekites as one who pathetically straddled that transition from a fallen group to a new chosen people. (Omni 1:21.)

Conclusion

One of the greatest lessons of the Book of Mormon is that whatever the Lord prophesies is fulfilled every whit, in every specific detail, nothing omitted. One day not far hence we will read those pages that precede the annihilation of the Jaredites, or the destruction of the Nephites before the Lord's first appearance, or the extinction of the Nephites in Moroni's day, and understand that the Book of Mormon was given to us in our day as a manual by which we could read the signs of the times and escape the irrevocable judgments of God.

Between the lines, however, we learn about the qualities of a Zion people. Undoubtedly Zion will be built up with some grand gestures, with some dramatic acts, but by and large it will be built up and sustained by those who have learned how to overcome in the most simple issues of life: to live in sweet, tolerant, humble peace—not just absence of war—but real, deep peace and real love with those around them. Only those who practice inner peace will survive in Zion.

Earlier we observed that the Book of Mormon describes no states between God's will and man's self-will, even though we may think we ourselves occupy intermediate positions. The question does not concern position but direction. As simplistic as this two-way philosophy seems at first, we must finally conclude that there really are only two ways. Anyone who operates from the ego impulses of self-will must admit that he or she spends his or her energies in the one way. Only that energy spent to grasp and respond to Christ's voice allows us to claim the other way. When we feel inner disturbance, it is a blessing to be able to check our own energy flow and correct its course. Only Christ makes us alive; every other way of life results in death.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Robert E. Parsons is associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B.H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51), 4:538, March 1842.
[^3] Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1957), 1:122.
[^4] ''Circles of Exaltation,'' Charge to Religious Educators, 2nd ed. [Salt Lake City], 28 June 1968.
[^5] Conference Report, Oct. 1984, p. 105.
