Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

25

THE PRACTICES OF THE CHURCH

(Moroni 1-6)

Robert E. Parsons [^1]

This final book in the Book of Mormon was written by Moroni after his father's death and some fifteen to thirty-five years after the battle at Cumorah. Moroni's dangerous and lonely situation is expressed in the opening verses: "Now I, Moroni, after having made an end of abridging the account of the people of Jared, I had supposed not to have written more, but I have not as yet perished; and I make not myself known to the Lamanites lest they should destroy me. For behold, their wars are exceedingly fierce among themselves; and because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ. And I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life." (Moro. 1:1-3.)

The first six chapters of Moroni deal with procedures and practices of the Church in Moroni's day. What is written is somewhat "ordinary" for active Latter-day Saints because the procedures are so similar to Church practices today. Thus, there often is a tendency to skim these chapters quickly and move on to more exciting material. However, a different view is needed if we acknowledge that Moroni was writing to our generation and had seen our day and time:

Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you. Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel, unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts. (Morm. 8:34-36.)

In connection with seeing our day, I like to think that Moroni also saw the practices of modern-day Christianity. This makes it easier to understand his concern and interest in telling us the correct procedures for such basic practices as conferring the Holy Ghost, ordaining to offices in the priesthood, administering the sacrament, and conducting church meetings. If one were to visit Catholics, Baptists, Lutherans, Pentecostals, and Unitarians on successive Sundays, what would he or she observe regarding the sacrament, ordinations, and church meetings? In that framework, it is easy to understand Moroni's concern with basic procedure and why he wrote what he did to this generation.

Power to Minister for Christ

Moroni's straightforward explanation in chapters 2 and 3 clarifies the statement of Jesus in John: "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit." (John 15:16.) What does it mean that Christ ordained the apostles? The Christian world lays on unauthorized hands, confers divinity degrees to bestow authority, or assumes power by simple desire. In clear, unmistakable words, Moroni stated:

The words of Christ, which he spake unto his disciples, the twelve whom he had chosen, as he laid his hands upon them—And he called them by name, saying: Ye shall call on the Father in my name, in mighty prayer; and after ye have done this ye shall have power that to him upon whom ye shall lay your hands, ye shall give the Holy Ghost; and in my name shall ye give it, for thus do mine apostles. (Moro. 2:1-2.)

The manner which the disciples, who were called the elders of the church, ordained priests and teachers—After they had prayed unto the Father in the name of Christ, they laid their hands upon them, and said: In the name of Jesus Christ I ordain you to be a priest, (or, if he be a teacher) I ordain you to be a teacher, to preach repentance and remission of sins through Jesus Christ, by the endurance of faith on his name to the end. Amen.

And after this manner did they ordain priests and teachers, according to the gifts and callings of God unto men; and they ordained them by the power of the Holy Ghost, which was in them. (Moro. 3:1-4.)

As we read these words, there can be no question as to how one is ordained with power to minister for Christ and how that power is used to bestow the Holy Ghost. Another plain and precious teaching has been restored in the Book of Mormon, and we can now read biblical statements on receiving the priesthood and bestowing the Holy Ghost without misunderstanding.

Verse 2 of Moroni chapter 2 ends, "for thus do mine apostles." Obviously the Nephites were familiar with this term as well as the sacred office, notwithstanding the constant use of the terms "twelve" or "disciple." Concerning the presence of apostles among the Nephites and the office in their church administration, Joseph Smith stated:

This book also tells us that our Saviour made His appearance upon this continent after His resurrection; that He planted the Gospel here in all its fullness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that they had Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, and Evangelists; the same order, the same priesthood, the same ordinances, gifts, powers, and blessings, as were enjoyed on the eastern continent, that the people were cut off in consequence of their transgressions, that the last of their prophets who existed among them was commanded to write an abridgment of their prophecies, history, &c, and to hide it up in the earth and that it should come forth and be united with the Bible for the accomplishment of the purposes of God in the last days. [^2]

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith added: "While in every instance the Nephite twelve are spoken of as disciples, the fact remains that they had been endowed with divine authority to be special witnesses for Christ among their own people. Therefore, they were virtually apostles to the Nephite race, although their jurisdiction was, as revealed to Nephi, eventually to be subject to the authority and jurisdiction of Peter and the twelve chosen in Palestine." [^3]

Sacramental Prayers

As Moroni saw our day and observed a typical Christian Sabbath, he must have been amazed at the multitude of apostate practices surrounding the holy yet simple ordinance of the sacrament in the various Christian churches. Visiting the Catholics, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, or Pentecostals, one would see a variety of practices. No wonder Moroni wrote the prayers and manner of administering and said, "We know the manner to be true." (Moro. 4:1.)

Both of the sacramental prayers contain the phrase "always remember him." We learn something of the importance of this phrase in the account recorded in 3 Nephi 1-2. A plan had been made to slay the righteous, and a day had been set apart to do this if the sign spoken of by Samuel the Lamanite should not come to pass. As Nephi pleaded with God in mighty prayer, the Lord spoke, saying: "Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfil all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of my holy prophets." (3 Ne. 1:13.)

The sign was given, and the effect of this sign on those in the promised land is recorded as follows: "From this time forth there began to be lyings sent forth among the people, by Satan, to harden their hearts, to the intent that they might not believe in those signs and wonders which they had seen; but notwithstanding these lyings and deceivings the more part of the people did believe, and were converted unto the Lord." (3 Ne. 1:22.)

Although it is common to say "signs do not convert," it is clear that this sign was so tremendous that "the more part of the people did believe, and were converted to the Lord."

A great lesson is now taught in the Book of Mormon, for we learn that after conversion one must continue in works of faith to retain this conversion. Only three or four years after the people were converted, we read: "Thus passed away the ninety and fifth year also, and the people began to forget those signs and wonders which they had heard, and began to be less and less astonished at a sign or a wonder from heaven, insomuch that they began to be hard in their hearts, and blind in their minds, and began to disbelieve all which they had heard and seen." (3 Ne. 2:1.)

How do people "begin to forget"? Could they actually forget they had seen a day, a night, and a day as one day? Certainly not, but they could forget the spiritual significance of that experience. They could forget their spiritual feelings and thus could lose their spiritual conversion. Unfortunately, we see the same thing in the lives of a few Church members today. For example, a returned missionary will never forget where he served his mission, but he may forget his spiritual feelings and conversion. How does this happen? By neglecting the sacred ordinance given that "we might always remember." If we always remember, we certainly cannot forget. If we neglect the sacred ordinance of the sacrament, or do not partake of the emblems worthily and with the proper attitude, it is not long until we do not "always remember him" and "always have his spirit to be with us." If we lose his spirit, we are no longer numbered with the faithful. Although the Nephites in 3 Nephi 2 did not have the ordinance of the sacrament (it had not yet been instituted among them), they obviously had sacrificial ordinances designed to point them to Christ and to help them always remember him. They lost the spirit that converted them and could keep them faithful. The necessity of faithful sacrament observance in remembering the Lord was discussed by President Spencer W. Kimball: "When you look in the dictionary for the most important word, do you know what it is? It could be remember. Because all of you have made covenants—you know what to do and you know how to do it—our greatest need is to remember. That is why everyone goes to sacrament meeting every Sabbath day, to take the sacrament and listen to the priests pray that they 'may always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them.' Nobody should ever forget to go to sacrament meeting. Remember is the word. Remember is the program." [^4]

Sacred Ordinances

Elder Boyd K. Packer said, "Good conduct without the ordinances of the gospel will neither redeem nor exalt mankind; covenants and the ordinances are essential." [^5]

Elder Packer was speaking of the ordinances of salvation—beginning with baptism and progressing on to the sealing ordinances of the temple. Why should ordinances be so important? Certainly most Protestant churches place little saving value on them. The following four points may help solidify our understanding of their purpose and importance.

First, God has commanded them. This in and of itself should be sufficient: "Wherefore he that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of me if he obey mine ordinances. He that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances." (D&C 52:15-16.)

Second, ordinances are the legal means for the orderly accomplishment of stated purposes. Priesthood is used in God's kingdom so that the work performed is legal. So it continues with ordinances. God could remit sins through any means he decreed. If he said that one must read the Bible eight times to be forgiven of sins, that decree would stand. However, for good reasons he instituted the principle that sins are to be forgiven through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance of sins, and participation in the ordinance of baptism. Thus, this becomes the legal or authorized means for remitting sins. Performed under the direction of his priesthood, it is and remains an orderly procedure, without confusion, carefully and harmoniously regulated.

Third, ordinances are effective teaching symbols that clearly portray what is happening. The ordinance of baptism is a perfect example. How gracious of God to institute a procedure that portrays forgiveness. Water itself is a cleansing agent. The burial in the water symbolizes the burying of the man of sin in a watery grave. The rising of the person from immersion in water is analogous to the dead rising from an earthly grave. The rising or resurrection is to a new life—a spiritual life. As we wash away our sins in a watery grave and bury the man of sin in a watery tomb, so we also come forth to a new, spiritual life, cleansed and forgiven through the sacred ordinance of baptism.

Fourth, ordinances serve as witnesses to spiritual agreements between God and man. As one puts his signature to a document to bind himself to the written terms, so we bind ourselves to the terms of ordinances by participating in them. Such a seal of intent and participation is noted in heaven itself and is also recorded on earthly records kept by the Church. When the day of judgment arrives and the books are opened, records of our participation in and binding ourselves to the terms of ordinances will be brought forth. Both our making of these ordinances and our keeping of the terms entered into will play a major role in the judgment rendered upon us.

Nourishing New Members

Moroni 6 is most interesting and enlightening concerning Nephite church practices. We read: "After they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith." (Moro. 6:4; emphasis added.)

To illustrate the importance of nourishing new members, I would like to include excerpts from a lesson taught to a Book of Mormon class at Brigham Young University during the fall of 1987. I asked the class to indicate where they had family members serving on missions and then to estimate how many hours a day the missionary was working and how much the mission was costing per month.

Teacher: We have suggested time and cost of missionary work. Let us examine another question. Why do some converts not remain active in the Church? My own experience has been that if we were to pick the one central thing that causes more people to go inactive than anything else, the answer would have to be lack of fellowshipping. But that has ramifications. You can say, well they weren't really converted, but what that means is that as long as someone fellowshipped them they were converted enough to keep coming and to grow. But if you stop the fellowshipping, they weren't able to keep on by themselves. If we had fellowshipped them another one or two years, maybe they would have been strong enough to stand by themselves.

The reason we've discussed this is that I did a little calculating. Although these figures may not be exactly up to date, they are not too far off. These figures were worked out in the early 1980s. I took the number of converts we get in the Church per year, and the number of missionaries we have, and an estimated number of hours they work, and the estimated average cost. What I came up with was that it was taking about 468 hours of missionary work per convert, and it was costing about $540 per convert. If you go on a mission and know that it is going to take that many hours to make a convert and cost that much money, do you want to go or stay home? Do you find members objecting to spending that much money and that much time to convert somebody to the Church? We don't object to that. We say we would like to be more economical because we want more people to hear the gospel. But, if that is what it takes, we'll spend the time and the money. Now, isn't it a shame to spend all that time and all that money to bring somebody into the Church, and then lose him? And the main reason we lose him is what? Lack of fellowshipping. We should keep many more converts in the Church. We should be much more successful.

Have you ever gone to sacrament meeting, stood at the back of the hall for ten or fifteen minutes before the meeting began, watched people come in and sit down, and noticed who looked like he might be all alone? Have you ever watched for somebody sitting all by himself? Did you ever have enough compassion and spirit of fellowshipping to go sit down by that person and say, "I'm so-and-so and you're who?" Did you get acquainted and make that person feel at home and go through the meetings with him? No, we don't do that. That's as much a part of missionary work for this time and circumstances as to accept a full-time mission when the call comes.

Now, in the light of all I've said, let's read a passage from Moroni chapter 6. We want to pick it up in verse 4. We are talking about converts who come into the Church. "After they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way."

We have a system for keeping track of people. Isn't that what Moroni was saying they did? They were numbered, and their names were taken. Now, they didn't have computers like we do today, but they kept track of people so they could be nourished and kept in the right way. They fellowshipped them to strengthen them in the kingdom.

We do a very good job in missionary work and are willing to spend money and time to convert people to the Church. We don't do a very good job currently in fellowshipping. There are some exceptions to that; once in a while you go to a ward where they really take care of strangers.

Student: Sometimes we, as missionaries, hated to take someone to a ward knowing how cold that ward was going to be. We had something so precious that we wanted to share with them, but we were afraid of what the members would do.

Teacher: That's not too flattering to us, is it? As we reflect on our efforts to strengthen converts and keep track of members in the Church today, it is edifying to read Moroni's statement of similar concern in his day and of the practices of the Church among the Nephites.

Is it not faith-promoting to know that the Church in earlier dispensations not only practiced faith, repentance, and baptism, but also recorded the names of members and watched over and nourished them that they might be kept in the faith? Today we call such practices fellowshipping, home teaching, or visiting teaching, but the purpose in each dispensation has been the same—first to convert and then to perfect members of Christ's Church. President Gordon B. Hinckley commented on the tragedy of losing souls after once having brought them into the kingdom: "The greatest tragedy in the Church . . . is the loss of those who join the Church and then fall away. With very few exceptions it need not happen. I am convinced that almost universally those who are baptized by the missionaries have been taught sufficiently to have received knowledge and testimony sufficiently to warrant their baptism. But it is not an easy thing to make the transition incident to joining this Church. It means cutting old ties. It means leaving friends. It may mean setting aside cherished beliefs. It may require a change of habits and a suppression of appetites. In so many cases it means loneliness and even fear of the unknown. There must be nurturing and strengthening during this difficult season of a convert's life. A tremendous price has been paid for his presence in the Church. The long efforts of the missionaries and the cost of their service, the separation from old relationship and the trauma associated with this makes it imperative that these precious souls be welcomed, reassured, helped in their times of weakness, praised for what they do, given responsibility under which they may grow strong, and encouraged and thanked for all they do." [^6]

Conducting Meetings

Moroni 6 concludes: "The church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls. . . . And their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done." (Moro. 6:5, 9.)

Those who preside over meetings today are concerned that what is done is under the influence of the Holy Ghost. Meetings should be planned under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and meetings should be conducted under that same spirit. This will necessitate, at times, that on-the-spot changes be made in the songs sung and those called upon to speak and the subjects spoken upon—all this that God may be glorified and that Church members may be watched over and strengthened as was done in the ancient church among the Nephites.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Monte S. Nyman is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.
[^2] Mormon was about ten years of age in A.D. 321, making him about thirty-four in the year A.D. 345. (4 Ne. 1:48-49; Morm. 1:2.)
[^3] Charges of plagiarizing have been leveled against the Prophet Joseph Smith because of the similarities between 1 Corinthians 13 and Moroni 7. There are several possibilities for these similarities: (1) The Holy Ghost inspired both men; (2) Jesus taught these things to both the Jews and the Nephites and they were not recorded (John 21:25; Acts 1:3; 3 Ne. 26:8-12); (3) Paul and Mormon both were quoting from an earlier source that was lost from the original text of the Bible with other plain and precious things (1 Ne. 13:24-29). Some support of the latter is given by references to charity in Old Testament times by Nephi. (2 Ne. 26:30.) The last two possibilities are supported by modern biblical critics who question Paul as the originator of the message of 1 Corinthians 13. For their theories and evidences, see Richard L. Anderson, Understanding Paul (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1983), pp. 118-19 and notes.
[^4] Mormon's quotation is very similar to 3 Nephi 14:16-20 or Matthew 7:14-20. Because these sources use ''fruits'' instead of ''works'' and ''a tree'' rather than ''a man,'' it is possible that Mormon was paraphrasing these teachings. Another possibility is that he was quoting from an Old Testament source that is no longer in the Bible because of the loss of plain and precious parts. (1 Ne. 13:24-29.) Further support for the latter possibility is that much of the so-called Sermon on the Mount was known to the Nephites before it was given as a collective sermon to the Nephites. (See Matt. 7:7 and 2 Ne. 32:4.)
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976), p. 162.
[^6] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 11th ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1959), p. 136.
