Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

26

HOPE, FAITH, AND CHARITY

(Moroni 7-8)

Monte S. Nyman [^1]

Many members of the Church can quote some of the verses from Moroni 7, such as "All things which are good cometh of God" (v. 12); "The Spirit of Christ is given to every man" (v. 16); and "Charity is the pure love of Christ" (v. 47). However, few have ever seen the great overall message and the unity of the whole chapter. It is my opinion that Mormon's sermon ranks as one of the greatest, surpassed only by those of the Savior.

Mormon identified his audience as those "of the church, that are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which [they] can enter into the rest of the Lord, from this time henceforth until [they] shall rest with him in heaven." (Moro. 7:3.) While we do not know exactly when Mormon delivered his sermon, we do know that it was in a period when great trials and afflictions were upon the Church. In A.D. 345, Mormon, who was then about thirty-four years old, lamented that "a continual scene of wickedness and abominations has been before mine eyes ever since I have been sufficient to behold the ways of man." (Morm. 2:18.) [^2] As these conditions only worsened over the next forty years of his life, those whom Mormon addressed as the faithful members of the Church would have endured the sufferings and persecutions of their corrupt society.

When Mormon presented the sermon recorded in Moroni 7, he was a disciple of Jesus Christ (3 Ne. 5:12-13), a special witness, grounded in the knowledge of the gospel. His office not only gave him the authority but also the responsibility to declare the gospel "according to the power of the Holy Ghost." (D&C 18:32.) His message to the Nephites is as applicable to us today as it was to those who heard it in his own time. As will be shown, it represents a three-step plan of salvation: hope, faith, and charity. While these terms have become common in our modern Christian world, we may also have become complacent in really understanding them. That they are of universal importance is demonstrated by Paul's use of them in writing to the Corinthians. (1 Cor. 13.) [^3]

Hope Produces Good Works

Those faithful members of the Church to whom Mormon spoke had been brought to their present spiritual status through the principle of hope—the hope of eternal life (Titus 1:2; 3:7) obtained through Jesus Christ (Jacob 2:19). This hope gives people the courage to follow the commandments, thereby producing good works in their lives. Both ancient and modern scriptures tell us all people will be judged of their works, whether they be good or evil. (2 Cor. 5:10; Morm. 3:20.) This is enlarged upon by Mormon.

Mormon commenced the body of his sermon by saying: "The word of God . . . [says] by their works ye shall know them . . . a man being evil cannot do that which is good." (Moro. 7:5-6.) [^4] This statement serves as a warning or refutation of the idea of earning or buying salvation through a specified number of good deeds. As Mormon continued, "if [a man] offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing." (Moro. 7:6.) In other words, we must do the right thing for the right reason. After expounding upon the idea that it is impossible for an evil person to do good things, Mormon declared that this is because "all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil." (Moro. 7:12.) Doing something for the right reason is doing it not only because it is what God would want us to do, but also because it is what we want to do. Consequently, work will demonstrate a love of God and be a service to humanity. It will further God's work of bringing "to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) It will be inspired of God. (Moro. 7:13.)

Mormon added a further warning about how we perceive works. He cautioned us against judging what is good to be from the devil and what is evil from God. (Moro. 7:14.) As an answer to this dilemma of how we can know which is which, he reminded his congregation and us that "the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil." He then noted that the way to judge whether a thing is good or not is to determine whether it "inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ." (Moro. 7:15-16.) If it does, it is good. After giving a similar but contrasting description of how the devil's operations entice us to do evil, Mormon cautioned that the way we judge will determine the way we will also be judged. (Moro. 7:17-18.)

Through a hope in Christ, we produce good works in this life and gain the right to receive the Spirit in our lives. This is one criterion for the judgment for every individual. By following the directions of the Spirit of Christ, given to everyone who is born into this world, we can make the proper selection of which good works to accomplish.

Faith Produces Ordinances

Mormon told his listeners that they could lay hold upon every good thing through their faith, for a good thing comes through Christ; and God, who knows all things, sent angels to minister to mortals and make known Christ's coming. (Moro. 7:19-22.) Mormon added that God also declared to prophets that Christ would come and that there were various ways that good things were manifest: "Wherefore . . . men began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing; and thus it was until the coming of Christ." (Moro. 7:23-25.)

Mormon further attested that people were saved by faith in Christ, thus becoming the sons and daughters of God. (Moro. 7:26.) We become his sons and daughters through being born again. (Mosiah 5:7; Ether 3:14; Gal. 4:1-7.) As the Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "Being born again, comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances." [^5] Thus faith produces ordinances necessary for salvation. Mormon equated these saving ordinances with miracles, which he said had not ceased since the coming of Christ in the flesh, neither had angels ceased to minister to God's children. (Moro. 7:27-29.) He noted that there are two prerequisites for angels to minister to mortals: first, angels must be commanded to come by Jesus; and second, the recipient must be "of strong faith and a firm mind." (Moro. 7:30.)

There are two basic purposes for which angels come: (1) to call people to repentance, and (2) to fulfill and to do the work of the covenants of the Father. (Moro. 7:31.) The calling of people to repentance is illustrated in various places in the Book of Mormon. (See, for example, 1 Ne. 3:29; Mosiah 27:11.) The appearance of angels to fulfill and to do the work of the covenants of the Father is the work of providing ordinances for salvation. For ordinances to be efficacious, they must be done by the authority of the priesthood. The keys of the priesthood are the directing power of the priesthood. [^6] When apostasy has occurred and the keys of the priesthood have been lost, making it necessary to restore these keys again, God has used angels to restore them. In our own dispensation, John the Baptist restored the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood (D&C 13); Peter, James, and John restored the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood (D&C 27:12-13); Moses brought back the keys of the gathering of Israel, Elias the keys of the Abrahamic covenant, Elijah the keys of sealing power (D&C 110:11-16); other angels from Adam to the present all declared their dispensation, their keys, and so on (D&C 128:21). Thus the way is once more prepared for individuals to attain salvation through the exercise of faith to receive the ordinances of the priesthood. The chosen vessels of the Lord (priesthood leaders) bear testimony of Christ, and the ordinances necessary for salvation through him (baptism, etc.), and the covenants of the Lord are fulfilled. (Moro. 7:31-32.) By faith, miracles are performed and angels minister to God's children. Without faith, these ordinances are not performed, angels do not minister, and individuals are not fit to be numbered among the people of the Church. (Moro. 7:37-39.)

Mormon proclaimed that such faith would not be obtainable without hope. This hope, which motivates us to do things, is a necessary companion of faith. We hope for eternal life, and because of our hope we have faith in Christ. Because of our faith in Christ, we do the works of the Father. We could not exercise faith to receive the ordinances if we did not hope for eternal life through the atonement. (Moro. 7:40-42.)

Charity Brings Grace

Through the humility required to obtain hope and faith, one is also able to obtain the essential quality for salvation, charity. This enables him or her to confess "by the power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Christ." Without this celestial quality, Mormon says, mortals are considered as nothing. (Moro. 7:44.) Similar testimony of this concept was previously borne in the Book of Mormon by Nephi (2 Ne. 26:30) and Amulek (Alma 34:28-29). Mormon gave or quoted a lengthy definition of charity. The definition concludes with the familiar statement: "Charity is the pure love of Christ." (Moro. 7:45-47.)

Mormon bore witness that it will be well at the time of judgment for those who possess charity. (Moro. 7:47.) He then gave the formula for obtaining this gift of God: "Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart," and the gift will be "bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that [they] may become the sons [and daughters] of God." (Moro. 7:48.) The obtaining and maintenance of this pure love is possible through "diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come." (Moro. 8:26; see also 2 Ne. 33:6-9.) Therefore, charity is the pure love of God and is a gift from God based on prayer and true discipleship. Gaining it is required for salvation in the celestial kingdom, and it is bestowed through God's grace. As one shares the love, he or she receives more of God's grace—he or she receives "grace for grace." (D&C 93:12; John 1:16.)

Three Steps to Salvation

Basically, three things are required for salvation: works, faith, and grace. Some religions emphasize that salvation comes only through faith and the grace of God. Others emphasize that salvation comes from ordinances. Still others preach the necessity of works. The scriptures show that all three are required for salvation. Because hope for eternal life produces works, individuals will be judged according to their works. Through faith we gain the ordinances prerequisite for salvation. However, after we receive all of the ordinances and do all of the works, it is the grace of God that prepares and purifies us for salvation. This is what Nephi meant when he said, "It is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Ne. 25:23.)

The Doctrine of Christ Concerning Children

The sermon we have just considered was placed in the record by Moroni as he concluded his engravings on the plates. He also included a letter he had received from his father concerning the baptism of little children, a pernicious doctrine that had been introduced into the Nephite church and seemed always to creep into the church as apostasy began to set in. (Moro. 8:4-6.) [^7] The placement of Mormon's letter following his sermon does not seem to be accidental. Mormon testified to his son that those who suppose that little children need baptism are "in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity." (Moro. 8:14.)

Before considering Mormon's explanation of the relationship of Christ and little children, we should affirm the source of his reasoning. He had received the word of the Lord by the power of the Holy Ghost and had received the authority and responsibility from God to boldly declare his words. Therefore, we will not be considering merely the opinion of Mormon but the very "words of Christ" that came to him. (Moro. 8:7-8, 16.)

The Lord revealed three reasons to Mormon as to why children do not need to be baptized. The first is that little children are not capable of committing sin. The second is that the atonement of Christ has paid for the transgressions of little children. The third is that little children cannot repent. These three reasons will each be considered separately.

Mormon was told that little children were not capable of committing sin. After being reminded of Jesus' teaching that he came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance (cf. Mark 2:17), Mormon was told that the curse of Adam (the fall into an environment of sin) was taken from children and had no power over them. In other words, Satan has no power to tempt little children. (D&C 29:47.) Furthermore, Mormon was informed that the law of circumcision was done away or revoked by Christ (Moro. 8:8) because this law had served its purpose. Prior to the Savior's advent, circumcision at eight days typified the principle that children are not accountable until they are eight years old. (JST Gen. 17:11-12.) When the atonement was accomplished, circumcision, like Mosaic sacrifice, was done away. Thus Mormon concluded that it was solemn mockery to baptize little children when the atonement of Christ had taken care of whatever transgressions they may have committed.

Mormon next explained to Moroni that "little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world." The plan of salvation was based upon the foreknowledge of God. God, knowing that many little children would not live to the age of accountability, provided for their salvation through the atonement, without the necessity of baptism. (Moro. 8:11-12.) As revealed to Joseph Smith, "All little children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (D&C 137:10.) Not to have provided for these little children would have rendered God "a partial God," for "many little children have died without receiving baptism." (Moro. 8:12.) Based on his foreknowledge, God sent those spirits who were of a celestial character to the bodies of those who would die in their infancy. In the words of Joseph Smith:

We have again the warning voice sounded in our midst, which shows the uncertainty of human life; and in my leisure moments I have meditated upon the subject, and asked the question, why it is that infants, innocent children, are taken away from us, especially those that seem to be the most intelligent and interesting. The strongest reasons that present themselves to my mind are these: This world is a very wicked world; and it is a proverb that the "world grows weaker and wiser"; if that is the case, the world grows more wicked and corrupt. In the earlier ages of the world a righteous man, and a man of God and of intelligence, had a better chance to do good, to be believed and received than at the present day; but in these days such a man is much opposed and persecuted by most of the inhabitants of the earth, and he has much sorrow to pass through here. The Lord takes many away even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man, and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on earth; therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil, and we shall soon have them again. [^8]

These children needed to receive a body, that they might go on in their eternal progression. [^9] Of course other great and noble spirits were needed to administer the plan of salvation upon the earth and were also chosen in the premortal councils to be leaders on the earth at various times in mortality. (Abr. 3:22-23.) In the wisdom and foreknowledge of God, the assignments were made based upon the faith and good works of the spirits in the first estate, meaning the premortal life. (Alma 13:1-5.) Without an acceptance of the omniscience of God, the doctrine of salvation for little children is incompatible with God being unchangeable and no respecter of persons.

Mormon's final point that little children are unable to repent (Moro. 8:19) is also based upon the law of accountability. Repentance includes the recognition of sin, a remorse for mistakes, and a restitution for the damage or hurt that has been done. Until the child matures enough to be able to do this, he is not accountable; until the child is able to understand right and wrong and the effects of his actions, the Lord does not hold him accountable. To believe in the need for baptism of infants, in Mormon's words, "denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption." (Moro. 8:20.) Mormon invited the readers to give heed, for his words will stand for or against them at the judgment seat of Christ. (Moro. 8:21.)

Mormon added another dimension to his treatise on little children; he said that those who are without the law are also alive in Christ. This would include all people who are born into a situation where they are never taught, [^10] as well as those who through some imparity are also incapable of understanding the law. (Moro. 8:22; see also D&C 29:50.)

Become Like Little Children

Mormon admonished his missionary son to teach "repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children." (Moro. 8:10.) Jesus taught similar things during his mortal ministry. (Matt. 18:2-6.) Paul taught the saints to be children in the sense that they were devoid of malice, but to be adults in regard to understanding. (1 Cor. 14:20.) Mormon further taught that the first fruit of repentance was baptism, "and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; and the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God." (Moro. 8:25-26.) The plan of redemption is to fill all of us, like Christ, full of charity. Those who have hope and bring forth works unto repentance will receive a remission of their sins through their faith in accepting the ordinances. Through the ordinances they will receive the Holy Ghost, who will fill them with hope to do more and more good works in and through the love of Christ, which is charity. This charity will then enable them to endure to the end.

Mormon followed this plan and attained the desired goal. He was filled with everlasting charity for all people, and he especially loved little children. He urged his son Moroni to pray for the Lamanites, his enemies who were seeking his life. (Moro. 8:27-29.) With the exception of the Savior himself, we may have no better example of a charitable person than Mormon. Moroni took his father's advice and seems to have attained that same quality of love. As he later abridged the record of the Jaredites, he prayed for the Gentiles unto whom his record would come. (Ether 12:33-41.) As he added a few more chapters to the records of his father, he also did so for the benefit of the Lamanites. (Moro. 10:1-4.) With such examples and admonitions to follow, we should be encouraged to strive to attain the same quality of love in our lives, "for charity never faileth" and "all [other] things must fail." (Moro. 7:46.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] S. Brent Farley is an instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion at Utah State University.
[^2] See ''Bible Dictionary,'' Holy Bible (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979), p. 732.
[^3] Bible Dictionary, p. 608.
[^4] Mormon's quotation is very similar to 3 Nephi 14:16-20 or Matthew 7:14-20. Because these sources use ''fruits'' instead of ''works'' and ''a tree'' rather than ''a man,'' it is possible that Mormon was paraphrasing these teachings. Another possibility is that he was quoting from an Old Testament source that is no longer in the Bible because of the loss of plain and precious parts. (1 Ne. 13:24-29.) Further support for the latter possibility is that much of the so-called Sermon on the Mount was known to the Nephites before it was given as a collective sermon to the Nephites. (See Matt. 7:7 and 2 Ne. 32:4.)
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976), p. 162.
[^6] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 11th ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1959), p. 136.
[^7] The washing of little children was a false doctrine instituted in the days of Abraham and refuted by the Lord in a revelation. (JST Gen. 17:3-6.) The Lord on this same occasion made the covenant with Abraham that every male child should be circumcised when eight days old. (Gen. 17:9-12.) The circumcision being performed at eight days was symbolic of the child becoming accountable at eight years. (JST Gen. 17:11-12; see also D&C 68:25-27.)
[^8] Teachings, pp. 196-97.
[^9] The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: ''We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment. He is pleased when he can obtain the tabernacle of man, and when cast out by the Savior he asked to go into the herd of swine, showing that he would prefer a swine's body to having none.'' (Teachings, p. 181.) These little children, being pure, did not need to be tested further. Their gaining of earthly experience, another purpose for coming to mortality, will be provided for them in the millennium. (See Gospel Doctrine, pp. 453-54.) See also Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 2:56-57; Bruce R. McConkie, ''The Salvation of Little Children,'' Ensign, April 1977, p. 6.
[^10] Paul taught that ''where no law is, there is no transgression.'' (Rom. 4:15; see also 2 Ne. 9:25-26.) However, while those who have no law are not taught, it must also be remembered that without the law there is no progression. Those who die without the law are only terrestrial beings unless they accept the gospel in the spirit world. (D&C 76:72; see also Joseph Fielding Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 5 vols., compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1957-66], 4:10.)
