Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 8: Alma 30 to Moroni ( 1988)

27

COME UNTO CHRIST

(Moroni 9-10)

S. Brent Farley [^1]

"My beloved son, I write unto you again that ye may know that I am yet alive; but I write somewhat of that which is grievous." (Moro. 9:1.) Thus began the final known letter of Mormon to his son Moroni. The ravages of war threatened to annihilate an entire nation; yet the prophet-father reached his prophet-son with the news that he was yet alive. His only joy was the knowledge of their faithfulness. (See Moro. 9:6, 22, 25-26.)

Mormon's report on the condition of their people was appalling. They had, by choice, gone beyond the point of repentance. Inspired warnings were met with anger; they refused to repent. Their feelings for the dignity of the human race had dwindled from smoking embers to cold ash. They thirsted for blood and craved immorality. They had become so hardened that they delighted in torture and murder; they even ate the flesh of their victims as a token of bravery. They were without civilization, without principle, and beyond feeling.

The bleakness of the letter was broken by the hope of reunion and the transferral of sacred records. (Moro. 9:24.) The closing reflected the sacred trust that though a nation might perish, a faithful saint would be raised up to the glory of eternal life. (Moro. 9:25.) With a final "amen," Mormon disappeared from known history.

Moroni's Promise

In the ensuing years, Moroni concluded his sacred commission with the golden plates. His final message to the world began with a promise that will help change the world as its inhabitants come unto Christ (a millennial destiny). It is called "the promise of the Book of Mormon."

"Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things . . ." (Moro. 10:3.) Moroni was referring specifically to the sacred records, a portion of which would be revealed in the restoration of the gospel to Joseph Smith. The portion would be translated and published for all the world to read. "If it be wisdom in God that ye should read them." The book could be read and laid aside as any other piece of literature. But if the reader sought wisdom about God and his kingdom, he would be taking a step upward in his relationship with the divine. It would be the wisdom of God ingested to one's spirit from the printed page. To further qualify for this great promise, the reader is encouraged, "Remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things." This provides a perspective that spans time and races, and causes one to realize that God is a personal and loving individual who has been dealing with humanity for their salvation since time began on this planet. It implies a reference to the Bible, for it is the most commonly possessed scripture that provides knowledge of God's dealings with his children since the creation. Having an understanding of biblical accounts provides a foundation for an understanding and an acceptance of the Book of Mormon as another testament for Christ. "And ponder it in your hearts." Pondering is thinking seriously, thoughtfully considering something, or reflecting upon a topic. To ponder in the heart adds the dimension of the feelings of the soul, wherein heart and mind are combined in an effort to understand.

Such an attitude of consideration begins with the "reading" and leads to the "receiving." (Moro. 10:4.) As Alma explained, truth (applied in this case to the Book of Mormon—the experiment being tested) has an effect upon the soul, for truth "will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me." (Alma 32:28.) This is a gradual but very noticeable process. As one reads and receives, the admonition of the promise continues: "I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moro. 10:4.) Nephi, an earlier Book of Mormon prophet, testified that "if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ." (2 Ne. 33:10.) A simpler deduction would be hard to obtain; the promise of the Book of Mormon is a guarantee that this logical point will be proven. The proof, however, is not an empirical test open to the view of all. It is open only to the view of all who perform the test in the specified way; it is a test that affects the soul and the mind. The heart must be "sincere"; the intent must be "real." The sincerity and intent must be of such a nature and force as to produce change in the heart of the reader upon verification of the truth. And it requires faith, a quality difficult to measure for mortals, but which is definitely measurable to God. When such conditions are adequately met, the grand promise is: "He will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moro. 10:4.) A direct communication from God through the Holy Ghost will occur.

The promise originates with God. Thousands upon thousands have tested the promise and obtained the blessing of positive and undeniable proof. Many are the witnesses who verify the validity of fulfillment. Such evidence is referred to as a testimony. Through varying degrees and in differing manners, one may, as Moroni testified, "know the truth of all things" by the power of the Holy Ghost. (Moro. 10:5.)

Gifts of the Spirit

Moroni prophetically declared: "Nothing that is good denieth the Christ, but acknowledgeth that he is. And ye may know that he is, by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moro. 10:6-7.) He then rehearsed some of the gifts of God that come by the Spirit (much as Paul did in 1 Corinthians 12).

"To one is given by the Spirit of God, that he may teach the word of wisdom." (Moro. 10:9.) Wisdom is the ability to understand and use principles and ideas that are correct and true; it is the ability to incorporate those principles into life for the betterment of humanity. The greatest source of wisdom is God. James declared, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.) It was this scripture that led Joseph Smith into the sacred grove and the presence of God. Wisdom embraces the use of principles both spiritual and temporal, great and small; but all wisdom results in the benefit of mankind and their ultimate progression toward God. The ability to teach the word of wisdom is the ability to emulate and propagate that which benefits and improves mankind.

"And to another, that he may teach the word of knowledge by the same Spirit." (Moro. 10:10.) Knowledge is attained when one grasps truth. "Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.) Knowledge is not a distorted grasp of the facts; it is a clear attainment and understanding of that which is. It is not the varying interpretations of mortals that produce knowledge most readily; it is the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord that brings things into view "as they really are, and . . . as they really will be." (Jacob 4:13.) The greatest knowledge is that which opens the way to exaltation. As with wisdom, there are varying degrees of knowledge, temporal and spiritual, greater and smaller. The ultimate and sublime purpose of knowledge is "for the salvation of our souls." (Jacob 4:13.)

Firsthand knowledge comes with the aid of the Spirit. To read the scriptures gives one knowledge of what others have said. That is secondhand knowledge. When the Spirit bears witness to the truth of what the prophets have written, it becomes the personal and firsthand knowledge of the reader. The knowledge thus obtained is a gift of God, and the ability to teach knowledge is the capacity to aid others in their grasp of truth.

"And to another, exceedingly great faith." (Moro. 10:11.) "Faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (JST Heb. 11:1.) Faith comes in varying degrees for a variety of situations, both temporal and spiritual, from the farmer who plants the seeds to the prophet who sees within the veil the things of God. Its exercise develops power and undying trust. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and Sarah are cited for their faith. (Heb. 11:4-13; see also Ether 12:19.) Faith was the power that saved Israel when they were led through the waters of the Red Sea. (Heb. 11:29.) Faith in its perfection is embodied in God, who framed the worlds through this power. (Heb. 11:3.)

Faith is the ability to trust explicitly in someone or something. In its truest sense, it binds one to God and the principles of his kingdom. Great faith is a peak in spiritual development. The brother of Jared illustrated this when he saw the Savior. (Ether 3:4-13.)

"And to another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit." (Moro. 10:11.) Healing is the process by which the sick are restored to health. The priesthood ordinance of administering to the sick by use of pure olive oil and the authority of God is designed for this purpose. Many could testify to the miracle of healing through priesthood ordinances. The scriptures are replete with examples of healing, the prime focus centering in Christ himself, who went about "healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people which believed on his name." (JST Matt. 4:22.) The gift of healing by the Spirit is a special and notable ability to perceive the situations in which the miracle of restoration of health may be called forth by faith and priesthood power.

The gift to heal is not limited solely to physical maladies; it also extends to the ability to restore health to the spirit. The sicknesses of sin and depression affect spirituality. Some have the ability to teach or speak in such a manner that hope and enlightenment are brought to those who are down in spirit; they are thereby able to grasp that healing balm provided in the word of another and work their way back to full spiritual health.

"And again, to another, that he may work mighty miracles." (Moro. 10:12.) A miracle is something perceived by others as "supernatural," or beyond the normal power of mortals to produce. It is a manifestation of divine power, usually in response to faith. [^2] Miracles have affected the earth, the elements of nature, and the inhabitants of the world. Some miracles appear greater than others. The greatest miracle of all was the atoning sacrifice and resurrection of the Savior.

"To another, that he may prophesy concerning all things." (Moro. 10:13.) The ability to prophesy is the spiritual power to foresee and foretell events in the future. The greatest prophecies were the predictions of the prophets of the mission of Jesus Christ before it actually occurred.

To prophesy is greater than to predict; people predict weather and events based upon logic and consistency of occurrences. Often they are wrong. Prophecy is a gift of the Spirit, sure and validated by the workings of God. "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (Rev. 19:10.) As judged appropriate by God, certain individuals have the gift to know of things in the future.

"To another, the beholding of angels and ministering spirits." (Moro. 10:14.) This gift enables one to see people who are normally beyond the veil limiting mortal sight. It is to behold heavenly beings. "Ordinarily the word angel means those ministering persons who have a body of flesh and bone, being either resurrected from the dead (re-embodied), or else translated, as were Enoch, Elijah, etc. (D&C 129). . . . Spirits are those beings who either have not yet obtained a body of flesh and bone (unembodied), or who have once had a mortal body and have died, and are awaiting the resurrection (disembodied)." [^3]

"And again, to another, all kinds of tongues; and again, to another, the interpretation of languages and of divers kinds of tongues." (Moro. 10:15-16.) The gift of tongues applies to the understanding of various languages. It may come suddenly in the ability to speak in one language and be understood in another, as on the Day of Pentecost. (Acts 2:1-11.) More commonly, it is the ability given to missionaries to quickly acquire the skill to speak in and understand a foreign tongue spoken in the mission area to which they are called.

"And all these gifts come by the Spirit of Christ; and they come unto every man severally, according as he will." (Moro. 10:17.) The Spirit of Christ is the "true light, which lighteth every man who cometh into the world" (JST John 1:9); it is the power that enlightens eyes and "quickeneth your understandings" (D&C 88:11). It is referred to by many as the "conscience." Through that medium, the gift of the Holy Ghost brings about the greater spiritual gifts to those who are obedient to God's commandments. Every person has a spiritual gift or gifts; they are determined and given by an all-wise God for the benefit of the individual and those with whom he or she relates. All gifts are designed to bring people to Christ.

Moroni testified to "all the ends of the earth—that if the day cometh that the power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief." (Moro. 10:24.) He had lived in such a society.

"And again I would exhort you that ye would come unto Christ, and lay hold upon every good gift, and touch not the evil gift, nor the unclean thing." (Moro. 10:30.) As the good gifts came from God and led to eternal happiness, so the evil gifts would refer to powers and abilities of wickedness derived from obedience to Satan, which would lead to eternal misery. Implied in the exhortation to "lay hold upon every good gift" is that all gifts from God may be enjoyed at some point in time—their fullness undoubtedly reserved for the next life for those who are exalted. To "lay hold" would imply not only the use of individual gifts, but also the enjoyment available from the emanation of gifts exercised by others.

Becoming Perfected in Christ

A concise and concluding formula for coming unto Christ is given by Moroni. (Moro. 10:32-33.) "Come unto Christ, and be perfected in him." In the records Moroni was about to seal was the recorded commandment of the Savior: "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Ne. 12:48.) Being close to Christ carries this requirement: "Deny yourselves of all ungodliness." To become godlike is the supreme goal in gospel progression. Satan would thwart that goal by cloaking evil enticements in attractive garbs. To resist them requires denial. It requires saying no to the attractive show of Satan's wares. Success also requires the exertion to "love God with all your might, mind and strength." In turning away from Satan, one must turn to God. A complete commitment and devotion fosters a love that takes on a divine characteristic, for it transcends all other relationships. It moves more and more toward charity, which is "the pure love of Christ." (Moro. 7:47.) It becomes more and more a privilege than a command as one grows in love of God. As that occurs, "then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ." That which is beyond the capability of an individual to achieve on his or her own is granted by divine providence. The power of increased spiritual strength brings one closer to the attributes of godliness, and thus closer to the eternal goal of perfection. Perfection in mortality is possible in a limited way; that is, one does the best in gospel progression of which he or she is capable within the confines of mortality. It is to gain the triumph over sin. Thus it was recorded that "Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation." (Moses 8:27.) Ultimately, perfection is attained in the eternal sense when one becomes like God: "He that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him." (D&C 84:38.) These, Christ said, will "sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne." (Rev. 3:21.)

The perfection in mortality involves qualifying to be "sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot." (Moro. 10:33.) To be sanctified is to be cleansed by the spirit of the Holy Ghost because of the efficacy of the atonement of Jesus Christ, made possible by baptism into the Lord's church. It leaves one pure and clean. In mortality, it is an ongoing and renewable process, for throughout mortality one keeps overcoming mistakes and progressing. Sins are repented of quickly and regularly, and the seriousness is less and less when compared with the mistakes of earlier development. The cleansing is a type of that which becomes permanent when one enters the kingdom of God in eternity. Then that which was known in part is achieved in a fullness, that the one so sanctified may remain in that state forever.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] S. Brent Farley is an instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion at Utah State University.
[^2] See ''Bible Dictionary,'' Holy Bible (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979), p. 732.
[^3] Bible Dictionary, p. 608.
