Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Preface

We are all travelers for a time on this planet earth. One day we shall return to that dwelling place we knew before, and there rejoice in the memories of our journey and the experiences of this earth life—experiences some of which have taken us to the very mountain peaks of our lives and others into deep valleys as we have been tried and tested along the way, all for the purpose that we might be prepared to receive the glory the Lord has for us when we return. Sometimes we must trudge along in faith not knowing the answers for a time, but always knowing there is a divine plan and a purpose, and feeling the assurance of a loving Father in heaven. With this knowledge, we realize that the tests we are called upon to endure are for our growth, not to consume us but to refine us, not to discourage us but to enlighten us, and not to defeat us but to redeem us.

Some years ago I had a wonderful opportunity to travel to the Holy Land, the birthplace of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. I walked where He had walked, and along the way I talked with friends, fellow travelers, of the things He taught. We shared feelings and emotions, testimonies, and tears of joy and gladness and some sadness. We drew strength from one another as we shared this memorable experience. Upon our return home, things were never quite the same again. Oh, the environment was the same and circumstances and challenges had not changed that much; but our thinking, our understanding, our vision had been expanded. We had been there together at the empty tomb, where we sang of the risen Christ and tried to comprehend what that singular experience meant to each of us in our own lives. We felt the mighty change of heart of which King Benjamin spoke and had a burning desire to "do good continually." (Mosiah 5:2.) The change that takes place is not in our circumstances but in the inner soul, when spirit speaks to spirit and the reality of our eternal relationship is very real. Through this unforgettable trip, a great bonding of friendship among the entire group has taken place, although we seldom see one another. But when we do meet, either as a group or individually, we try to relive all that we experienced. We exchange not just words but feelings. And while some of the memories grow dim, the feelings that we felt then seem to intensify, and we remember. We remember what we saw, but mostly we remember how we felt about the love and sacrifice of our Savior, about each other, about the very purpose of this earth life, and about our common commitment to follow the Savior. It was our love for Him that we had shared, and that feeling, once experienced, is never forgotten.

Since that time, there have been many, many trips with other travelers, not to Nazareth or Bethlehem, but through other cities and towns, with neighbors and sisters and friends journeying toward home, our heavenly home. We have met in conferences and firesides, large meetings and small. We have met in times of laughter and times of sadness, and witnessed an outpouring of the Spirit as our hearts have been touched by the glorious truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ. As we travel together through life, we learn to value differences of one another and treasure the uniqueness of each, knowing that we are all children of our Father in heaven. In the true spirit of sisterhood, we learn to reach out to one another and bear testimony of our common goals to return home—that home where we will not only walk where Jesus walks but will walk with Him and talk with Him. We will recall the times we traveled together, and we will remember.

Our common tie to this life may be a result of our date of birth and our allotted time on earth, or it may be geography, the place in which we live, that has brought us together for a time. But for all of us, wherever we live or whatever our circumstances may be, we share a common bond as sisters, members of the same family, through the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is with this feeling of being bonded together that I desire to draw closer to you, my neighbor, my sister, my friend, in full anticipation that when we return "home," we will have many occasions to remember when we traveled together, how we felt, and how we covenanted to help carry one another's burdens along the way. As we learn from the Doctrine and Covenants, "That same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy." (D&C 130:2.) At that time, I believe, we will look back and, remembering our travels, will realize that what we identified as burdens along the way were not burdens at all, but lessons that qualified us to receive all the blessings our Father has promised us when we follow the path that leads us back to Him.

Recently I received a letter from a young woman who had attended a Young Women's conference attended by several hundred mothers and daughters. She wrote, "I waited in line after the meeting and you gave me a hug and said some wonderful things to me. I was the girl in the green jumper on the second row. Could you please write and tell me what you said. I forgot and I want to write it in my journal so I can read it when I'm feeling down." She didn't remember what was said, but she knew how she felt. It was a special moment when a relationship was established because of the spirit that was present, and she wanted to remember.

The joy of the journey comes through our relationships, feelings for each other that, like divine echoes of times past, stir within us a quiet anticipation of the continuation of this same sociality eternally. It is as Alma told the people at the waters of Mormon: "Ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life." (Mosiah 18:8-9.)

Over the years, I have received many letters from my sisters, young and old, not unlike the request from the little girl "in the green jumper on the second row." It is in response to these kinds of expressions that I desire to share the messages in these chapters and would, if I could, give you a hug and "say some wonderful things" to you—my neighbor, my sister, my friend.

Acknowledgments

I express appreciation to my husband, Heber, who believes I can write, encourages me to write, and makes time for me to write. I am grateful to Kerry Lin Hammond, a very able and efficient secretary, who typed many drafts along the way toward the completion of this project. And I express deepest gratitude and appreciation to Eleanor Knowles, executive editor of Deseret Book, who first encouraged me to publish and who has provided the skillful editing for this manuscript.
