Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Part I

Away from Our Heavenly Home

Chapter 1

That We May Prepare to Do Our Part

Some time ago when I was shopping for groceries, as we all do, a woman saw me and asked, in a tone of surprise, "Do you buy groceries?" I smiled and said, "Yes, and I eat them too."

We are all so ordinary, and yet each is special and unique. It is when we come to know that we are literally sisters in the same family away from our heavenly home for a time that we begin to really recognize each other—not in relation to positions, possessions, prestige, or power, but rather as sisters, heart to heart and soul to soul. Then when we meet we don't exchange just words, but a wonderful exchange of the spirit takes place. We learn to share and trust and risk and not be so concerned about what we do but rather who we are and, even more important, whose we are. We begin to reveal how we feel. We laugh together and cry together and learn how to bear one another's burdens so that they may be light. At least that is what we, as covenant people, hope to do—and yet at times we fall short of the mark and feel some disappointment in ourselves because we are not always doing as well as we could or should or would, given another chance. But above all, it is important for you to know you and me to know me.

On occasion when we conduct a private and sometimes sobering interview with ourselves, we recognize the distance between the ideal and the real. It humbles us and increases our desire for an improved performance, given the wonderful gift of another day. We all hope for the final commendation on our performance, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant."

When the Promised Valley Playhouse in Salt Lake City announced a few years ago that it was going to produce the musical play Annie, 320 young girls auditioned for the part of Annie. Not everyone who tried out got a part, and some who got parts didn't get the ones they thought they wanted. Following a period of intensive rehearsals, the opening night was absolutely spectacular, and the girl who played the lead took many well-deserved bows. But as magnificent as Annie's performance was, her greatest moment, I believe, came after the show, when she graciously acknowledged praises from throngs of admirers in the lobby of the theater. In a corner of the lobby I observed an elderly gentleman, stooped with age and his eyes moist, eagerly searching the crowd. Somehow, through a small opening in the crowd, Annie caught a glimpse of the old man. Forgetting all the public acclaim and with arms outstretched she called, "Grandpa, Grandpa!" The crowd parted, leaving a narrow passageway for this precious moment. The elderly man reached out his arms like parentheses and nestled his precious granddaughter close to him. He spoke softly, and although I could not hear, I think he must have said, "My dear, you played your part so very, very well."

Since that memorable occasion, I have replayed that scene in my mind many times and contemplated the greeting we will each receive following our final performance. Each of us is on stage for a time. This is not the first nor the final act. It is the second act, and we have been assured that we performed our first act very well. Concerning the second, our Father in heaven has said, "We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them; and they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; . . . and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Abraham 3:25-26.)

As we participate in this great drama of earth life, we often find that the parts we so much desire may not be available to us for a time. We find ourselves placed in other roles, only to discover after some years and after a trial of our faith that those other roles may even be the very ones we auditioned for, roles for which we received coaching and divine guidance from our Heavenly Father before we left our heavenly home to come on stage for a season.

President George Q. Cannon gives us great insight as he explains, "God has chosen us out of the world and has given us a great mission. I do not entertain a doubt myself that we were selected and fore-ordained for the mission before the world was, that we had our parts allotted to us in this mortal state of existence as our Savior had His assigned to Him." (Gospel Truth [Deseret Book, 1987], p. 18.)

In the production of Annie, Sandy, Annie's dog, broke loose, missed his cue, and entered too soon. He could have spoiled the show, but Annie came to the rescue and helped him wait until it was his time to enter. As participants on the stage of life, we too must be sensitive to timing, and we must work to support each other. There are times when some will, for a brief moment, move center stage in front of the lights, then go backstage or even offstage into the wings for a time, confident that the entire cast will participate in the final curtain call.

I believe that the sensitivity we each have for another's part, major or minor, will affect tremendously the quality of our individual and final performance. And it is often in the supportive roles that we see the finest and most magnificent examples.

This analogy of being onstage with a particular part is not intended to suggest that anyone performs as a puppet on a string. This would violate the basic doctrine of agency, which is so critical to the very purpose of earth life. And yet many young people whom I talk to, and sometimes older ones, mistakenly believe that they should wait for a prompting of the Spirit on every decision. They believe that if things go well, it is because the Spirit prompts them on what to do, and if things don't go well, it is because the devil made them do it.

President Brigham Young gives us some great insight into our responsibility for choosing well. He said, "God is the author of all good; and yet, if you rightly understood yourselves, you would not directly attribute every good act you perform to our Father in heaven, nor to his Son Jesus Christ, nor to the Holy Ghost; neither would you attribute every evil act of a man or woman to the Devil or his spirits or influences; for man is organized by his Creator to act perfectly independently of all influences there are above or beneath. Those influences are always attending him, and are ready to dictate and direct—to lead him into truth or to lead him to destruction. But is he always guided by those influences in every act? He is not. It is ordained of God that we should act independently in and of ourselves, and the good is present when we need it. If we will ask for it, it is with us." (Journal of Discourses 9:122.)

We are responsible for our own actions. We are always at liberty to ad lib and be distracted by seemingly more exciting things. For example, some of us may spend so much time in the wardrobe department selecting, designing, modeling, combining this with that, including all the accessories, that we may miss our cue. Others may be distracted by the props, the scenery, the set. But these, although important in their place, pale by comparison to the joy that comes in touching another's life in some quiet, small act of service. Would we ever let our possessions stand in the way of that joy which comes when we share our lives with others?

Even as we endeavor to play our various parts in their appropriate seasons, there will continually be self-appointed stage managers who, not knowing or caring about the script, will shout from the wings, "You're playing the wrong part. You don't want the supporting role. That isn't important. Why be a supporting actor when you can be the star? Be front stage. Move in. Let them know who you are. This is your chance to win the applause."

There are those who would attempt to revise, rewrite, and restructure the script, changing the sacred roles of men and women, modifying the scenes and seasons, adjusting the morals and models where possible, and even altering the main stage, the home, in which the most important drama of life should unfold.

There are always loud voices assuming authorship while abdicating stewardship. You and I may never win acclaim, and society may never know us beyond the street where we live, or because one calling or position may be in the public eye more than another. But I am sure that when the lights have gone out and the curtain is closed on our second act, the opinions of others, the acceptance and applause of the crowd, will be a haunting echo if our Father's approval is in question.

It won't matter if we play center stage or in the wings if our Lord and Savior is at the very center of our life. He reaches out to us with this promise: "Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not. Behold the wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails in my hands and feet; be faithful, keep my commandments and ye shall inherit the kingdom of heaven." (D&C 6:36-37.) And Alma reminds us, "This life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors." (Alma 34:32.) Our labors come in a variety of ways.

Recently I visited with a young woman in her early twenties. She poured out her heart, saying, "If I were just pretty, then I'd feel more confident." It is so easy to be distracted by vanity and pride. I believe that is one of the reasons that we have more than three hundred references in the scriptures to the word remember. When we remember our parts, when we remember who we are and whose we are, we are no longer distracted by foolish intruders. Remember Alma's question to those who would gain exaltation: "I ask of you, my brethren [I might add sisters] of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:14.) When this takes place, our beauty will be unsurpassed and assured.

Of course, it is appropriate that we look our best, but before we become dazzled with the glamour of our outer wear, we might heed the words of Alma: "Yea, can ye be puffed up in the pride of your hearts; yea, will ye still persist in the wearing of costly apparel and setting your hearts upon the vain things of the world, upon your riches?" (Alma 5:53.) There are many attractive distractions that would interfere, if they could, with our command performance.

When we let go of our sins and our eye is single to the glory of God, we are promised that our whole body shall be filled with light and that there shall be no darkness in us. (D&C 88:67.) We will hear the still, small voice prompting us from the wings, reminding us of our lines day by day. And even when we may question our own strength and ability, we can take comfort in the promises of the Lord when we are on His errand: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.)

Some years ago my husband, Heber, and I arose early to go to the laying of the cornerstone for the Jordan River Temple. We planned to arrive well before the crowd, but our plan was ill timed. The crowd was already there when we arrived. Due to the contour of the land, I was not only stretching to see over the heads of those in front of me, but we were on the low side of the slope in front of the temple, and I couldn't see what was going on. Heber, being considerably taller, tried to ease my disappointment by reporting to me observations from his vantage point. "The choir is assembling," he reported. "The General Authorities are taking their places. The TV cameras are in place." This only added to my frustration as I faced the backs of those in front who were seeing this historic event that I was missing.

After reaching and stretching without success, I decided to settle down, hoping to just feel the spirit of the occasion. It was when I relaxed that my perspective changed and I noticed an activity at the far northeast side of the temple. There I observed two men dressed in dark pants, white shirts, and ties, and each was holding a shovel. I saw them empty sacks of concrete into a wheelbarrow, pour in water, and mix the contents.

In time, after the choir sang and the presiding authorities had delivered impressive messages, Heber reported that the cameras were moving to the location for the placement of the cornerstone. At that moment the men who had been mixing the mortar pushed the wheelbarrow forward and quickly disappeared behind the scene. Then the cornerstone was anchored in place.

On the television news that evening, I saw what the cameras saw. But they did not see what I had seen. And even today, years later, I never drive past the Jordan River Temple without thinking of those men who mixed the mortar—those whose quiet, unsung labors played a major role in the placement of the cornerstone for the House of the Lord in a building that will stand against all the storms of life.

Given a choice, would you be willing to serve with the men who mix the mortar? Small acts of service, small sacrifices, small notes and calls, words of encouragement one to another—these "small things" are the mortar that help hold life together.

The routine of life may sometimes seem a little humdrum, repetitious, and routine, maybe even boring on occasion. We must not let that happen. It is all right to get tired, but we should never become bored with life. How long has it been since you have celebrated the dawn of a new day, studied the dew on a spider web, or counted the petals on a daisy? Oh, that we may remain alive and alert as long as we live!

At times when my role seems difficult and when there are more demands than I can meet, I am forced to set priorities because I can't do it all. Then I read again the words of our Savior, words that help me as I try to separate the urgent demands from the vital virtues: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:34-35.)

Our greatest performances come when we take time to give of ourselves in love, one for another, often away from the crowd. Of the multitude of happenings during the past several years in my life, may I share what I would like to have recorded on a page of history as possibly a noteworthy performance.

A few years ago, as Christmas drew near, I found myself confronted with a very full schedule. The streets were crowded, my calendar was crowded, and my mind was crowded. There was so much to do and so little time. An invitation to give a brief Christmas message to the residents of a nursing home nearby was one activity I could check off rather quickly and then move to the next appointment.

As I rushed past the receptionist at the nursing home door, I was ushered into a large room where I suddenly stopped. Life was moving at a different pace here, if it was moving at all. There were wheelchairs, bent shoulders, gray hair, tired eyes, and the impression of so little going on. Though the room was warm, many of the elderly had knitted shawls draped over rounded shoulders and woolly slippers covering tired feet.

Following my message, one of the visitors, the granddaughter of one of the elderly residents, asked if I had time to visit with her grandmother in her own private room for just a few moments. She commented, "She thinks she knows you," indicating perhaps that her grandmother's mind might also be tired. I agreed that I could spare a few minutes, and I followed the younger woman as she helped her elderly grandmother shuffle down the narrow hall to her room. When she reached her bedside, this dear elderly woman slowly turned around, let go of her granddaughter's arm, and sat on her bed. Then she raised her head so that I could look into her face. My eyes caught hers. "Sister Myrtle Dudley!" I exclaimed. "You were my Primary teacher."

Her wrinkled mouth formed a smile as she pulled on her granddaughter's jacket and said, "See, I told you she would know me."

I continued, "I remember when you used to lead the singing. You wore that wine-colored dress with the big sleeves that waved back and forth as you taught us the songs."

Again she pulled on her granddaughter's jacket. "I told you she would know me."

"Yes," I said, "and you made carrot juice for my mother when she was sick."

Then she asked, "Did you come all the way from Canada just to see me?"

"Oh, Sister Dudley," I said, "I have come a long way. It has been over forty years."

She reached out her arms and drew me close. I felt like a child once again, back in Primary, in the arms of my teacher who loved me. Then she whispered in my ear, "I knew you would know me."

There in the arms of my Primary teacher the world stood still for a moment. The busy streets were forgotten. The crowded calendar was no longer pressing on my mind. The spirit of Christmas filled my soul. A small miracle was taking place, not because of what I brought but because of what I received.

After a time, I reluctantly left the presence of my Primary teacher and walked slowly back to my car. I sat there pondering while the snowflakes fell gently on the windshield. It was the season of celebration for the birth of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior. It was He who asked us to love one another and to serve one another. He said to each of us, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.)

Yes, I thought, I knew Sister Dudley because she had served me, and she knew me because she had served me. Then the vision cleared before my eyes. We will know Him when we serve Him, and He will know us when we serve Him. And I asked myself, Can I one day say with the same confidence with which Sister Dudley spoke, "I told you He would know me"?

Let us always keep in mind an anticipation of that glorious day when we will be with our Father again. The words of President George Q. Cannon help us envision that event: "We existed with Him in a family relationship as His children. . . . When we see our Father in heaven we shall know Him; and the recollection that we were once with Him and that He was our Father will come back to us, and we will fall upon His neck, and He will fall upon us, and we will kiss each other. We will know our Mother, also." (Gospel Truth, pp. 1, 3.)

One day, like Annie, we will leave the stage. I am confident that, having done our part, we will receive an embrace and experience the greatest commendation we could ever hope for from the only one who really matters. "You played your part so very, very well," I believe we will hear our Father and Mother say, "My child, I have you home again." Then we will hear not with our ears, but with our spirit, the echoing applause of multitudes of heavenly hosts, our brothers and our sisters, rejoicing in our safe return to have glory added upon our heads forever and ever.

May we find our constant example in that part played by the greatest model in the greatest moment of all time. May the curtain never close until our work is finished. And when it does close, may we each feel the satisfaction of having listened to the whisperings of the Spirit every day of our lives, that we may prepare to do our part.
