Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 2

The Promise of Tomorrow

An old farmer, asked how he was, reportedly said, "I am better than I was but I ain't as good as I'm going to be." I believe that tomorrow's promise rests in that philosophy. We are better than we were but not as good as we are going to be, and that suggests growth and progress and even some discomfort and struggle.

Have you ever seen a tree cut down or looked at the end of a log that has been cut? On the trunk, a pattern of growth rings represents each year of the tree's life. Our own lives may be similar to that of the tree. Some of our seasons provide wider growth rings than others. Some are not as wide. During some of our days, we may not do as much and may just want to slow down or wait.

Let me share with you three approaches to handling growth and change and our tomorrows. To illustrate the first, do you remember the famous book Gone with the Wind? Scarlett O'Hara, in times of great stress, uses a phrase that is characteristic of her approach to facing difficult challenges. "I won't think about that now," she says. "I'll think of it all tomorrow. . . . After all, tomorrow is another day."

We see another approach in the popular play Annie. Annie, an orphan child, is mistreated, abandoned, and neglected, with no real evidence of having a brighter future. But in Annie's mind she has hope; she has faith. As she sings those famous words, "The sun will come out tomorrow," she lifts and leads herself and others out of the darkness of their despair into the sunshine of hope. Annie doesn't know what tomorrow will bring, but there is no question of her unwavering optimism.

The third approach is found in the musical The Unsinkable Molly Brown. We see Molly at the beginning as a backwoods girl with few opportunities, no education, and no refinement. While wrestling with her adopted brothers she is pinned down, and one of them yells, "You're down, Molly! You're down!" Molly responds, "I ain't down! And even if I was, you'd sure never hear it from me 'cause I hate the word down, but I love the word up 'cause that means hope. And that's what I got. Hope for someplace prettier and someplace cleaner. And if I gotta eat catfish heads all my life, can't I eat them off a plate and in a red silk dress?"

Scarlett O'Hara tells us something about waiting for another day if we cannot handle any more today, and that is an important lesson. We can live with the hope and maybe a promise that tomorrow will be better, since it may seem at times that it can't possibly get any worse. Annie has great faith, knowing that as bad as things are, the sun will shine tomorrow. And that's only a day away. But Molly Brown won't wait until tomorrow. She believes that the promise of tomorrow rests in her hands today. She refuses to be down for even a day—and even if she were down, no one would know it. Molly realizes that if happiness is dependent on tomorrow, then when tomorrow comes she can still be living in expectation of a better day. She plans for tomorrow by taking care of today.

Each of us needs to determine to do all we can to fill our days with hope and faith and happiness now. In the Book of Mormon we read, "And then cometh the time that . . . he that is righteous shall be righteous still; he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be unhappy still." (Mormon 9:14.)

Does that suggest that the promise of a happy future is in question if things aren't going well for us today? I think not. My own experience teaches me that the promise of happiness today and tomorrow is not necessarily an escape from turmoil, anguish, or disappointment or from trials or tests of any kind. In fact, quite the contrary. If we qualify for all that is promised tomorrow, we must be tried and tested today.

The Lord has told us, "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion; and he that will not bear chastisement is not worthy of my kingdom." (D&C 136:31.)

President Marion G. Romney once said, "I am convinced that if we are to have peace in our hearts, we must learn how to preserve it in our hearts in the midst of trouble and trial." How can we do this when the harsh winters of our lives seem for a season to give little hope of spring? How can we hold on when the voices of the world shout alluring promises about tomorrow and offer escape and freedom from the responsibilities of today?

It is not the loud voices of the world, or even the murmuring of troubled men and women, that we must tune our ears to, but the quiet whisperings of the Spirit. When we are clear in our minds and in our hearts concerning the promises made by the Lord to each of us, we can fill our minds with gospel truths and close out those conflicting thoughts that can erode our faith and destroy our peace.

In Proverbs we read, "For as [a man] thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Proverbs 23:7.) We find ourselves today where yesterday's thoughts have brought us. We cannot escape the harvest of the seeds we plant. Tomorrow's promise, then, rests with our thoughts today. In contrast, those who expose their minds to things that are disquieting to the Spirit can expect to be unsettled, unsure, unsatisfied, and unhappy tomorrow.

In the Deseret News recently I read about Deborah McKeithan, who is legally blind and an epileptic and has partial paralysis and cerebral multiple sclerosis. " 'In fact,' she chuckles, 'the only thing that works really well is my mouth.' Colleagues add to the list 'her heart, her head and her highly developed stubborn streak and determination.' " Despite her problems, however, Deborah says, "I'm a disabled person working very hard not to let my attitude be my handicap."

Here are a few thoughts that could be used to cultivate a feeling of misery today and tomorrow, if we were to choose to think that way:

Why do some of these thoughts attack our minds like a relentless enemy? How do we fight against them? The mind is always working; it never stops. Let us guard against the subtle inroads today that can become embedded habits of negativism tomorrow. We will find our strength and our peace when we study and pray and ponder and meditate, and when we strive to listen to the whisperings of the Spirit. This course will provide undeviating, constant answers to our most basic questions concerning our identity, "Who am I?"; our direction, "What am I to do?"; and our reason for being, "What is the purpose of my life?"

To follow such a course, we need some time each day when we can be alone and can tell the Lord just how things are with us. We need a time to review our promises and covenants in private with Him, a time when we, in a way, hold an interview concerning our lives up to this point. We each need this time to ponder our blessings and the words of the Lord in the scriptures and thereby increase our understanding. On occasion, we will experience an unfolding and an awakening, as it were, of things we have known before, a "divine echo." We need these very personal, quiet, sacred moments. It is a time of pulling ourselves together and away from the influences that pull us apart. What matters is that we become inwardly attentive, so that when the outside noise of life is quieted, there is an inner music of our very own. Then when people knock on the door of our soul, they will find someone is at home.

In our quiet times, we can count our blessings and come to know who we are and, more importantly, whose we are. Not infrequently people will come up to me, thinking they recognize me, and say, "You're Sister Kapp, aren't you?" And I will reply, "Yes, I am." Then in sincere interest I'll ask, "And who are you?" Too often the answer is, "Oh, I'm nobody." And right then I feel an intense desire to mount a platform and, with the fervor of an evangelist, plead for them to have the vision of who they really are—that their eyes might be open and they might see with their heart and soul.

How I wish that all people, young and old, could see themselves as they really are. Each one is a wonderful human being, the offspring of Deity, a son or daughter of God. When I hear comments of self-depreciation, I want to open my scriptures and read to them from the fifth chapter of Mosiah:

"And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters.

"And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given whereby salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives. . . .

"Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all." (Mosiah 5:7-8, 15.)

A knowledge of these eternal truths can quiet our restless nature when we feel less than we are. This knowledge makes the steep and steady climb upward one of adventure and hope, not despair.

It doesn't matter who we aren't when we know who we are. We are the children of God. He is our Father. Think of it! The promise of tomorrow rests with our knowing who our Eternal Father is and knowing that there is no attribute we ascribe to Him that we do not possess, though it may be dormant or in embryo. Knowing this eternal truth brings a warm and exciting, yet weighty and humbling, sense of responsibility that forces the question, Then what am I to do?

One thing we are commanded to do is to "seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.) We are taught that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.) We are here to succeed. If we pray for help and study diligently, we will find that our minds will be enlightened and receptive to things that we could not grasp previously.

Sometimes questions are raised about the value of education for women. I believe education presupposes the wise use of knowledge and that the wise use of knowledge will help us reach our eternal goals.

When we each have the promises of eternity indelibly imprinted in our mind, our heart, and our soul, and our understanding of the purpose of life is firmly in place, then our plans, our education, and our preparation for tomorrow can move ahead safely, because we will measure every decision in relation to our eternal values and our ultimate destination. When these values are in place, we can manage our education wisely and without threat to our highest and ultimate goals. Personal revelation is involved in this process. Timing is critical, and an ear tuned to the words of the living prophet provides guidance and safety.

We are not able to do all things at once, but, guided by the Spirit, we can set our priorities and refuse to let enticing opportunities rob us of our ultimate goals. We need to avoid detours and delays that may appear to be appealing, enticing, and rewarding. We must learn to resist rationalization and hold fast to those things which are most dear.

Sometimes in the spirit of intellectual excitement, with our knowledge, experience, and wisdom increasing, we may find ourselves feeling the need to evaluate, assess, and analyze every principle, every truth, and every guideline ever given, even by the Prophet himself. Many years ago, I sat listening to several of my intellectual friends discussing issues that raised questions in my mind about some of the things I had always accepted. I remember feeling that if I were to be as smart as they, maybe I should be wondering and asking more of those kinds of questions—questions that addressed the very fundamentals of my belief. Then one day I realized that that was not only unnecessary, it was unwise. If I was going to progress, I must be true to what I had already come to know was right. Then I would expand my knowledge and search for answers to more things and build on the sure foundation I had already put in place. Tomorrow is not built by casting stones at the foundation of what we have put in place today. We don't need to keep pulling up a plant to see if its roots are still there.

There seems to be a tendency for some to be forever testing even the basic truths to see if they are real or worthwhile. Some truths, feelings, and thoughts have to be accepted on face value, at least for the moment. We don't need to be completely gullible, but a constant pecking away at even the strongest foundation can eventually destroy it. Sometimes a person's desire to question everyone and everything is not so much a measure of that person's lack of confidence in others but the lack of security within himself.

Everywhere we hear many voices, and many opinions and weighty decisions must be made along the way. When we remember who our Father is, who we are, and that tomorrow's promise will return us to our heavenly home, then the attractive detours for even a brief delay lose their glamour, their appeal, and their temptation. The Lord has told us, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." (D&C 82:10.) He gives us the commandments out of His infinite love for us, because the commandments of God are the laws through which we make ourselves receptive to the guidance and comfort and protection of the Holy Ghost. This is the gift given of our Father, to bring us safely home. We keep the commandments so that we can have His Spirit to be with us.

We read in the Doctrine and Covenants, "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.) The Lord wants us to get the spirit and the vision and understand the purpose of our earthly mission.

One day we shall return home and our Father will say, "My child, I have you home again." And we will know our Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, our Elder Brother. Tomorrow's promise brings eternal life through our Savior's infinite and eternal atonement. He paid the price for us to come forth from the grave and gives us His glorious promise: "Because I live, ye shall live also." (John 14:19.) He has invited all to come unto Him. He will guide us safely home.
