Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 3

Our Inheritance: Secure or in Jeopardy?

Some months ago I attended a missionary farewell in another ward. After a few words of greeting, the opening song, and the invocation, the bishop attended to some ward business. Then, looking out across the congregation, he asked, "Chad, are you here?"

Immediately the sound of a folding chair knocked noisily against another could be heard, and a young boy made his way awkwardly into the aisle. As he turned to maneuver by, I observed from his facial features that he might not have the same mental abilities of other young people his age. I watched as he literally ran, awkwardly but with great enthusiasm, up the full length of the chapel. On the stand the bishop put his arm around Chad and drew him close for a moment, the two of them looking at each other with a private exchange only they understood. Then, with Chad nestled securely in the fold of his arm, the bishop announced to the audience, "Chad has earned his Duty to God award. He has qualified in every way." Glancing down at the young man, he added, with deep feeling, "We're all proud of you, Chad."

Following the presentation there was the usual handshake and an additional warm and sustained embrace. As Chad turned to leave, he broke with tradition and raised his hand high in the air. The bishop understood the signal and responded to Chad's invitation by raising his hand to meet Chad's, giving a resounding clap in the air. Outside the meeting he would probably have added the words, "Give me five."

Before leaving the stand, Chad walked quickly toward the chorister, who stood and wrapped him in his arms. I learned later that the man was his father. Then the young boy made his way down the aisle with a broad smile on his face and his arm raised high in the air as if to "give 'em five" to every ward member who had helped him and who now shared in his victory.

It has been months since that memorable Sunday, but in my mind I keep playing that scene over and over again. What struggles and challenges preceded that day for Chad? Were there times when he might have wanted to give up? Certainly some of the requirements must have been harder for him than they were for others his age. Were there times of discouragement and maybe disappointment? He was smiling when the bishop called him forward to receive his Duty to God award, but there must have been many times when even duty to God was difficult. I wonder if there were times when Chad, in the privacy of his own heart, asked the Father why—why does it have to be so hard? And while he waited for the answer, he kept going.

Each of us has circumstances that might seem like handicaps, not necessarily like Chad's, but challenges that test our courage and strength, our commitment and ultimately our faith in a loving Heavenly Father. And how do we respond?

A bishop calls. The call is heard and people respond. Those who have learned to listen for the call are prepared and ready to respond. They don't wait, they don't walk, they don't stop to explain, they don't ask why. However wearisome the test or whatever the circumstances, however severe the handicaps or steep the road, still many prepare to come running when they are called.

As we learn to listen and follow the counsel of the Lord, both written and spoken, we prepare for that day when there will be a call for each of us—a call to come home, not later when we are better prepared, but now. We might hear the words, "Come, my child. Come as you are, but come now." With unwavering faith in our ultimate reward and our divine inheritance as rightful heirs, will we, like Chad, be prepared to run forward with confidence when we hear that call?

In the Book of Mormon Alma invites us to envision the alternative: "Can you imagine to yourselves that ye hear the voice of the Lord, saying unto you, in that day: Come unto me ye blessed, for behold, your works have been the works of righteousness upon the face of the earth? . . . Or otherwise, can ye imagine yourselves brought before the tribunal of God with your souls filled with guilt and remorse, having a remembrance of all your guilt, yea, a perfect remembrance of all your wickedness, yea, a remembrance that ye have set at defiance the commandments of God? I say unto you, can ye look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands? I say unto you, can ye look up, having the image of God engraven upon your countenances?" (Alma 5:18-19.)

The answers to these questions are found in the choices we make. Every choice counts one way or the other. We are free to choose to follow or not to follow, to abide the law or to disregard it, to have freedom or to forfeit it, to claim our inheritance or to leave it unclaimed.

Recently I was asked to speak to a gathering of men in a small chapel. These men had an understanding of law, agency, freedom, blessings, choice, and accountability. To reach the chapel I had to go through tight security, present identification, and be escorted by an officer of the law down a long corridor and through sets of metal doors that sounded a haunting echo as metal clanged against metal. Each door in sequence closed tightly behind me, and I knew I was locked in.

As I approached the chapel, I heard a sound that seemed foreign to that setting—beautiful male voices singing in harmony and with great feeling. I entered the meeting, which was already in session, and observed each man wearing a uniform that had an identification number across the left side of the chest. Most of them were holding hymnbooks, and they were singing the hymn "How Gentle God's Commands." I'll never hear that hymn again without reliving that experience. These are the words:

How gentle God's commands! How kind his precepts are! Come, cast your burdens on the Lord And trust his constant care. Beneath his watchful eye, His Saints securely dwell; That hand which bears all nature up Shall guard his children well. Why should this anxious load Press down your weary mind? Haste to your Heav'nly Father's throne And sweet refreshment find. His goodness stands approved, Unchanged from day to day; I'll drop my burden at his feet And bear a song away.

As I shook hands with one of the inmates, I looked into his sad eyes and wondered: My brother, when did you begin to exercise your agency, your freedom, and, little by little, to move from freedom to enslavement and finally imprisonment? Did you not know that you were an heir with a birthright, a divine inheritance? Did you realize you were moving in this direction? Did it begin in high school when the influence of peers spoke louder than the wisdom of parents? Or was it the freedom from parents into the environment of college or work that opened a door that appeared to be freedom and has now closed and locked behind you? When did the chains that bind begin to form just one small link at a time? Who else shares in the responsibility? Is it perhaps that I am not only my brother's keeper but also my brother's maker? What is the effect of my influence on those around me?

As children of God, we are His heirs. But we must first be tested before we can be trusted with our inheritance—the power and blessings of God our Eternal Father. Then we can become joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, with glory added upon our heads forever and ever.

When we have a spiritual perspective and come to fully understand our promised blessings, our inheritance, and the mission of the Savior and the price He paid in our behalf to help us claim our reward, I believe that even on our hardest days our tests will hardly seem severe enough. It seems unfathomable that after the price paid by Him because of His great love for us, we are still free to choose whether or not that sacrifice in our behalf is accepted or rejected. We are given our agency.

As we are tried and tempered in the furnace of affliction, it is not to consume us but to refine us, to qualify us, to prove us. Our severe tests are designed to try us. The temptations and testing begin very early in life and continue so long as we dwell in this mortal state. It begins something like this:

My nephew, Kent, was pleading with his mom just before lunchtime to go over to his friend's to play. "No," his mother said, "not now."

Kent went outside to his sandpile to ponder. Something in the inherent nature of everyone reaches out for freedom and a desire to exercise agency. Suddenly he went running back into the house. "Mom," he asked, "what if I go to Dougie's anyway?"

"Then I guess I would have to discipline you for disobeying."

"What would you do?"

Pressed for an answer, and without much time to ponder the magnitude of the disobedience, she said, "I guess I'd have to spank you."

He thought momentarily and then inquired further before making his decision. "Would it be with my pants up or on my bare bottom?"

His mom was not quite prepared for this response, but she said, "I guess it would be with your pants up."

"How many times?"

"Five," she said.

"Five!" he exclaimed. "Five for just going to Dougie's? That's not fair."

"It might not seem fair," she explained, "but that's how it is. You suit yourself."

He needed more information before he made a decision. "Can I go after lunch?" he asked.

"Kent, if you choose to be obedient and not go over to Dougie's, then after lunch we'll do something even better. You can go with me to pick up your daddy."

Kent had not known of that alternative. With that in the plan, the desire to go to his friend's was of little consequence. He used his agency, was spared the spanking, and participated in an even more desirable activity.

Sometimes we are shortsighted and are not aware of what awaits us just around the corner following our obedience. We "receive no witness until after the trial of [our] faith." (Ether 12:6.) But we don't negotiate with our Father in heaven on these matters. The laws are in place. We know that "there is a law . . . upon which all blessings are predicated," and when we receive any blessing, "it is by obedience to that law." (D&C 130:20.)

And so our Father, wanting us to qualify for all of the blessings, has given us laws and commandments. These commandments are given not to restrict us but to redeem us; not just to reform us but to exalt us. "Therefore," as Nephi said, "cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life." (2 Nephi 10:23.)

Some of us resent, resist, even recoil from the apparent restrictions imposed upon us. And so it was in the Savior's time. There were those who didn't like what he taught. "This is an hard saying; who can hear it?" they said. "When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Doth this offend you?" And we read that "from that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him." (John 6:60-61, 66.)

There are, at least in the minds of some, too many rules, too many commandments, honor codes, all kinds of regulations, standards, and restrictions. These serve as constant reminders. And leaders who love us and believe in us will give of their time to meet with us at regular intervals and help remind us of what we have the capacity to become. Especially in times of discouragement, trials, and tests, they will help us, carry our burdens, and believe in us when we may otherwise not even believe in ourselves. Obedience is the key that unlocks the door and sets us free.

I am reminded of a Bolivian woman who roamed the Altaplano driving her llama herds day after day with little direction or purpose. It didn't matter too much which direction they wandered in. Then one day she was drawn into the gospel net, and her spirit responded to truth. When she learned of the mission of the Savior, the meaning of the atonement and His ultimate sacrifice, and the purpose of her earth life, she whispered, "You mean He did that for me?" And then, more as a testimony than a question, she repeated, "You mean He did that for me?" And He did, for you and for me. But if we are to claim our inheritance, we must each, individually, find Him.

Because of His atonement, through our obedience to gospel law we can find Him and become joint-heirs with Him in the fullness of our Father's kingdom. With this knowledge, what could possibly threaten or put in jeopardy our inheritance?

Agency plays a major part, for it is with our agency that we cast our vote. And make no mistake, there are influences of an unseen enemy that seek relentlessly to entice us to what appear to be attractive alternatives and will lobby for our vote. Throughout the scriptures we read that Satan stirred up the hearts of people. "It is he who is the author of all sin. And behold, he doth carry on his works of darkness . . . from generation to generation according as he can get hold upon the hearts of the children of men." (Helaman 6:30.) We read that "the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet." (D&C 29:39.)

President David O. McKay taught, "Your greatest weakness will be the point at which Satan will try to tempt you, will try to win you; and if you made yourself weak, he will add to that weakness." (Improvement Era, July 1968, p. 3.)

Our time is the time spoken of by the prophets, a time when the adversary is aggressively marshaling his forces as never before in the last great battle against righteousness. And he is using the same tactics as he employed in his attempts to distract the Savior from his appointed mission.

The first tactic is a temptation to appeal to the appetite, to an inherent craving to satisfy hunger and the demands of the flesh. An uncontrolled appetite attacks one's reasoning. It begins with rationalization, then justification, and finally the actual use of artificial stimulants, such as drugs and alcohol and pornography. When it gets out of hand, the result is personal devastation—not freedom, but enslavement. The question then is, Do I have an appetite for anything that could be enslaving?

The second tactic is to have us yield to pride, fashion, vanity, the praises of men, peer influence, and those things that separate us from the things of God. Our hearts become centered on the things of the world rather than the things of the spirit. Popularity, prestige, power, and positions become more important than humility, meekness, and teachability.

The third tactic is to gratify the hungering for the riches of the world. Is our ethical compass useful and visible and dependable? Can we say with Job, "Till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me"? (Job 27:5.) It is true that some people seem to have more temptations than others, and some have greater power of resistance than others. "But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it." (1 Corinthians 10:13.)

There could be no condemnation for our doing what we can't help, but we can help doing the things that violate the laws and commandments. God has given us power to resist these things, and we can call upon Him for strength that we lack. And by our habits, we gain control. It is our habits in relation to the gospel of Jesus Christ that bind us or free us. It is our habits that determine whether our inheritance is to be claimed or unclaimed. We are what we are because of our habits. The habit of striving to keep all of the commandments will change us from what we are to what we are to become. It is a process that changes our souls, our appetites, our desires. When we get the gospel on the inside and make it part of our very being, we have not just changed our habits; our habits have literally changed us, a mighty change.

We can have the gift of the Holy Ghost with us always, and that gift is more than a prompting to do right and wrong. As Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote, "It quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passions and affections. . . . It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form, and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation, and social feeling. It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being. . . . Such is the gift of the Holy Ghost, and such are its operations when received through the lawful channel—the divine, eternal priesthood." (Key to the Science of Theology [Deseret Book, 1978 ed.], pp. 61-62.)

When we find ourselves out of control for a time, out of harmony, and disappointed in our actions in relation to our desires, we need not despair. There is a place of spiritual repair. We can take our wounded spirit faithfully and regularly to the sacrament altar and there renew our covenants, our commitments, by offering a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Then we begin, in part at least, to feel the healing, the peace, the deep, abiding love when we ponder the meaning of the atonement in our personal lives. There we will feel what Andrew and Nathaniel must have felt and say with them, "We have found the Christ. We have found Him. Come and see."

Some time ago I participated in a survival camp with a group of young people in the High Sierra Mountains. After three days of physically challenging and spiritually strengthening experiences, we faced one of the last activities—that of rappeling down an eighty-foot cliff.

When my turn came, I surveyed the setting. Overhead the sky was blue and clear. Over the edge of the cliff was a long, long way down, and I could not see the landing place below or the people who would welcome me or pick up the pieces. The instructor securely wrapped a strap around my legs and waist, placed the rappeling rope in my hand, and proceeded with instructions. It's fascinating how much better we listen and concentrate when we know that what is being said really matters. He had previously explained the skill of rappeling and the importance of the safety rope with each individual who went down the cliff ahead of me, but when it was my turn, I listened more intently. I wanted to know all that he knew. I didn't want any of the rules overlooked or minimized. If I followed the instructions, I'd get down safely; if not, I would suffer varying degrees of discomfort according to my ability to follow the instructions. I learned right away that his instructions were accurate when I experienced some discomforting rope burn on my hands.

Without looking down, but always looking up and straining to listen for instructions, advice, and encouragement, I began my descent. About halfway down, as I pondered my position, I was reminded of the teachings of President George Q. Cannon: "When we went forth into the waters of baptism and covenanted with our Father in heaven to serve Him and keep His commandments, He bound Himself also by covenant to us that He would never desert us, never leave us to ourselves, never forget us, that in the midst of trials and hardships, when everything was arrayed against us, He would be near unto us and would sustain us. That was His covenant." (Gospel Truth, 1987, p. 134.)

The Savior bound Himself to us. He is our safety rope. He throws out the lifeline—literally our lifeline. Through obedience to His laws and commandments, we tie ourselves securely to Him. The rope I held was the safety rope. I had my agency. I could hang on or I could let go. Or if I wanted, I could take out my pocket knife, exercise my agency, and cut just one fine strand at a time. Surely one strand at a time would present no risk.

I likened the rope to the commandments. I can break one commandment at a time. Surely one commandment at a time won't hurt. Would we ever consider letting go of a rope and challenging our ability to survive against the law of gravity? Or would we ignore the commandments of God and pit our resistance against the power of the adversary? If we choose to hold onto the rope, we are limited, restricted, curtailed, but through that very process our Father in heaven has said that He will make us free. Only after we are tried and tested can we be trusted with our inheritance as heirs to the kingdom of God. If we choose to let go of the rope and release ourselves from the laws and the commandments, we also choose the consequences, because even God obeys the law. Through disobedience to laws, we will fall.

Those men in prison, your brothers and mine, chose to let go of the rope. They cut themselves free of the laws and rejected the "hard sayings," and now within their prison walls they sing, "How gentle God's commands."

Let us each protect ourselves from enslavement and release ourselves from those prison walls of our own making, those things that weaken our grasp on the safety rope, the lifeline, the iron rod. The Savior taught that should one choose to willfully leave his parents and waste his inheritance in sin, his repentant return would be greeted with rejoicing and acceptance. Thus He illustrated the worth of souls to the Father and the love His disciples should have for each other.

Mary, the mother of Jesus, exemplified in the most glorious way her preparation and submission to the will of God when she responded to the angel Gabriel, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." (Luke 1:38.)

The Lord told his disciples, "Come, . . . follow me." (Matthew 19:21.) I know from my own experience that on those occasions when we follow with full purpose of heart, acting with integrity—no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with all intent, repenting of our sins—we can feel that quiet assurance that we are free: free from the chains that bind, free from darkness and unbelief, free from depression and anger and hatred, free from jealousies and envy and cravings of the appetite, free from hungering for the riches of the world, free from fear and from error, free to claim our inheritance.

As we consider that day when the bishop called, "Chad, are you here?" and he came running, we can anticipate a similar day for each of us. Let us keep ever in our mind an anticipation of that glorious day when, with outstretched arms, our Father will greet us and we will respond, "Oh, my Father, I am home again." Then, if we are prepared, we will receive our inheritance and become the sons and daughters of God, heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ.
