Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 4

Choose to Return

Sometimes when we are discouraged, we may feel that life is too difficult. We are away from our heavenly home, and our spirits long to return. Have you ever walked alone in the evening and looked up at the stars and wondered, "What am I doing here? Where am I going? What is life all about?" It is good to think about these things, for if we don't think about them, we may not even understand the importance of the life we are living.

What was it like when we left home? We were the valiant ones, the faithful ones. We learned obedience there and chose to follow the Savior. We were given an opportunity to come to earth, and we came because we wanted to. We are here to be tried and tested. We are away from home on a mission, and God has given each of us our own divine mission.

When we made the transition from our heavenly home to this earth life, a veil was drawn over our eyes so we wouldn't remember what it was like there. We have to walk by faith. But sometimes we have deep spiritual feelings that assure us this isn't the beginning. Our Father told us that if we will exercise faith in Him, He will always be with us, and His Spirit will be with us to help us keep the commandments.

It is important for us to realize that in the battle that was waged in our pre-earth life, we chose to be on the Lord's side. That same battle is continuing here on earth. It is a battle between right and wrong, good and evil, happiness and misery, freedom and enslavement. It is a battle between obedience and disobedience, light and darkness. It is a battle between being on the Lord's side or being on Satan's side. And we can choose.

When the Savior visited the American continent in the time of the Nephites, He told the people that He would come again. But He also warned them: "Ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desires to have you, that he may sift you as wheat." (3 Nephi 18:18.)

Yes, Satan desires to have us, and he will do everything in his power to persuade us to yield to his enticements. The battle between the followers of Satan and the followers of the Savior is now being waged, and for us to think casually about this great conflict is very dangerous. In fact, it can be life threatening. It can affect our very eternal life. The Lord warns us, "Whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself." He also tells us that the choice is ours: "For behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves. He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye can do good and be restored unto that which is good, or have that which is good restored unto you; or ye can do evil, and have that which is evil restored unto you." (Helaman 14:30-31.)

We have our agency and can make our own choices. But we cannot blame anyone else for the choices we make. We are each responsible for our own actions. That being the case, how can we be sure that we will return home from our earthly mission when we have so many decisions to make each day?

To guide us, we have scriptures, the blessing of daily prayer, and a living prophet. When I listen to general conference and our prophet tells us what we should do and encourages us to do it, I think he is telling us because he knows the lessons that we need to learn before we get back home. He knows what is at stake. We need to listen to the promptings of the Spirit and to know that when our prophet speaks, he is speaking to each of us.

We are each in control of our own life. If we are successful, it isn't because of luck. Success comes through hard work, commitment, and strenuous effort, and through the grace of God. In the Book of Mormon we read, "Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life. Wherefore, . . . reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved." (2 Nephi 10:23-24.)

When I was a child, I remember saying, "Dad, can I do such and such?" And my father would say, "Suit yourself, but I wouldn't." In a way, that is what our Heavenly Father is saying. He gives us the plan and says this is what He wants us to do, but we have our agency. We are responsible for the choices we make and must live with the consequences of those choices.

Sometimes it might be easier if our Father would tell us, "No, I'm going to make you do what you should do." Why doesn't He do that? Because that was Satan's plan. We didn't vote for that plan, because it would have meant that we wouldn't be able to grow and become all that we can be. Does that mean we're not going to make any mistakes? No. We are going to make lots of mistakes, and our Father in heaven knew we would and that we could learn and grow because of them. A mistake can either destroy or refine us, and it isn't a total mistake if we learn from it.

On one occasion as a child, I had a difficult choice to make. I came home from school much later than I was supposed to, and my father was waiting for me. I was raised on a farm, and he was coming around the corner of the chicken coop when he saw me. He said, "Come over here and sit down," motioning to a log. That wasn't the first time I had come home late. My father and I often sat close together on the log and talked, but that day I sat on the end of the log, as far away as I could get. He said to me, "Ardie, I'm going to have to help you to learn obedience and responsibility, to be where you're supposed to be." Then I noticed he had a green willow in his hand. Stroking the willow, he said, "I'm going to give you your choice. You can stay home for a week or you can have a licking."

I didn't like either of those choices. The licking would last a shorter time, but the suffering would be more intense. That was the first time I remember being faced with a really hard choice to make, and I remember struggling with it. Should I take the licking or should I stay home for a week? And how could I avoid such hard choices in the future? It was then that the concept of obedience began to formulate in my mind.

Since then I have had to make many choices in my life, most of them much harder than that one. We are told that we will be tried and tested, and it isn't intended to be easy. Each of us has many trials and is tried many times. And for each of us, our tests will be where we are the weakest. That is where Satan will tempt us. Your tests are different from mine. The things that are the hardest for me are where I am being tested, just as the things that are the hardest for you are where you are being tested. We must be on guard at all times against all temptations, for Satan desires to have us, to enslave us and destroy us.

When I was a student at Brigham Young University many years ago, I left my wallet in the telephone booth at the Joseph Smith Building. There was ten dollars in it, all the money I had. I went to the BYU lost-and-found department, but the wallet had not been turned in.

Nine years later I received a letter in the mail that had been routed through a clinic in Calgary, Alberta, where I had had a physical examination several years before. The letter had been sent to the clinic, which had forwarded it to my parents in Canada, and they in turn had sent it on to me. I opened the envelope and read the following message: "To Whom It May Concern. Anyone knowing the whereabouts of Ardeth Greene please forward this letter. It is very important that contact be made as soon as possible to settle some unfinished business at the B.Y.U." The return address was in Salt Lake City, where I was then living, so I called the sender immediately because I wanted to know what the unfinished business could be.

When I identified myself on the telephone, a quiet voice said, "I'm so glad to hear from you." Then she told me this story: "I was a student at BYU nine years ago and I had no money. My parents had no money, and I needed ten dollars to complete my registration fee. I borrowed ten dollars from my boyfriend, and I promised I'd pay him back Friday. Then I prayed fervently that I would somehow be able to get the money to repay the debt. That day I went into a telephone booth on campus and there was a wallet. I opened the wallet and there was a ten-dollar bill."

How would you have reacted in that situation? Would you have thought that finding the wallet was an answer to prayer? What would Satan want you to think? Do you think that young woman thought about being tempted at that moment? Remember, she wasn't being tempted with cigarettes or alcohol or whatever else. She was tempted because of the urgent need for ten dollars.

She continued her report. "I took the ten dollars and returned the money to my boyfriend. For all these nine years, I've had that wallet in my top dresser drawer. Every time I clean I want to throw it away, but you know you can't make a wrong right by throwing it away. You have to make it right by doing right." Several years later she looked through the wallet one more time, and this time she noticed a little card she had not seen before. The name of the clinic in Calgary was on that card.

On the phone she said, "Oh, I'll be so happy to return this wallet to you." I was working at the telephone company at the time, so I suggested, "Would you bring it into the office?" She said, "Oh, I'd be too embarrassed. I've never stolen anything before or since, and I'm really embarrassed." I replied, "I'd be honored to meet someone as honest as you." Yes, she had made a mistake, but was she a bad person? No. She was a good person, and she had gone to great lengths to make things right. Finally she agreed to come to my office.

When I came back from lunch one day, a beautiful young woman was waiting for me. I walked over and sat across from her, and she laid the wallet on the desk. Looking directly at me, she said, "I hope this means as much to you now as it did to me the day I took it." I reached for her hand and said, "I consider it such a great privilege to meet such an honest and noble person." She smiled and said, "This is so good. This problem has hung like a millstone around my neck for nine years, and now I've set it right." After she left, I went to the window and watched her go down the sidewalk with a skip in her step.

We all make mistakes, but there are ways to set things right. Sometimes it's a lot harder than just returning a wallet after nine years, but there's always a way to set something right. There's always a way back. The little "termites" that eat away inside us don't need to destroy us. But we must recognize them and get rid of them before they become destructive and destroy this tabernacle of flesh and this spirit that's eternal. We can't afford to let even little termites, our little sins, go unresolved. They can destroy us.

Once when I was speaking to a group about the importance of doing what's right and the seriousness of mistakes, I saw a young woman in the back of the hall get up and walk out. I felt sick about it. I wanted to shout, "Come back. Please come back." Then I noticed another young woman get up and walk out, and that made me feel even worse. Later I learned that the second person was the Laurel class president. She had seen the other Laurel, for whom she had a responsibility, get up and leave, and knowing that the girl was having some problems in her life, she went after her to try to bring her back. She couldn't get the girl to come back in, but after the meeting she came to me and said, "Will you go talk to my friend? She needs help." I said, "Of course I will." And I wanted to add, "There's always a way back. Come back. Come back."

Yes, there is a way back. All of the Father's blessings are intended for us if we will just choose to be obedient. And when we make mistakes, He understands and He will forgive if we put things right. Satan would have us think, "Look, you've made a serious mistake. You might as well give up. There's no way back." But there is a way back. That is the message of the gospel. That is the glad tidings. Sometimes the way is difficult and painful and takes a long, long time, but there is a way back.

The first principle of the gospel is faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. This means that we must come to know our Savior—to know that He really exists and that He knows us. It means coming to know that He loved us so much that He gave His life for us. It means knowing that we can make it back home because He has provided a way. Through faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ and repentance of sin, by the grace of God we can receive eternal life and exaltation after we have expended our own best efforts.

Some time ago I received a letter from a young woman I had met several months earlier while on an overseas assignment. She told me of a serious mistake she had made and added, "And now, for some reason, I don't pray anymore. It's hard for me to pray. I can't read the Book of Mormon anymore. I feel like I'm caught in a trap and I can't get out. I don't have a testimony, but I want one." At the end of the letter, she pleaded, "Please help."

Was there anything I could do for her? Was it too late?

Let me tell you of a rescue that took place. A number of years ago, at 4:45 on a Friday afternoon in April, radio and television news commentators put aside international news to headline the story of a desperate rescue attempt. A child had fallen into a deep abandoned well. Within half an hour firemen were pumping oxygen into a small opening in the shaft. A rope was lowered into a darkened hole and anxious voices were shouting, "Try to grab hold of the rope, Kathy. Grab hold of the rope." In response they heard this weak response: "I am. I am." And then the voice ceased. Efforts to raise Kathy with a rope had failed.

That night under a blaze of lights, men and machines worked feverishly to try to rescue the child. Hundreds of people volunteered. Circus midgets in the vicinity came and risked their lives trying to get through the narrow shaft. Exhausted rescuers faced great danger as they worked through layers of rock. One report told of men on a ship at sea who listened to the reports and took up a collection of money in their desire to help. It was reported that seldom had so much prayer power been focused on one person or on one rescue. And under all these great machines, bright lights, and loudspeakers lay a tiny girl. What about her? Was there water where she lay? Was she conscious? Was she still alive? And what about her parents, who waited anxiously, not knowing what the outcome would be?

After the total expenditure of half a million dollars and fifty-three hours of rescue efforts, the trapped girl's doctor went down into the tunnel and the answer came: Kathy Fiscus, the little girl whom the world had come to know and love, was dead. She had apparently died shortly after she had last spoken. While so many millions mourned the tragedy of little Kathy, they didn't realize that Kathy was all right. She had gone back home. Maybe she had gone early, but she had returned.

This is not the kind of rescue that we are most concerned about. We are not so concerned about the body. Spiritual rescues are the kind we must strive for. When I received the letter from the young girl who was crying for help, I wanted to get on a plane and go to her and shout, "Try to grab hold of the rope!" But I would have said, "Grab hold of the iron rod. Hang on. You can make it. I know you can. We all can make it if we choose to. Our Elder Brother made it possible."

I often wonder how the Savior would feel if, having given His life for us so that we can make it back home, He were to hear us say, "Yes, you gave your life for me, but I didn't choose to be obedient to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. I cannot qualify for the promised blessings. So in my case, you gave your life in vain."

It cannot be that way. One day we must come to realize that He gave his life for us. And because He did so, we can set things right insofar as possible, for He has made up the difference. The prophets have taught that there won't ever be a greater test than the test that we are experiencing here in this earth life. The challenge lies in having opposition in all things and then being allowed to act for ourselves. (See 2 Nephi 2:16.)

Now I don't know about your choices, but I do know about mine, and there are some things that I want to do better than I have done before. And maybe there are some important adjustments that each of us need to make in order to follow the path. We need to reach out to each other and be part of the rescue team. We need to shout to everyone who needs our help, "Come back! Come back if you've made mistakes!" We must open our circle large enough to include everyone, and hold to the iron rod.

I know that our Savior lives and cares about us. Whatever He asks of us, is it too much? Surely it's not enough to pay the price in return for what He has done for us. Let us choose to return.
