Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 5

My Sister, My Friend

My sister, my friend, I wish it were possible to say to you, "Come into my home. Sit on my hearth. Let's talk." If we were just sitting together, you and I, we could share things that are important in a more personal way. I would want you to know of my assurance of God's love for each of us.

And you would share your thoughts with me. "And do you know this? And have you read this? And look how this relates to that." We would turn to our scriptures and discover together. So let us imagine in our minds that we are sitting side by side together, close enough to say to each other, "This is how it feels inside my heart."

When my husband and I travel together in the car, often it will be quiet for a minute, then one will say to the other, "What's on your mind? What are you thinking?" Then we ramble on and on. Maybe there isn't a lot of correlation in all that is said, but when it is all over, we feel right. So, will you ramble with me for a minute?

Let's begin with a statement from President Spencer W. Kimball, who said that we women are to be scholars of the scriptures. Why? I think that one of the reasons is that words form our thoughts, and our thoughts control our feelings, and our feelings control our actions. That is an exciting thing to discover. Then I would probably pull out my file and say to you, my sister, "Do you know what Hugh Nibley has said about that?" And we would share this thought from him:

"We can think only one thing at a time. We hold thousands of instantaneous impressions in suspension, just long enough to make our choices and drop those we don't want. Why the mind chooses to focus on one object to the exclusion of all others remains a mystery. But one thing is clear, the blocked out signals are the unwanted ones, and the ones we favor are our deliberate choice. I can think anything I want to, absolutely anything with this provision. Then when I choose to focus my attention on one subject, all other subjects are dropped into the background. We are always thinking something, selecting what will fit into the world we are making for ourselves."

Related to this idea is this scripture from the Book of Mormon: "Then cometh the judgment of the Holy One . . . the time that he that is filthy shall be filthy still; and he that is righteous shall be righteous still; he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be unhappy still." (Mormon 9:14.)

We'd talk about this scripture. "You mean I'm not going to move from here to there and find it's all wonderful? And if I'm not happy here, do you mean that I won't be happy there? Is that what it means?" I think it is. But how do we find happiness here in the midst of trials?

Psychologist Victor Frankl says, "Suffering isn't suffering the minute that we find a reason for it." If we understand the purpose in suffering, we can learn from it and can become stronger because of it. Our Savior set the pattern. We read in the scriptures, "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered." (Hebrews 5:8.) Instead of thinking, "Why me? It isn't fair," we consider what we might learn from the experience and what God would have us do. It is when we learn to seek, ask, and knock that we find Him.

Then we would turn to the Doctrine and Covenants and read: "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion." (D&C 136:31.) We must be tried in all things: spiritually, physically, emotionally, socially, mentally. This being the case, if we are not having any trials, maybe we ought to pray for a few. Of course, no one is going to pray for more tests, but we can pray for the strength to be faithful and endure to the end.

We are not going to be tested beyond that which we can handle. The Lord knows us. We may think we've gone as far as we can, but He will push us a little farther. Another favorite scripture of mine is found in Second Corinthians, when Paul talks to Timothy about comforting each other. He says, "Blessed be God, . . . who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God. For . . . as [we] are partakers of the sufferings, so shall [we] be also of the consolation." (2 Corinthians 1:3-4, 7.)

In the book of Ether, Moroni says: "I would show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.) I don't know if our trials will last a week, a month, a year, or a lifetime, but I do know that each of us has a mission. Each of us has a purpose. It is in coming to know the Lord's will that we can feel peace in times of tribulation. It is, in fact, while we are struggling that we can come to know the Lord—not just read about Him, not just know His will, but know Him. He will speak to our minds and we will hear and know.

We may sometimes think that it is too difficult, too much for us to bear. Then we realize that we are not alone. The Lord has told us, "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up." (D&C 84:88.) On the other side are those who are near and dear to us, and sometimes they can seem very close to us. I bear testimony of this. Those who know our needs and wants, I believe, are privileged sometimes in the quiet of our solitude to impress things upon our minds that help us to understand.

I was struggling one time in the quiet of my solitude when my father's voice came into my mind and said, "My dear, don't worry about the little things and the big things that you agreed to before you came."

When we have plateaus and feel as if we are not growing, or when we fall short of what we wish we were, I think of what President George Q. Cannon said:

"It is true that some have greater power of resistance than others, but everyone has the power to close his heart against doubt, against darkness, against unbelief, against depression, against anger, against hatred, against jealousy, against malice, against envy. God has given this power unto all of us, and we can gain still greater power by calling upon Him for that which we lack. If it were not so, how could we be condemned for giving way to wrong influences? . . .

"God has given us power to resist these things, that our hearts may be kept free from them and also from doubt; and when Satan comes and assails us, it is our privilege to say, 'Get thee behind me, Satan, for I have no lot nor portion in you, and you have no part in me. I am in the service of my God or about the work of God, and I will not listen to you.' " (Gospel Truth, 1987, pp. 16, 17.)

Understanding the gospel provides strength within, and we come to find out better than ever before who we really are. I believe that when we come to know who we are, we don't suffer feelings of inadequacy. We are painfully aware of our shortcomings, but they don't immobilize us. They help us to focus our efforts and overcome our weaknesses.

How do we take the steps that move us off the plateau we are on to a higher level of spirituality? This occurs when we experience a real need, a real want, a desire akin to thirst. This may be experienced in a variety of ways.

For example, how many testimonies have you seen borne out of the anguish of people suffering with serious physical problems? One evening my ward Relief Society president, who at the time was suffering with cancer, called me on the phone and said, "I know you've been busy this week. What time would you like me to bring your supper over to you?" While her body was raging with cancer, her spirit was reaching out to others, her faith was strong and unwavering, and her example strengthened the faith of her family and friends. Sometimes sickness is necessary for our spiritual growth.

Our testimonies may also be strengthened when we lose someone who is very near and dear to us. At such a time, the other side seems so close. When our loved ones are there, and we know they are there, the other side seems much more a reality, our testimonies are strengthened, and we begin to look forward, not to make us homesick, but at least to live with anticipation of one day going home.

Finally, if it isn't death, it might be floods or earthquakes or something beyond our ability to control that turns us toward our Father. We learn to listen as we have never listened before, and we learn to trust.

In the past few months, I've come to know the Lord's will on things that I have yearned to know for a lifetime. My testimony is that this has happened because I have searched more diligently, I have listened more intently, and I have needed to know more desperately. He is there. We can hear. We need not be perfect vessels. He will speak to imperfect vessels according to our diligence and according to our faith.

As you sit at my hearth and we are sharing some thoughts, I would share with you just two or three things that I feel are essential. First, have faith. We need to have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. We need to know in our hearts, and if we don't know, we need to ask.

One time when I was feeling far away, but realizing that it is never the Lord who puts the distance between us, but the distractions that we let creep into our hearts and that lead us away from instead of toward the light, I asked the question, Where do we go for comfort, for higher spiritual ground? And now I have the answer, at least in part. I go to the scriptures. The Lord will speak to me. Often He will answer my prayers through the scriptures. As I read, I may think, I never saw that scripture before. That was written for me. Then I will write the date in the margin and that scripture becomes mine.

One scripture that is for me—and for you also—tells us: "Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. . . . And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole [body] shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness [no depression, no despondency, no discouragement] in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." (D&C 88:63, 67-68.)

Do we believe this? I know we do! But do we practice it? Do we ask? I see increasingly the evidence that the Lord does hear and does answer our prayers. So I would say, have faith.

Second, I would say, know of your divine nature. Know who you really are. Sometimes I think we suffer because we don't really know who we are. I like what President George Q. Cannon has said: "We are the children of God, and as His children there is no attribute we ascribe to Him that we do not possess, though they may be dormant or in embryo." (Gospel Truth, 1987, p. 3.)

Do you ever get up in the morning and look in the mirror and say, "Ho hum. You and me throughout all eternity"? Look deeper into your heart and soul. See yourself as a daughter of God. Try to look beyond the flesh. You are endowed and blessed with a pure spirit struggling to overcome the weaknesses of the flesh.

Each of us came to earth with a pure spirit. Sometimes one's spirit is wounded because the demands of the flesh overtake the spirit. What do we do then? Do we give up or give out or give in? No. We come to the sacrament table with a contrite heart and a broken spirit. We partake of sacred emblems. Those emblems are not changed into the body and the flesh, as some theologians teach. The change takes place inside the soul of the person who partakes. Then we can start again—and again—because we know the Lord loves us unconditionally. We never walk alone.

Let us each feel the responsibility to grow spiritually so that we are different today than we were last year. If we are just the same this year as we were last year, we may not live fifty years, but just live the same year fifty times. This year must be different from last year; otherwise life can become routine and even boring, without growth, and our mission will never be realized.

We don't want life to be overwhelming as a result of trying to run faster than we should, but we don't want it to be underwhelming either. It is all right to get tired, but never bored. We need never to get tired of life so long as we have so much to learn.

With a testimony that is undeniable, I know that God hears our prayers. He knows our needs. He will allow us to suffer, and from that suffering can come great spiritual growth. One day as we look back, we will be grateful for the times we tried and made it. We will be grateful for prayers delayed but not unanswered. We will come to know the mysteries of God and be grateful for the tests, all of them.

I love to read these words of Nephi: "And I, Nephi, did go unto the mount oft, and I did pray oft unto the Lord; wherefore the Lord showed unto me great things." (1 Nephi 18:3.) I would trade my degrees from two universities for the things that I have come to know in going to the mountain. That mountain need not be literally a mountain. It can be in the privacy of our own home. It is usually in the morning for me, before the activities of the day begin.

We can know the things we need to know to fulfill our mission. I am sure of that. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly . . . in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain to the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand." (D&C 88:78.) That is fascinating to me. It is as we teach each other that we learn.

When I hear sisters say, "I don't want to teach the young women. I don't want to teach the Primary. I need to be in Relief Society," I want to say, "For precious little time will only a few be selected to teach the children and to teach the young women. It is in teaching diligently that we are instructed more perfectly." Those who are privileged to have a calling to teach the children for a short time can enhance and hasten their spiritual understanding as they are teaching, not just as they are being taught.

As I think about the things that put us on higher ground spiritually, I think of the opportunity to serve. President Marion G. Romney said, "The Lord sends us to minister to one another. Obtaining a remission of our sins comes from caring for one another. The efficacy of our prayers depends on how we care for one another." How much do we care for one another? We'll take a loaf of bread, we'll make a phone call. But when we serve, something also needs to happen inside the soul. I call that soul service. It is through service that we experience a level of spirituality that lifts us higher than we otherwise might ever attain.

If we will radiate the truth that we know because of the faith that is born in us, out of struggles, out of hurts, out of disappointments, but also out of faith and out of knowledge of the Lord's love for us, He will speak His mind and will to us and we can stand as witnesses of God at all times, in all things, and in all places. And we will qualify for eternal life.

May we go forth in the coming years on a higher plateau spiritually than we have ever known before as daughters of light spreading joy and happiness wherever we go, through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
