Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Part II

The Journey

Chapter 6

Here I Am, but Where Am I Going?

When Adam left Eden, he left on a question, "Adam, where art thou?" Did God not know where Adam was? Actually He is the only one who does know. If we were to be asked that question, we might answer, I am here, but where is here? And more important, where am I going, not geographically but spiritually?

President David O. McKay defined spirituality as "our true aim, . . . the consciousness of victory over self and of communion with the infinite." (Stepping Stones to an Abundant Life [Deseret Book, 1971], p. 99.) The scriptures tell us that the spirit and the body are the soul of man. (See D&C 88:15.) If we are to have consciousness of victory over self, we must make the demands of the flesh submissive to the spirit. President Spencer W. Kimball taught that God "wants us to perfect ourselves and maintain control of ourselves. He does not want Satan and others to control our lives." (Ensign, October 1982, p. 2.)

We must learn that keeping our Heavenly Father's commandments represents the only path to total control of ourselves, the only way to find joy, truth, and fulfillment in this life and in eternity. Spirituality, victory over self, impels us to conquer difficulties and acquire strength, which I believe means self-control, as we face the challenges of life.

From childhood we learn to face physical challenges, then move on to social challenges, then emotional challenges, and finally spiritual growth. For each of us, our experiences are varied, but the lessons we learn have many similarities. The very purpose of this life is that we might be tested and gradually gain control and self-mastery as we learn to obey all our Father's laws and come to know Him and His Son, Jesus Christ.

Knowing God in the ultimate and full sense can allow us to think what He would think, say what He would say, do what He would do, and be like Him in character, in attributes, and ultimately in perfection. He can become the very center of our lives until we experience an unfolding of our faculties, an expanding of our souls, and an awakening of the spirit within us. To know Him is to have His will constantly in our minds, in our thoughts, in our actions, in the resolution of our differences, in our decisions, in our responses, in our interpretations—indeed, in our total experience in life. Through oneness with Him, we begin to understand our reason for being, and those trials and problems that we might otherwise choose to avoid may become the very foundation that brings us to the threshold of spirituality.

At this point, as never before, we begin to have a plan for our life. Rather than asking, "What do we want to have happen?" we ask, "What does He want to have happen?" Then each day we begin to really live and to savor every moment of life with new insight and understanding, with purpose and reason, following a plan that gives direction. This is more than setting goals. It is a pattern and a plan that allow us not only to set goals but to reach them because of a higher motivation. We move from the struggle—the battle of trying to control ourselves with will power and overcoming temptation—until we have a mighty change of heart. We no longer need will power because our will is His will.

And with this mighty change of heart, we have no more disposition to do evil, but want to do good continually. We are free from the battle fatigue of this life because we have yielded our hearts to God through the process of the mighty change. Every day of life is a precious gift.

When I consider how precious this life can be, I am reminded of Thornton Wilder's play Our Town. One of the main characters is a young woman, Emily, who dies and discovers that she has the opportunity to live one day of her life over again. She chooses her twelfth birthday. When the day begins, her first reaction is an intense desire to savor every moment. "I can't look at everything hard enough," she says. Then to her sorrow she sees that the members of her family are not experiencing life with any intensity. In desperation she says, "Let's look at one another." And then she says, "I can't. I can't go on. It goes so fast. We don't have time to look at one another. I didn't realize. So all that was going on, and we never noticed. Take me back—up the hill—to my grave. But first: Wait! One more look. Good-by, world. Good-by, Grover's Corners, . . . Mama and Papa. Good-by to clocks ticking, . . . and Mama's sunflowers. And food and coffee. And new-ironed dresses and hot baths . . . and sleeping and waking up. Oh, earth, you're too wonderful for anybody to realize you. Do any human beings ever realize life while they live it?—every, every minute?" The narrator, or stage manager, replies, "No." He pauses and then adds, "The saints and poets, maybe—they do some."

Oh, if we could just talk to all of the Emilys and, yes, saints and poets and Latter-day Saints! If we could just help everyone to know that with that inner control which brings communion with the infinite, all of life can be a constant revelation, and that we can begin to see it, to live it, and to experience each moment! Even difficult experiences, stresses, and strain can provide insight and an unfolding if we could actually understand what is happening to us and consider what we can learn from the situations in which we find ourselves. As we come to know who we are, what our purpose in life is, and what our relationship with the Savior is, we begin to develop inner control and victory over self. We begin to understand that we are the children of God, and that as His children, we can become like Him.

We didn't come to earth to gain spirituality. We brought it with us. Our task is to practice it through self-mastery, self-discipline, and communion with God in prayer and scripture study. Nephi taught, "Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, feast upon the words of Christ; for behold the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do. . . . For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray. . . . I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ." (2 Nephi 32:3, 8-9.)

The heavens are not closed to us unless we ourselves close them. We should expect communication with our Father in heaven. The Prophet Joseph Smith, speaking of revelation, said, "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Jesus Christ." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith [Deseret Book, 1976], p. 151.)

In communion with the Lord, there are those times when we know with certainty that He is with us. This can happen as it did when the apostles were traveling on the road to Emmaus and said one to another, "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32.)

Some time ago in Monterrey, Mexico, a sister and I walked along a dirt path shaded by olive trees. We were on the Lord's errand, traveling together to visit a sister in a remote area. Initially I felt some reservation about this assignment because I didn't know the people, didn't know the language, didn't know the culture, and didn't know exactly what to say. But as we walked together in the quiet of that morning, I contemplated the possibility of our having the Lord with us, as a companion. And while we did not see Him, I did witness a burning within, an excitement, an assurance, a witness of the Spirit that He walked with us on our way, which was His way. I have found that communion with the infinite most often occurs when we are in the act of serving someone else.

There are times when we may feel our service is of considerably less consequence than that of others whose contributions seem more visible, more magnificent, more far-reaching, and much more generous because of skills, finances, abilities, or self-confidence. On those occasions when I feel that my contribution is of infinitesimal proportion, I think of that great occasion when Jesus stood before the multitude, with evening approaching. The disciples suggested that it was time for the people to go into the village to get food. But Jesus said, "They need not depart." (Matthew 14:16.) One of the disciples found a young boy who had five loaves and two fish. The possibility of feeding five thousand people with just five loaves of bread and two fish must have seemed quite absurd. In fact, I can almost hear the young boy saying, "You want my lunch to feed five thousand?" But the message for me is that he gave all that he had, his five loaves and two fish.

We read that the Lord, after commanding the multitude to sit down on the grass, took the five loaves and two fish and gave thanks and blessed the food. Then he gave the loaves to his disciples to distribute to the multitude, and everyone ate and was filled. Afterwards the disciples picked up the fragments that remained and filled twelve baskets. (See John 6:5-13.)

When we give all that we have, the Lord will take it and bless it and magnify it and pass it, and there will be enough and to spare. It is only when we withhold what we have that we deprive ourselves of the promised blessing of grace, which our Bible Dictionary defines as "an enabling power that allows men and women to lay hold on eternal life and exaltation after they have expended their own best efforts." When we do our best, it is enough, and the Lord will make up the difference.

I have had experiences, as I am sure you have, that give me reason to know that as we begin to gain victory over ourselves and commune with the infinite, we can experience spirituality every day. I arose very early one day and, glancing out the window, witnessed in a reverent and different way the dawning of a new day. The sky was turning a delicate pink, in contrast to the deep green hills. I walked out on the balcony to better experience the manifestations of God's creations. The light and shadows changed quickly and quietly, and I felt that I had literally experienced the birth of a new day in the great eternal plan.

While pondering that experience, I thought of the conversation between Korihor and Alma in the Book of Mormon. "And now Korihor said unto Alma: If thou wilt show me a sign, that I may be convinced that there is a God, yea, show unto me that he hath power, and then will I be convinced of the truth of thy words. But Alma said unto him: Thou hast had signs enough; will ye tempt your God? Will ye say, Show unto me a sign, when ye have the testimony of all these thy brethren, and also all the holy prophets? The scriptures are laid before thee, yea, and all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator." (Alma 30:43-44.) Spiritual manifestations are all around us, but too frequently we fail to drink them in.

As we strive for communion with the infinite, we are much like the men in a story told by William George Jordan. During a violent storm their ship was driven far off course and carried into a strange bay. Though their water supply was gone and they suffered the agony of thirst, the crew dared not drink the salt water of the sea. Finally, in desperation they lowered a bucket over the ship's side and drank what they thought was seawater, but to their amazement the water was fresh and life-giving. They were in a fresh-water arm of the sea, and they had only to reach down and accept the new life and strength for which they craved.

And so it is with us. We are surrounded by things that might strengthen us spiritually if we would just drop down our bucket. If we could always be in tune with the Spirit and the whisperings of the Spirit, we would learn to pay attention and give heed to the wealth of resources all around us.

In life we are constantly faced with ruts, distractions, barriers, and sometimes seemingly insurmountable obstacles. For some it may be the searching for the very purpose of this life, a reason for being. For others it is the sorting out of voices of the world that sound reasonable but are not compatible with an inner sense, causing our minds and our hearts to get out of harmony with each other. For some it may be time schedules and physical exhaustion.

One of the barriers has to do with a different kind of timing. We all want things to happen according to our own predetermined time schedule. When events are out of sequence with our natural desires, we may become distracted and frustrated. We fail to realize that with delay may come increased opportunity for preparation.

I have some feeling for this kind of distraction, this enemy to spirituality. According to the yearnings of my heart and soul and my seemingly righteous desires, I had programmed my life to include a large family, to be a mother and a grandmother, the mother of a missionary, the mother of a bride, and on and on. But not so. The Lord's timeline for me was different. And what for a long time appeared to me to be a tragedy became the very foundation for deep spirituality. It is in matters of great consequence that we reach and touch divinity. And so I have learned that the exact time schedule for an event in one's life is not the real issue. The issue is not when a thing will happen, but the intensity of the preparation, the inner peace, the trust, the communion with the infinite, until it happens.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell, speaking of our individual timeline, has said, "The Lord will customize the curriculum for us in order to teach us the things we most need to know. He will set before us in life what we need, not always what we like. What therefore may seem now to be mere unconnected pieces of tile will someday, when we look back, take form and pattern and we will realize that God was making a mosaic."

After much pondering and years of reaching, I finally came to know that inner peace which brings increased power to communicate. The answer is in the scriptures: "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Proverbs 3:5-6.) Through certain knowledge of this counsel and implicit trust in our Father in heaven and the Savior, we can live on a higher spiritual plain.

For some of us, a barrier to spirituality is that we fail to systematically pursue the requirements for spiritual powers. This quest requires quiet time in a personal relationship—alone, yet not alone—where we find answers to things the world doesn't know, and where we inquire and come to know for ourselves. During this quiet time we tell the Lord how it is with us, review our promises and covenants in private, hold a "stewardship interview" concerning our lives up to this time, ponder the words of the Lord for increased understanding, and, on occasion, experience an unfolding—an awakening, as it were—of things we have known before, sometimes referred to as "divine echoes."

After meditation comes a time of resolve and commitment, mentally and spiritually, through self-discipline and self-mastery. Then, through prayer, we can humble ourselves and cleanse the inner vessel by praying mightily for forgiveness. When this pouring out of our heart and soul is accompanied by periods of fasting, though we may not always recognize the answer, we can experience inner peace while we await further direction.

Another barrier to spirituality—and perhaps the most common and the most powerful, and certainly the most persistent—is the power of the evil one. President George Q. Cannon stated: "If we could see with our spiritual senses as we now see with our natural senses, we should be greatly shocked at the sight of the influences that prompt us to disobey the counsels of God or the Spirit of the Lord in our hearts." (Gospel Truth, 1987, p. 65.)

President Spencer W. Kimball observed, "I find that when I get casual in my relationship with divinity and when it seems that no divine ear is listening and no divine voice is speaking, that I am far, far away, if I immerse myself in the scriptures, the distance narrows and the spirituality returns." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Bookcraft, 1982], p. 135.)

And so we acknowledge that there are many barriers to our spirituality. The war in heaven continues. Someday the war will be won and there will be an eventual triumph of the forces of Christ over those of Satan, a permanent victory. But for here and now, the battle wages. As we increase in spirituality, we can have the Holy Spirit to be with us always, and then we will find ourselves in God's service, reaching out to others.

I like the words of Mother Teresa, the Catholic nun who has devoted her life to serving the poor in India: "We must not drift away from the humble works because these are the works nobody will do. It is never too small. We are so small, we look at things in a small way, but God, being almighty, sees everything great. Therefore even if you write a letter for a blind man or you just go and sit and listen or you take the mail for him or you visit somebody or bring a flower to somebody, small things, or wash clothes for somebody, or clean the house, very humble work, that is where you and I must be. For there are many people who can do big things, but there are very few people who will do the small things. Our loaves and our fishes can feed thousands.

"Give Jesus not only your hands to serve, but your heart to love. Pray with absolute trust in God's loving care for you. Let Him use you without consulting you. Let Jesus fill you with joy that you may preach without preaching."(Love, a Fruit Always in Season [San Francisco: Ignatius Pr., 1987], p. 26.)

May I share with you the excitement, the pure joy, the anticipation, the conviction and commitment I feel as I contemplate the great love our Heavenly Father has for each of us. As Nephi said, "When I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins; nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted. My God hath been my support. . . . He hath filled me with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh. . . . Behold, he hath heard my cry by day, and he hath given me knowledge by visions in the nighttime. . . .

"O then, if I have seen so great things, if the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken, because of mine afflictions? And why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh? Yea, why should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have place in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? Why am I angry because of mine enemy?

"Awake, my soul! No longer droop in sin. Rejoice, O my heart, and give place no more for the enemy of my soul." (2 Nephi 4:19, 21, 23, 26-28.)

And when we feel ourselves out of control, out of harmony, for a time, not knowing for certain where we are or where we are going spiritually, disappointed in our actions in relation to our desires, we need not despair. There is a place of spiritual repair. We can take our wounded spirits faithfully and regularly to the sacrament table and there renew our covenants, our commitments, by offering a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Then we begin, in part at least, to feel the healing and the peace that comes when we ponder the meaning of the atonement in our personal lives. May we each endure to the end and rejoice in the blessings of mortality through our consciousness of victory over self and communion with the infinite.
