Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 7

Drifting, Dreaming, Directing

Of our day, Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, "Great trials lie ahead. All of the sorrows and perils of the past are but a foretaste of what is yet to be. And we must prepare ourselves temporally and spiritually." (Ensign, May 1979, p. 92.) Even with the reality of that kind of a backdrop, President Spencer W. Kimball admonished us, "Make no small plans, for they hold no magic to stir men's souls." (Regional Representatives seminar, 1979.) This reminds me of Dickens's A Tale of Two Cities. The story begins with the contrasts of that day:

"It was the best of times, it was the worst of times; it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness; it was the epic of belief, it was the epic of incredulity; it was the season of light, it was the season of darkness; it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair; we had everything before us, we had nothing before us; we were all going direct to heaven, we were all going direct the other way—in short—the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on it being received for good or for evil in a superlative degree of comparison only. . . . It was the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five."

We are living in the times spoken of in the scriptures when peace shall be taken from the earth. Of our time President Kimball said, "To be a righteous woman is a glorious thing in any age. To be a righteous woman during the winding-up scenes on this earth, before the second coming of our Savior, is an especially noble calling. The righteous woman's strength and influence today can be tenfold what it might be in more tranquil times." (My Beloved Sisters [Deseret Book, 1979], p. 17.)

Each of us will determine whether this day spoken of as the great and dreadful day will be recorded in our journals of life as a truly great and glorious day in which we are privileged to take part, or if, in fact, it is recorded only as a day of turmoil, conflict, and confusion.

President Harold B. Lee was referring to our day, I believe, when he said: "We have some tight places to go before the Lord is through with this church and the world in this dispensation, which is the last dispensation, which shall usher in the coming of the Lord. The gospel was restored to prepare a people ready to receive him. There will be inroads within the Church. There will be, as President [N. Eldon] Tanner has said, 'Hypocrites—those professing, but secretly are full of dead men's bones.' We will see those who profess membership, but secretly are plotting and trying to lead people not to follow the leadership that the Lord has set up to preside in this church."

And knowing the nature of man, President Lee continued: "You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. It may contradict your political views. It may contradict your social views. It may interfere with some of your social life. But if you listen to these things, as if from the mouth of the Lord himself, with patience and faith, the promise is that 'the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good and his name's glory' (D&C 21:6)." (Improvement Era, December 1970, p. 126.)

It is while a person stands undecided, uncommitted, and uncovenanted, with choices waiting to be made, that vulnerability to every wind that blows becomes life-threatening. Uncertainty, the thief of time and commitment, breeds vacillation and confusion. It is in taking a stand and making a choice to follow our leaders that we become free to move forward. We are then released from the crippling position of doubtful indecision and confusion. We then have access to power and influence, so much so that we can hardly keep pace with our opportunities. It is in or by using our agency and making firm decisions that we turn the key.

Let me share with you a few lines from The Agony and the Ecstasy by Irving Stone. On the very brink of creating what for many has become his greatest masterpiece, Michelangelo is faced with a decision that, once made, must be lived with. He has completed a multitude of drawings suggesting hundreds of ways he might carve the David. He has been vacillating, contemplating, considering all the alternatives, the many options, weighing and waiting. Now he must make a choice:

He burned his earlier drawings, settled down to the simplest beginning, probing within himself. . . . What could he find in David triumphant, he asked himself, worthy of sculpturing. Tradition portrayed him after the fact. Yet David after the battle was certainly an anticlimax, his great moment already gone. Which, then, was the important David? When did David become a giant? After killing Goliath, or at the moment he decided that he must try? David, as he was releasing with brilliant and deadly accuracy the shot from the sling; or David before he entered the battle when he decided that the Israelites must be freed from their vassalage to the Philistines? Was not the decision more important than the act itself, since character was more critical than action? For him, then, it was David's decision that made him a giant, not his killing of Goliath. This was the David he had been seeking, caught at the exultant height of resolution. . . . The man who killed Goliath would be committed all his life to warfare and its consequence: power. . . . To act was to join. David would not be sure he wanted to join. He had been a man alone. Once he tackled Goliath, there would be no turning back. . . . It was what he sensed that he would do to himself, as well as what the world would do to him, that made him doubtful and averse in changing the pattern of his days. His had been a hard choice indeed. ([New York: Doubleday and Company, 1961], pp. 388, 390-91.)

It was in realizing the importance of David's hard choice and his faith to act that the door for Michelangelo was unlocked, allowing him to decide about his own mission in marble. Recognizing David as the giant at the moment of his decision allowed him to make his decision; and the choice having been made, his tempo changed and with it came strength, power, and hidden energies. Irving Stone's story continues:

He soared, he drew with authority and power, he molded in clay . . . his fingers unable to keep pace with his thoughts and emotions, and with astonishing facility he knew where the David lay. The limitations of the block began to appear as assets, forcing his mind into a simplicity of design that might never have occurred to him had it been whole and perfect. The marble came alive now. (Ibid., p. 391.)

Each person must release his or her own David from the imperfect marble that holds it captive, and each of us will greatly hasten that process as we follow the counsel of the prophet. President Kimball said, "Be wise in the choices that you make. . . . Sharpen the skills you have been given and use the talents with which God has blessed you." (Ensign, November 1979, p. 103.) As we make right choices we are driven by an exhilaration that causes us to hunger and thirst and feel new energies that lift us, like Michelangelo, toward our goal.

As we make right choices, decisions, and commitments, we are released to move forward at a hastened pace and lengthen our stride. If we remain motionless on the brink of indecision we allow our voice, our example, our potential for good to be held imprisoned, as it were, in a slab of marble. Our testimonies, our commitments, and our covenants may lie deep inside, but until we can cut away all the debris that obscures this treasure, it cannot be recognized by others or even trusted by ourselves. As we seek divine direction, we will find our own blocks of marble to be more magnificent, with greater potential, than we have yet realized. Then, when the history of this era is reviewed, it might be said of us, as it was of Queen Esther, "Who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?" (Esther 4:14.)

Even with these truths and inspiring examples before us, I feel concern for some who may feel discouraged, who may feel that we get our moralities mixed up with our realities and that the gulf between morality and reality is too big, the stakes are too high, the requirements too rigid, and the rewards too uncertain.

It has been my observation, and it is my confession as a former participant, that many people drift along with the crowd in the Church. Many good people drift to sacrament meeting and Sunday School, even family home evening, and they drift through a casual study of the scriptures. The drifters fall into at least one of two groups. In the first group are those who step into the mainstream, getting deeply involved with Church activity and floating with the current, comfortable with a sense of false security that they are in the right place. In the second group are those who, accepting a few selected principles, resist being part of the flow, the mainstream, and choose to get out into the eddies at the edge, freed from the demands of full participation. It is difficult to decide which of these two groups is better—or worse. Those of us who, on the basis of activity alone, are very much in the Church may not necessarily have the Church very much in us; and if we were to leave, the Church might hardly recognize the difference. Following the practices, doing the right thing but without coming to know, understand, accept, and apply the saving principles and doctrines, we may be compared to one who spends his entire life stringing the instrument but who never once hears the music for which the instrument was created, or who would be incapable of recognizing the music if he did listen.

In matters of principle, let us stand as solid as a rock. In matters of practice, may all that we do be based upon these saving principles, and may we understand the intrinsic relationship of principles and practices. In deciding to follow the admonition of our prophets to study the scriptures, we will gradually learn the doctrines that prepare us to stand on the rock of revelation and to experience less frequently the restless sense of drifting, wandering, questioning, and searching.

Many good people are very faithful in following the traditions and practices. I am reminded of a song we used to sing in Sunday School: "Never be late for the Sunday School class, / Come with your bright smiling faces." The chorus ended with this refrain: "Try to be there, always be there, / Promptly at ten in the morning." Starting Sunday School at ten in the morning was a practice, a tradition, for a long time. It was not a principle. Yet there were those among the faithful who felt uncomfortable about change, not unlike the feelings expressed by some today as practices and traditions are modified. When changes come, and they always will, for some it may be a test to survive because their foundation is based on practices alone, without an understanding of the eternal, unchanging principles.

Being faithful does not necessarily develop faith. The first principle of the gospel is faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ. To have faith in Him is to know Him, to know His doctrine, and to know that the course of our life is in harmony with and acceptable to Him. It is relatively easy to be faithful, but faith is born out of study, fasting, prayer, meditation, sacrifice, service, and, finally, personal revelation.

Glimpses of understanding come line upon line, precept upon precept. Our Father is anxious to feed us just as fast as we can handle it, but we regulate the richness and the volume of our spiritual diet. And we do this by the same method used by the sons of Mosiah: "They had waxed strong in the knowledge of the truth; . . . they had searched the scriptures diligently, that they might know the word of God. But this is not all; they had given themselves to much prayer, and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with power and authority of God." (Alma 17:2-3.)

Faithfulness without faith, practices without principles, will leave us and our families seriously wanting as we move closer to that time spoken of by Heber C. Kimball, who said, "The time is coming when no man or woman will be able to endure on borrowed light. Each will have to be guided by the light within himself. If ye do not have it, you will not stand." (Quoted by Harold B. Lee in Conference Report, October 1955, p. 56.)

May we find ourselves doing less and less drifting as we make right choices based on personal revelation that give direction to us and our families each day of our life. And with that direction, let us develop "a program for personal improvement" that will cause us to "reach for new levels of achievement." (Spencer W. Kimball, My Beloved Sisters, p. 20.) Certain principles are essential in our struggle to avoid the wasteful experience of drifting.

Now, what of dreamers? Many of us are dreamers at times, wanting in some way to escape ourselves, to be free of our own limitations. I often ponder the words: "With voluntary dreams they cheat their minds." It has been said that if fate would destroy a man, it would first separate his forces and drive him to think one way and act another. It would rob him of the contentment that comes only from unity within. Choices must be decisive so that dreams and actions can be in harmony with each other. When we do something different than we know we should, it is like going into a final examination and giving the wrong answer, even though we know the right one.

Dreaming, however, can also serve a very positive function when it fits Webster's definition of having "a goal or purpose ardently desired."

In the popular musical South Pacific is the delightful song that asks, "If you don't have a dream, how ya gonna have a dream come true?" I am concerned for some of our sisters who have a magnificent dream but who will never fully realize its fulfillment because they feel that a righteous husband will take care of it, and they fail to prepare for their part in this eternal partnership.

There are some sisters who ponder the administrative structure of the Church and trouble themselves with what they think they don't have without ever coming to a full understanding of their own special and unique mission and the great blessings reserved specifically for them. We hear it expressed in terms that suggest that because women don't have the priesthood, they are shortchanged.

Still other sisters have the misunderstanding that priesthood is synonymous with men, and so they excuse themselves and have no concern for studying its importance in their own lives. The term priesthood is used without qualification, whether it refers to a bearer of the priesthood, to priesthood blessings, or to priesthood ordinances. Regardless of how it is used, our hearts should cry and we should raise our voices and shout warnings to sisters whose dreams are built on such faulty foundations.

Our greatest dreams will be fulfilled only as we come to understand fully and experience the blessings of the priesthood, the power of the priesthood, and the ordinances of the priesthood in our own lives. If we were to begin with the time a child is given a name and a blessing and then continue on through baptism, confirmation, the sacrament, callings and being set apart, patriarchal blessings, administrations, the endowment, and finally celestial marriage, we would quickly realize that all the saving blessings of the priesthood are for everyone, male and female.

And while the divine mission of motherhood is paramount, it is not all-inclusive. To help another gain eternal life is a companion privilege. This privilege, indeed this sacred responsibility, this noblest of callings, is denied to no worthy person. To assist in bringing to pass the eternal life of man, and to do it in dignity and honor, is the very pinnacle of my own personal dream. And for us to close our eyes to these eternal truths and not recognize them as priesthood blessings and ordinances is to keep us on the fringe area of the very saving principles that can make our eternal dreams come true.

It is true that as sisters we do not experience a priesthood ordination that carries an administrative function. We also do not have the tremendous, weighty burden of having that sacred responsibility heaped upon us in addition to the mission of creating and nurturing in partnership with God, first in giving birth to the Lord's spirit children and then in raising those children to serve the Lord and keep his commandments. I have come to know that we can all, both men and women, rejoice in the sacred calling of motherhood. To give birth is but one part of this sacred calling.

After drifting and dreaming, now may we consider the directing of one's life. At my high school graduation, Elder Oscar A. Kirkham of the First Council of the Seventy stood at the pulpit, looking into the eyes of idealistic, enthusiastic graduates, and offered this challenge: "Build a seaworthy ship. Be a loyal shipmate, and sail a true course." I don't remember anything else that he said, or what anyone else said, for that matter. But I've pondered that challenge many times over the years. In directing our lives, we want to be sure of the true course and its ultimate destination. We cannot risk being caught in the disillusionment of the fellow who was committed to going north and was in fact traveling north—but on an iceberg that was floating south.

True points, like stars in the heavens to guide us, are readily available for anyone earnestly seeking direction. These true points of doctrine are found in the true church. (See D&C 11:16.) Conversion to the truth comes by accepting true doctrine, and the truth of doctrine can be known only by revelation gained as a result of obedience. The Savior taught: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:16-17.)

The skeptic of two thousand years ago might have said, "Look, if I knew for sure that the star (the sign of the Savior's birth) would appear in the heavens tonight, I would be obedient." That's like standing in front of a stove and saying, "Give me some heat, and then I'll put in the wood." We must put in the wood first, and then we feel the warmth and the heat; then we can bear testimony of its reality. In the twelfth chapter of Ether we read: "Dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.) As our faith is tried and we are found standing firm even in times of storm, we will rejoice with increased confidence and discover within ourselves the loyal shipmate that we really have as we sail a true course.

Apostles and prophets have been provided in the Church for the purposes of identifying and teaching true doctrine, lest men be "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine." (Ephesians 4:14.) Now, we can follow the Brethren blindly, as one of my non-Mormon friends claims that we do—and I might add that it is far safer and better to follow them blindly than not at all—but that could be an abdication of our responsibility to direct our own lives and become spiritually independent. Following the practices alone is not enough. We must come to know the reason, indeed the doctrinal basis, for that practice; otherwise, when the practice or tradition is questioned or changed, those who do not understand the principle are prone to waver. They may even abandon or reject the very practice intended as a schoolmaster to carry them to an understanding of a saving and eternal principle.

There were those in King Benjamin's time who were caught up in following the law of Moses. With blinders they followed the practices—an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth—until King Benjamin taught them that their practices availed them nothing unless they accepted the mission of the Savior and His atonement. Without that commitment their practices were for naught.

While Adam was offering the firstlings of the flock, an angel appeared and asked him why he was doing it. Adam responded, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." The practice was offering sacrifice, but the principle, in this instance, was obedience. And then Adam received a witness, after the trial of his faith. The angel explained: "This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father." (Moses 5:6-7.)

As we direct our lives, it is important to understand practices and principles, their relationship as well as the differences between them. In my mind's eye, I visualize the practices as a horizontal line, a foundation, a schooling, a testing, a preparation; and I see the saving and exalting eternal principles or doctrine as a vertical line that links our souls to heaven and builds the relationship with God and faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ, and His mission.

There continues to be much opposition to true doctrine; but by and by the storm subsides, the clouds disperse, the sun breaks forth, and the rock of truth is seen again, firm and lasting. There never was a true principle that was not met by storm after storm of opposition and abuse, until that principle had obtained such influence that it no longer paid to oppose it. But until that time, the opposition and the abuse have ebbed and flowed like the tide.

It was a strong doctrine that rid Jesus of his weak disciples, and the same testing process continues today in determining those worthy of His kingdom. The Prophet Joseph Smith stated: "God has in reserve a time . . . when He will bring all His subjects, who have obeyed His voice and kept His commandments, into His celestial rest. This rest is of such perfection and glory, that man has need of a preparation before he can, according to the laws of that kingdom, enter it and enjoy its blessings. This being the fact, God has given certain laws to the human family, which, if observed, are sufficient to prepare them to inherit this rest. This, then, we conclude was the purpose of God in giving his laws to us." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 1976, p. 54.)

In our goal to apply principles and proceed with direction, it isn't intended that we arrive before we experience that witness of the Spirit. The witness sustains us in our journey. Truman Madsen has observed: "The greatest tragedy of life is that having paid that awful price of suffering 'according to the flesh that his bowels might be filled with compassion' and now prepared to reach down and help us, [the Savior] is forbidden because we won't let him. We look down instead of up." ("Prayer and the Prophet Joseph," Ensign, January 1976, p. 23.) We choose to remain enclosed in marble. But if we would free ourselves and come to know this truth through personal revelation, the time might come when even our routine practices could become life-giving and done in the Lord's name with His spirit so that the whole of our lives becomes a sacred experience as we labor for Him continuously.

Not long ago I witnessed what until then had been something of a routine for me, the blessing on the food. Picture with me my aged father, his body deteriorated by the devastation of stomach cancer, but his spirit magnified and refined through suffering. He sat at the kitchen table; he then weighed less than a hundred pounds. Bowing his head, resting it in his frail, trembling hands over a spoonful of baby food—all that he could eat—he pronounced a blessing on the food, as though it were a sacred sacrament, and gave thanks with acceptance and submission, with truth and faith, because he knew to whom he was speaking.

It is in coming to know our Savior and the saving principles taught through the gospel of Jesus Christ that we become different. And we need to be recognized as being different. The majority of the world doesn't see the options. It is our responsibility to be obviously good and obviously right—and able to articulate our values and be advocates for truth. We may have a temple recommend and attend our meetings and practice the principles, but how we look and act, what we say and do, may be the only message some people will receive. Our acts should show that there is a power and an influence with us that the inhabitants of the world do not understand. What is it that distinguishes us from others? The distinction is that we profess to be guided by revelation. And it is because of this principle that we are peculiar, since all of our actions can be under divine guidance. Having made the choice, we must stand and be visibly different. Until we make that choice, we remain anonymous, subject to the current of meandering multitudes.

President Kimball said: "Much of the major growth that is coming to the Church in the last days will come because many of the good women of the world (in whom there is often such an inner sense of spirituality) will be drawn to the Church in large numbers. This will happen to the degree that the women of the Church reflect righteousness and articulateness in their lives and to the degree that they are seen as distinct and different—in happy ways—from the women of the world." (My Beloved Sisters, p. 44.)

That is our direction. That is our challenge.

All individuals are what they are and where they are by a composite of choices that direct their lives each day. The responsibility of directing is not only for our own lives, but also for others who may be looking for the light. As we build a seaworthy ship and then sail a true course, many sails will navigate safely through troubled waters into the peaceful harbor because of the unflickering light radiating from the bow of our craft. As I consider our responsibility to others, I am inspired by the words of one of our hymns:

Brightly beams our Father's mercy From his lighthouse evermore, But to us he gives the keeping Of the lights along the shore. —Hymns, no. 335

Elder Neal A. Maxwell has written, "As other lights flicker and fade, the light of the gospel will burn ever more brightly in a darkening world, guiding the humble but irritating the guilty and those who prefer the dusk of decadence." (Church News, January 5, 1970, p. 28.)

May our lights be bright, without a flicker, as we tend the lights along the shore. Let us reach out and touch one another. Let us help carry one another's burdens. In cooperation we can overcome great odds. Let us rejoice with one another. It may be just a smile, a note, a call, an encouraging word that says, "I care. I understand. I will stand by you and help you." These are life-saving measures in times of storm.

Recently I was privileged to read part of a blessing received by one of our sisters that stated that her life would continue over a period when she would see great devastation and that she would be called to go into homes of the sorrowing, the suffering, the sick and afflicted, to minister unto them, to bind up their wounds, and to cheer them. I believe that we have all been called to minister unto those in need, to bind up not just their physical wounds but also their spiritual wounds, social wounds, and wounds that are kept hidden, sometimes festering until someone cares enough to tend the lights along the shore.

These are matters of eternal consequence, and we can, if we desire, reach far enough to experience an awakening of things we have known before.

It is my fervent and humble testimony that the heavens are very much open to women today. They are not closed unless we ourselves, by our choices, close them. And this reality can be just as evident as in any time past. As I read of the great spirituality of women of the past and realize how the Lord communicated with them, I thrill with the spiritual manifestations that accompanied their missions in life, literally a power evidencing the will of God made known through their instrumentality. I think of Eliza R. Snow, of whom Joseph F. Smith said, "She walked not in the borrowed light of others, but faced the morning unafraid and invincible."

The Spirit whispers to me that there are Eliza R. Snows among us even today, and there can be many, many more. We can pull down the blessings of heaven through obedience to law. These divine and sacred blessings are not reserved for others alone. Visions and revelations come by the power of the Holy Ghost. The Lord has said, "On my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy." (Acts 2:18.)

Let us go forth with the faith, the vision, the direction, and the decision to abide the laws that ensure these blessings not only for ourselves and our families but for all of God's children everywhere. Let us each feel deeply the power and strength and influence for good of our collective and united resolves. With renewed determination and confidence and commitment to the covenants we have made, let us become truly and in every way "women of God." Let us go forth in faith and confidence and prepare for the noble calling spoken of by the Prophet—to be righteous women during the winding-up scenes on this earth before the second coming of our Savior.
