Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 8

The Joy of the Journey

Early one morning, as a child, I walked beside my father along the irrigation ditch at the lower level of our eighty acres in Alberta, Canada. Then, standing at the edge of the ditch with his shovel in his hand, Dad said, "I'm going to teach you to jump the ditch." And he added, as he often did when teaching me something, ". . . if your attitude is right." I watched him place the shovel in the middle of the ditch and hop over; then he hopped back again the same way. He anchored the shovel in the ditch and pushed the handle toward me.

I looked down at the ditch, which seemed to be getting wider and wider, as the water got deeper and deeper. "But, Dad," I asked, "what if I don't make it?" He smiled and explained, "You'll land in the water and get soaked." "Then what?" I asked. "You'll still need to get to the other side." As I stared at the water skitters on the surface of the water, he provided more encouragement. "See that clump of buffalo beans on the other side? Keep your eye on those buffalo beans and give it all you've got, and you'll make it." Taking a deep breath, I held tight to the handle of the shovel and gave it all I had. I landed right on top of the buffalo beans. Quickly I looked back and saw Dad with both hands clasped in the air and a big smile. "I knew you could do it," he said. Then he jumped across with great ease. I wondered why all the fuss just for me.

Later in the day, eating our lunch in the shade of the elm trees, Dad and I talked about my experience in jumping the ditch. He looked more serious than before as he taught me this greatest of all lessons. "Ardie," he said, "there are many ditches you will have to cross in life and many of them you'll have to cross alone. If you keep your eye on the other side and give it all you've got, you'll make it."

Sometimes we lose sight of our goals because we become distracted by things that for a time seem more important. President Kimball gave us valuable counsel when he said, "Since immortality and eternal life constitute the sole purpose of life, all other interests and activities are but incidental thereto."

You might say, "You mean dinner parties, travel, nice homes, and entertainment are not important?" To some people they may be important, but they are not essential. We don't have to know everything; we don't have to do everything; we don't have to have everything. We just have to know who we really are, and what we should do, and why we should do it—the very purpose of life.

The answer to each of these important questions is clearly explained in the gospel of Jesus Christ. In fact, the gospel is the plan of salvation, intended for all of our Father's children so that none may be denied. The first great principle is that God is our Eternal Father and we are His children. In our premortal life we accepted His plan, which is the only plan through which we can gain eternal life, His greatest gift to us His children.

The first Young Women Value states, "I am a daughter of a Heavenly Father who loves me, and I will have faith in His eternal plan which centers in Jesus Christ, my Savior." Jesus, our Elder Brother, invites us to follow Him, and He has provided the way for us to do so. He has given us commandments that we must obey if we would return to our heavenly home. But He does not force us; He has also given us our agency. It is an eternal truth that progression requires the right to make our own choices. We must be free to choose for ourselves and then be accountable for our choices and accept the consequences.

Commandments are brief statements of direction given by God that are consistent with eternal laws and that provide eternal blessings. In a similar way, during our sojourn on earth, earthly parents establish family rules or commandments to help provide protection for their children while they learn to make wise choices.

How well I remember fighting the restrictions early in my life. One evening I attended a Sunday School party at the home of one of my friends. My parents had told me I was to be home by 10:00, which I remember thinking was quite unreasonable for my "mature" age. At about 10:15, I said to myself, "If a knock comes on the door right now, I'll just die. It will probably be my father." Right then came the knock. It was my father. Humiliated in front of my friends, I wanted to die. As we walked along the gravel road to our home, I thought, "Dad, how could you embarrass me like this in front of my friends?" It was a most memorable and painful experience.

A few years later, I went with a group of friends to a dance in Cardston at Christmastime. The weather was extremely cold, forty degrees below zero, with a strong wind blowing the snow around. At the end of the dance we headed toward the turnoff that would take us home. We were about halfway there when the car slowed to a gradual putt-putt and stopped. Thick frost quickly coated the car windows when the engine was turned off. In that extreme cold, we knew our lives were in danger. We had heard of people who had abandoned their cars in a blizzard and had gotten lost and died. We had also heard of others who had remained in their cars and had frozen to death.

After two or three moments of silence and private prayer, one of the youths in the back seat asked, "How long do you think it will be before your dad will get here?" What made them think my dad would come after us? Because he always did. Looking at our watches, we estimated the earliest possible time he might arrive. We scraped the heavy frost with our fingernails to make a little window so we could see out. At the shortest possible time, one of my friends put his eye to the small opening and excitedly cried, "He's coming. He's coming!" Suddenly we could see a glimmer of light through the blizzard, and it seemed to be getting brighter and brighter. My father had arrived. He had come to our rescue, to take us home.

One time I wanted to die because my dad came after me; another time my friends and I lived because he came after us.

Today there is a storm raging. It is no ordinary storm, not the kind with a temperature of forty degrees below zero. But make no mistake, lives are in danger. President Ezra Taft Benson reminds us, "Never before on the face of the earth have the forces of evil and the forces of good been so well organized. While our generation will be comparable in wickedness to the days of Noah when the Lord cleansed the earth by a flood, there is a major difference this time. God has saved for the final inning some of His stronger and most valiant children who will help bear off the kingdom triumphantly. You are the generation that must be prepared to meet your God. The final outcome is certain. The forces of righteousness will finally win; but what remains to be seen is where each of us personally, now and in the future, will stand in this battle and how tall we will stand."

Some people are giving in or giving up because they lack the vision, the faith, and the hope to survive and overcome. But with an understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ, we have not only the vision but also the promises and the blessings and the help. The help comes from our Savior, Jesus Christ. Sin is a conscious violation of a true principle. How Jesus saw sin as wrong! But He saw it springing from deep and unmet needs on the part of the sinner. He paid the price for us. He atoned for our sins. He is our Savior. And we partake of that great sacrifice, that blessing, as we choose to live in harmony with eternal laws and accept the saving ordinances and covenants. The covenants we make with our Father in heaven secure our safe journey, even a joyful journey. They allow us to keep our eye on the buffalo beans, so to speak, and give it all we've got, knowing that when we do, we will succeed.

I am impressed with the story told of Florence Chadwick, who, at thirty-four years of age, determined to be the first woman to swim the twenty-two miles from Catalina Island to the California coast. She had already been the first woman to swim the English Channel in both directions. One writer reported the experience:

"The water was cold that July morning, and the fog was so thick she could hardly see the boats in her own party. Millions were watching on national television. Several times sharks, which had gotten too close, had to be driven away with rifles to protect the lone figure in the water. As the hours ticked off, she swam on. Fatigue had never been her big problem in these swims. It was the bone-chilling cold of the water. More than fifteen hours later, numbed with cold, she asked to be taken out. She couldn't go on. Her mother and her trainer alongside in a boat told her they were near land. They urged her not to quit. But when she looked toward the California coast, all she could see was the dense fog."

A few minutes later, at 15 hours and 55 minutes, she was taken out of the water. It was not until hours later, when her body began to warm up again, that she felt the shock of failure. To a reporter she blurted out, "Look, I'm not excusing myself, but if I could have just seen land I might have made it." She had been pulled out only one-half mile from the California coast. Later she reflected that she had been defeated not by fatigue, not even the cold, but by fog. It had defeated her because it had obscured her goal and blinded her reason, her eyes, her heart. This was the only time Florence Chadwick ever quit. Two months later she swam that same channel and again fog obscured her view, but this time she swam with her faith intact. Somewhere behind that fog was land.

Yes, there are a lot of sharks and a lot of fog and fatigue and chilling cold. It is all part of the test. We don't have to do great things. We just have to hang on and do right things that become great. And while life may not always be enjoyable, it can be very satisfying and rewarding.

Let me refer again to the Young Women Values, which are really gospel principles for all of us, a basis for decision-making, helping us keep our eye on the goal. The values of faith, divine nature, and individual worth help us understand our identity and our relationship to our Father and His Son, Jesus Christ. Then we focus on the importance of knowledge. We must have knowledge to make wise choices.

Samuel the Lamanite said in the Book of Mormon, "And now remember, remember, . . . that whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free. He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death." (Helaman 14:30-31.)

Considering the importance of gaining knowledge, remember that if we want to experience the sense of smell, we use our nose, not our ears or eyes. If we want to hear, we use our ears, not our nose. If we want to see, we use our eyes, not our ears. And if we want to experience spiritual things, we must develop spiritual receptivity. We must not remain in grade one in spiritual things while we charge ahead in secular knowledge. As Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has said, "Be prepared so that if you are an engineer and want to cross the Red Sea, you will be prepared to construct a bridge or part the water."

I am reminded of the story of a visitor to the famous art museum, the Louvre, in Paris. When told of the value of one of the masterpieces there, he scoffed. "I can't see why it should be priced so high," he said. And the curator simply responded, "But don't you wish you could?"

Secular and spiritual knowledge prepares us to make wise choices and add to the joy of the journey. There may be times when we feel discouraged and painfully aware of our limited capacity to grasp it all, with so much to learn and so little time. But we don't need to grasp it all, not all at once, and not all here during this part of our journey. However, we want to learn as much as possible, because we are promised that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.)

I recall vividly as a child the painful experience of feeling "dumb" and struggling through the darkness of discouragement when you feel everyone else is smart. I believed that being smart was the greatest blessing one could ever have, and that gave me concern for what God would think of someone who was dumb.

I have found that usually our greatest lessons come in times of anguish, perhaps because we are more teachable. My anxiety was quieted somewhat on one occasion when my parents walked around the Cardston Temple and explained that if I continued to do my very best in school, I should no longer worry about being dumb, but should focus on being good. If I was good enough and obedient in keeping God's commandments, they said, one day instead of walking around the outside of the temple, I could go inside. And there—and only there—I would learn all I needed to know to return to my Heavenly Father. They explained that all the knowledge in the world would be of little consequence if I failed to gain the gift of knowledge that would be available to me in the temple. And they reassured me that I was smart enough to learn all I really needed to know to accomplish my earthly mission. This was a great comfort to me at that difficult time.

Only in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, guided by a living prophet receiving continuous revelation, and only by living worthy to enter the temple, can we receive the temple endowment, the gift of knowledge. There we receive sacred ordinances and make covenants that guide us through our life and provide the very purpose for this earth life and preparation for the next.

May God bless us to focus on eternal life while enjoying the valleys and mountain peaks along the journey.
