Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 9

There Is Time Enough

Every year I find myself becoming more and more concerned about health, perhaps because a friend warns me that after forty years of age, it's patch, patch, patch. Thus, preserving, maintaining, and restoring emotional and physical health has become a high priority for me, as I am sure it is for you. I heard the other day of a lady much older than I who had completed fifty pushups that very morning. That was distressing to me until I learned that she had begun them a year ago! It's fun to be able to laugh at some of the things we can't control, but it is equally important for us to feel that we can manage the things over which we can have control.

Dr. Verla Collins, an associate with Intermountain Hospital Corporation, once told me that there is evidence to verify that approximately 87 percent of the illnesses that are medically treated can be linked to psychosomatic illnesses. William James, often referred to as the father of psychology, stated, "Neither the nature nor the amount of our work is accountable for the frequency and severity of our breakdown, but the cause rather lies in the observed feelings of hurry and having no time. Breathlessness, tension, anxiety, the lack of inner harmony and ease." Louis Pasteur said it this way: "The microbe is nothing, but it is the terrain." In other words, the condition or state of the body is what matters most. A body under stress, in the state of "dis-ease," is more vulnerable to disease.

And so we might ask, Do I have time enough to allow me to move through life in a state of ease rather than disease? Time is used in different ways by different people. Historians record time, referees call time, musicians mark time, prisoners serve time, loafers kill time, and most of us try to stretch time as though we had an unlimited bank account. Often we find ourselves overdrawn.

In the bank of life, there are just so many hours in every day. We cannot overdeposit, but we can overdraw. Bankruptcy puts us in a state of tension. In life we use time, kill it, spend it, call it, save it, and wonder where it goes. It seems as though we never have enough time, and yet we have all there is. Time clicks off one second at a time, and we set a rhythm as it goes. Is there enough? Are we ever guilty of building prison walls that tie us up with tension and with anxiety when we utter just five little words, "I do not have time"? And yet we tell ourselves we don't have enough time—when we have all that there is.

There is always time enough if we will apply it well. We do this by first learning how to separate the vital things in life, which are really very few, from the urgent things, which are constantly mounting. When we learn that "urgent" is not the same thing as "vital," we begin to take control of our lives instead of having life control us. Too often, we respond as though everything were vital instead of just urgent.

Let me give you an example. Remember when you were in school and you started the semester with three papers to write and four textbooks to read? Were those assignments vital or urgent? They were vital to the graduation, but were they urgent? When did they become urgent? Often not until the night before they were due. What robbed you of the time when you could be taking care of the vital? All the urgent things—the social obligations, the sale downtown, the call on the phone, and so on. Many times we don't separate the vital from the urgent.

Some things really are urgent, but the vital tasks rarely need to be done immediately. The urgent ones grab for our attention, our energy, and often our commitment. We live by the belief that we should get something done now, and when all the little things are cleared out of the way, we can get to the big things. Often, however, the things that initially seemed vital are forgotten, and with a sense of loss we realize we have become slaves to the urgent, the social pressures, the demands, or the expectations that we thought that they thought we ought to do.

Our time is our life. Whatever it is we are doing with our time, we are paying for it with our life. So what are we getting for our life today?

Too often I fear we are distracted from the few things in life that are really important because of a sense of urgency—too many things in too many places for too many people with too little time and too few rewards. Yet the scripture tells us, "Be still, and know that I am God." (Psalm 46:10.) We also read of Joshua, who must have felt great pressure to bring all of the people to the Jordan and get them across the river. Remember the counsel he was given? "When ye are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan." (Joshua 3:8.) Stand still. Take time to get your head on straight. Call on all the resources available before you start rushing ahead.

Years ago in California in a little wooded area, I read a pamphlet called "The Parable of the Redwood." In it was this statement: "If you stand very still in the heart of a wood, you will hear many wonderful things—the snap of a twig, the wind in the trees, and the whine of invisible things. If you stand very still in the turmoil of life, and you wait for the voice from within, you will draw from the silence the things that you need, strength, hope, faith, courage for your task."

A recent best-selling book, Megatrends, discusses the mounting number of choices available today: more alternatives, more paths to take, more things to succeed. We talk about a knowledge explosion, an information explosion. Walk through any library and look at all the books you'll never have a chance to read in this life. Think of all the things you don't know and that you won't have a chance to be accountable for. Because we have so many choices, this is either the best of all times or the worst of all times. Having so many alternatives can be a burden—what one writer has called "the burden of over-choice"—or a blessing, depending on our ability to separate the vital from the urgent or the trivial.

Ralph Waldo Emerson said, "There comes a time in every man's education when he arrives at the conclusion that envy is ignorance and imitation, suicide. But he must take himself for better or for worse as his allotted portion. And all the good earth be full of good. No kernel of nourishing corn can come to him but by the toil bestowed by him upon that plot of ground given to him to till. The power within him is new in nature. No one knows what it is he can do, nor does he know until he has tried."

What each of us must do, then, is all that concerns us individually, not what others may say. That rule, which is as difficult to follow in actual as in intellectual life, is the sole distinction between greatness and meanness. It is even more difficult because there are always those who think they know our duty better than we know it. It is easy in the world to live after the opinions of the world, and in solitude to live after our own. But the great person is the one who in the midst of the crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the independence of solitude.

In this hurry-hurry world, we must provide time for solitude. Sometimes we call it meditation. Anne Morrow Lindbergh, in her book A Gift from the Sea, talks about the soul's quieting inside from the turmoil of the world. We must find that peace, a moment in time to pull ourselves away from the world so that we can pull ourselves together to face the world.

And so it is that we take ourselves away for just a while, for whatever reason, to focus on what we value most so that we can let go of the things that we don't value as much. It is in relation to what we really value that we form a foundation for how we live our lives—what we will and what we won't do. Planning is important in helping us to manage our time. It helps bring the future into the present so that we can begin to take control. For example, suppose we want to take a vacation next summer. We don't wait until summer comes to start planning and looking at a map. We begin now so that when the time comes and we leave on our vacation, we are in control.

Another advantage of planning is that it helps us live in a state of anticipation. Anytime we have a plan, we are in a mode of anticipation. We may get tired but we will never get bored, because planning helps us begin to be in control, to refuse to give up what we want most for what we want now. For example, right now I may want to sleep, or I may want a new car, or I may want freedom from schedules. But more than that, I want education, or I want to be with my family, or I want to serve my fellowman. I can't do it all.

So how do we make the most of our time? We do it by planning. Goal setting is a form of planning. We set a goal and then we plan how we are going to achieve it. But we also have to set priorities. We can't do everything; we have to let some things go so that we can make others a reality. And when that happens, we begin to have little signs of success. This increases our self-confidence, our self-esteem, our productivity; and as we climb up little by little, eventually we reach that valued goal.

Having goals without any values as their foundation can be likened to a willow that responds to every breeze that blows. Without goals or plans, we will never have time enough, and we will respond to every distraction that comes along—and nothing important will ever get done. But if our goals are anchored in values, we will have time enough, for we will set priorities to ensure that we reach our goals. We will be in control. That is when freedom comes. That is when the stress level begins to go down.

To illustrate, suppose you come home from a day of whatever you've been about, and your neighbor says, "I've picked and put up two bushels of apricots today and taken seven quarts over to one of my neighbors, and my house is clean, and I'm happy, and it's been a glorious day." Then you walk in your house and look out the window and see the apricots that are on the ground around your tree, and you think, "Oh, I don't even have my apricots picked!" If you don't have a plan, you'll pull the blinds and say to yourself, "I wish that neighbor would move away." The pressure is too great, and you feel threatened by what someone else is doing.

However, if you have a plan, a valued goal, you may say, "I spent this day with my widowed, elderly mother. And frankly, my family doesn't even like apricots." When we know why we are doing what we are doing, we don't need to worry about why another person is doing what she is doing. And that is a wonderful relief.

A basis for decision-making or planning has to be related to the things that we value most. Goals can change with times and seasons and circumstances. Perhaps you have been with a friend and you have thought, "Oh, I want to be as knowledgeable about literature as she is." So you resolve to take a literature class. Then you are with another friend and and you think, "I want to be as good a cook as she is"—and you decide to enroll in gourmet cooking class. Why do we do this? We do it because we are blessed with so many opportunities. But blessing or burden depends on whether or not we decide what we value most, set our goals, and then begin to make a plan.

I like the words of Joan of Arc in the play Joan of Lorraine by Maxwell Anderson. Her words serve as a reminder to us. She says, "I know this now, every man gives his life for what he believes. Every woman gives her life for what she believes. Sometimes people believe in little or nothing. Nevertheless they give their lives to that little or nothing. One life is all we have. We live it as we believe in living it, and then it's gone. But to surrender what you are and live without belief, that's more terrible than dying. More terrible than dying young."

What do we believe? What are we willing to live for? We sometimes talk about what we are willing to die for, but what are we willing to live for? If we say we really value something and we are not giving any time to it, we are in a state of tension. We are in a state of dis-ease. There is time enough when we establish our values and set our priorities. We can't have everything, but there is enough time for the things that matter most.

An important element in planning is to plan with a purpose. Instead of asking what we should do, we should ask ourselves what we want to have happen. This then becomes the basis for our plans and our decisions.

Recently someone said to my husband, who is partially retired, "You have a little time. I have a deal for you—an opportunity for you to make some really good money. The product is good, and you'll have a lot of flexibility. You can do it when you want to do it." So we sat down and talked about this great opportunity. We asked ourselves, "What would we do with the extra money? We eat all we want, we have all the clothes we need, our house is big enough, and we have enough to meet our needs." The "opportunity" sounded pretty good until we tested it against our highest values and our goals. The value of our time together was more important than the value of other things we could get with more money.

When we sit down for a family activity, typically we ask, "What shall we do?" A better question would be, "What do we want to have happen?" We shouldn't wait until we get this bill paid or that project completed before we begin to establish valued goals. There is time enough even now. If we wait until tomorrow to begin to plan, when tomorrow comes we will still be waiting for the future.

Yes, there is time enough if we set our priorities and plan with a purpose, with our values in place. May we each have time enough so that when we look back, the things that we wanted most were not sacrificed for the things of least importance.
