Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Part III

Our Eternal Families

Chapter 10

With No Vision, the Family Perishes

On occasion when I participate in youth conferences, I will sometimes ask the young people if they have discovered that their parents aren't perfect. There is always an immediate response in the affirmative. I follow with a second question: "Are you aware that they don't have any perfect children either?" That usually comes as a surprise. The fact is, none of us is perfect. We are placed on earth in families according to an eternal plan that affords the most ideal structure for our growth and development.

One faithful and somewhat idealistic mother reportedly was determined to rid her family of all distracting influences in the home, beginning with negative comments. To put this plan into effect, she announced that the next person who spoke an unkind word would have his or her mouth washed out with soap. Now with any threat, there must be follow-up. In response to the question of whether or not she followed up, she admitted, "Yes, I did, and it tasted terrible."

And so it is with each of us in our family relationships. We know where we are. We are not yet perfect. We are in the process of perfection as we prepare for eternal life. An understanding of this ultimate goal helps keep individuals and families on course, on schedule, and moving forward according to the eternal plan.

Today a battle is being waged, and it is no ordinary battle. The safety, the protection, the survival, the sanctity of the family are under attack as never before. The traditional family structure is disintegrating, and many individuals are suffering deep and serious wounds. There is an increasing number of casualties. Problems with crime, drugs, alcohol, immorality, abuse, and even suicide are growing at an alarming rate. This is no ordinary battle. The enemy is real, and the family is the target.

In the fight against the devastating influences that press upon even the most traditional and solid families, it is important to keep in mind the vision of where we ultimately want to be. An understanding of all that is past and the promises of the future helps give us the vision to make daily decisions of eternal consequence. Without discernment or foresight to see beyond the urgencies or apparent crises of the moment, one can win the battle but lose the war.

In His infinite mercy, God has revealed to us a great vision concerning the family. The knowledge that God is our Father and we are His children places the family unit in the most exalted position. Think of it: we existed with Him in a family relationship as His children! We were faithful, valiant, and obedient; and, despite the opposing forces there, we chose to keep our first estate and then to come to this mortal life knowing it would be a time of severe trials and testing.

We have been told that we will experience opposition in all things and learn to act for ourselves. (See 2 Nephi 2:16.) This mortal life provides the opportunities for us to qualify ourselves to become joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, to establish eternal family relationships through the sealing power of the priesthood, and to have eternal increase in the celestial kingdom.

With the vision of our next home, we can gain a better understanding of our existence here and the importance of our family relationships. The more aware we are that the spirit world is an extension of our mortal existence, the better prepared we are to set aside the treasures of this world and to establish priorities in relation to the next.

As we learn to live in such a way that the vision of eternity presses upon us, we will make decisions that may not be popular in society but will be in harmony with the Lord's plan. President Brigham Young once said that if he could do but one thing to bless the Saints, he believed it would be to give them "eyes with which to see things as they are." (Journal of Discourses 3:221.) We seek to know the truth, to gain "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.)

President Kimball explained that "one of the ordinances performed in the temple is that of the endowment, which comprises a course of instruction relating to the eternal journey of a man and woman from the pre-earthly existence through the earthly experience and on to the exaltation each may attain." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Bookcraft, 1982], p. 535.)

An understanding of this plan and faith in God will provide the strength for us to endure the most severe trials and struggles and to sacrifice everything necessary to reach the goal of eternal family relationships. It has been so in the past and continues to be so today.

Some time ago my husband and I visited the Mormon Cemetery at Winter Quarters, a monument to family members, young and old, who were buried in graves along the trail as their families continued westward toward the Rocky Mountains. Of those people, who had vision and faith in God, we read: "There are times and places in the life of every individual, every people, and every nation when great spiritual heights are reached, . . . when courage becomes a living thing, . . . when faith in God stands as the granite mountain wall, firm and immovable. . . . Winter Quarters . . . was such a time and place for the Mormon people." (Heber J. Grant, remarks at the dedication of the Winter Quarters Monument, 1936.)

A person who has no vision may draw from this pioneer experience what appears to be an obvious conclusion: families perished. But in an eternal perspective, they did not. It was their willingness to sacrifice everything—even life, if necessary—that would ensure the salvation of these families eternally.

Gordon B. Hinckley, in a talk to students at Brigham Young University in March 1972, said, "The family is the center of all things. We had the family before we had the gospel. The purpose of the gospel is to eternalize the family unit, to make it operative in the eternities to come as well as in this life, for it is in the home that most of the problems of this world will be settled, not in the federal government, the U.N., or any other organization."

The patriarchal order, designed for the government in the kingdom of God, is simple and perfect. It places parents with family members in a position of accountability for their own direct family kingdom. It requires willing compliance to the laws of God. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "God has in reserve a time . . . when He will bring all His subjects, who have obeyed His voice and kept His commandments, into His celestial rest. This rest is of such perfection and glory, that man has need of a preparation before he can, according to the laws of the kingdom, enter it and enjoy its blessings. This being the fact, God has given certain laws to the human family, which, if observed, are sufficient to prepare them to inherit this rest. This, then, we conclude, was the purpose of God in giving His laws to us." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 54.)

Under the patriarchal order, there are boundaries, not barriers. There is structure, but each member of the family must be free to act on his or her own in accordance with correct principles, strongly influenced by family values, and with the well-being of others in mind. When parents and children are taught this divine concept of the eternal family unit and understand and accept it, they have a basis for all of their decisions. They simply ask, "Will this action move us closer toward our goal or delay our progress individually and as a family?"

Even when we possess clearly defined goals and an understanding of the law, we will be challenged as we try to make the plan work in the daily routine of life. One well-meaning parent determined to establish some family rules or laws. The scenario went like this: "Rule 1. Every child in this household must be in bed and asleep by ten o'clock. But if they are not asleep, they must be at least in bed by ten o'clock. But if they are not in bed, they must be ready for bed or at least in the house thinking about getting ready for bed. OK, they must at least be in the house so I can go to bed by ten o'clock."

The majority of families in the United States and in many other countries no longer live in rural settings as in the past. In an urban society, the efforts of children are generally not essential to the welfare of the family; they do not work side by side with parents to provide the basic needs for survival. No longer are family values discussed regularly in prolonged conversations at mealtime and during the household chores. No longer are members of the extended family—aunts, uncles, and cousins—living in close proximity and available to reinforce, reward, and rejoice together in daily family happenings.

Today many families are splintered by conflicting work schedules. Family mealtime is irregular, if at all, and microwave ovens and fast foods have robbed us of mealtime rituals. A study of first graders' reading readiness found that "high scorers had a radically different atmosphere around the meal table," as compared to the low scorers. The former group enjoyed family meals that were "a focus for total family interaction" and were both positive and permissive in emotional tone. ("The Family in America," The Rockford Institute Center, p. 3.)

Consider the effects of current lifestyles and of increasing affluence on a growing sense of isolation. In a society in which family members often have separate bedrooms, individual television sets, and video players and earphones, individuals tend to become more independent, which can contribute to feelings of loneliness, rejection, and despair. Incidences of abandonment, abuse, neglect, and emotional aloofness also occur, and use of drugs and alcohol and reports of suicide increase. In the absence of communication and time spent together, families often experience a diminishing of shared values.

The factors that dim the vision of the sacredness of the family unit are varied and numerous. In the early 1970s, media ranked eighth as an influence in the lives of teenagers. By 1988 it ranked second—and was battling with parents for first. Much of what we see in the media today tends to distort and even destroy the values associated with the ideal family. In a recent survey of television programs on a Salt Lake City channel during a twenty-four-hour period, researchers counted eighty-six incidents of immoral conduct, eighty-eight portrayals of violence, and forty-five uses of vulgar language. And in an article entitled "Television as a Value Setter," we read: "Schools don't dare impose values. Parents are busy and confused themselves. And organized religion plays a smaller part in many people's lives. There has been an erosion among the traditional suppliers of values." (TV Guide, July 23, 1988, p. 5.) According to a study by the National Institutes of Mental Health, adults and children alike use TV to learn how to handle their own family roles.

The media and retail stores present choices designed to create in consumers insatiable desires that can never be satisfied, resulting in a hungering that is out of control. A decade ago, the average supermarket carried 9,000 items; today it carries 24,000 or more items. Marketing campaigns feed people's appetites, particularly those of youth, as though identity, acceptance by peers, and personal worth can be found in brand names. These economic and social pressures impose devastating problems for families.

The types of entertainment people engage in today are becoming increasingly passive, resulting in more isolation and less socializing of family members. Video parties, loud music, and costly public entertainment present few opportunities for interpersonal communication.

While societal forces are working to create a great gulf between the vision of the family and the realities of the environment in which we live, the family does continue to be recognized as a critical factor in our society. One magazine writer observes: "Throughout history nations have been able to survive a multiplicity of disasters, invasion, famines, earthquakes, epidemics, depressions, but they have never been able to survive the disintegration of the family. The family is the seedbed of economic skills, money habits, attitudes toward work, and the arts of financial independence. The family is a stronger agency of educational success than school. The family is a stronger teacher of the religious imagination than the church. . . . What strengthens the family strengthens society. . . . The role of a father, a mother, and of children . . . is the absolutely critical center of social force. . . . If things go well with the family, life is worth living; when the family falters, life falls apart." (Michael Novak, "The Family Out of Favor," Harper's, April 1976, pp. 42-43.)

Truly, where there is no vision, the family perishes. But when the promises of eternity press upon us daily and we train our appetites to hunger after the things of the spirit, we can live in the world without being a part of it. We know where we are and what our families' challenges are. We have a vision of where we want to be and what the rewards are. Our responsibility is to make decisions that will move us from where we are toward our ultimate goal of exaltation.

As the world ripens in iniquity and the family continues to be under increasing attack, the family unit need not perish. Individuals within each family can survive. Families can be together forever. A refuge can be created and preserved. Our homes can be our safe places. But we must be constantly alert to guard against the termites of contention that are infesting our safe places, going about their destructive work behind the scenes with relentless tenacity. The guidelines are clear. The path is straight. The promises are profound. But we must discipline ourselves, heed the counsel of our prophets, and abide the commandments of God.

President Ezra Taft Benson gives us this vision of the eternal nature of the family: "Adam and Eve provide us with an ideal example of a covenant marriage relationship. They labored together; they had children together; they prayed together; and they taught their children the gospel—together. This is the pattern God would have all righteous men and women imitate." ("To the Elect Women of the Kingdom of God," Woman [Deseret Book, 1979], p. 70.)

President Marion G. Romney said, "I feel certain that, if in our homes, parents will read from the Book of Mormon prayerfully and regularly, both by themselves and with their children, the spirit of that great book will come to permeate our homes and all who dwell therein. The spirit of reverence will increase. Mutual respect and consideration for each other will grow. The spirit of contention will depart. Parents will counsel their children in greater love and wisdom. Children will be more responsive and submissive to the counsel of their parents. Righteousness will increase. Faith, hope, and charity, the full love of Christ, will abound in our homes and lives, bringing in their wake peace, joy, and happiness." (Ensign, May 1980, p. 67.)

The family council can provide the basis for establishing and maintaining close family relationships and open communication. According to President Benson, family councils imitate a heavenly plan. (See Ensign, May 1979, p. 88.) They can help family members work, play, and grow together, become more sensitive to the needs of others, and set goals and evaluate progress. The 1989 Relief Society manual (p. 170) stated, "Family councils also establish habits of communication and mutual respect on which both children and parents can rely when serious and difficult problems arise within the family or in the lives of individual family members."

A Home Front radio message sponsored by the Church notes that "the average family talks together less than five minutes a day." Communication is essential to the survival of the family, but it must be done in an attitude of accepting, appreciating, and valuing changing behavior. Human beings are dynamic, ever changing, and in the process of becoming. Thus, the challenge of effective communication is that it is never fixed. Accepting constant change increases an attitude of expectation, tolerance, and excitement about the process. There is no simple, easy way to communicate. Part of the joy of living comes from working through the process. And when families spend time together in an environment that invites trust, their communication becomes more effective, and the effects extend far beyond the family circle.

In a recent attitude survey, teenagers were asked if they could change one thing in their lives, what would it be? The highest desire for most of the respondents was to be able to change their family relationships. They wanted to be able to talk to their parents as they talk to their friends about important matters. Yes, teenagers often behave in unexpected and unpredictable ways that may frustrate and alarm their parents. But too often children are rejected just when they need the greatest support.

Conflict results when parents think of children as they were and as they should be, not as they are and as they are becoming. It is difficult for many parents to allow their children to leave childhood behind and to become more independent, thinking adults. But the process of "becoming" is vital and exciting. When changing, growing teens are accepted, they can contribute immeasurably to the family unit. Perhaps the role of the parent should be one of more teaching and less preaching, more listening and less lecturing, more discussion and fewer demands, more praise and less punishment.

Elder L. Lionel Kendrick of the First Quorum of the Seventy has reminded us: "Our communications are at the core of our relationships with others. If we are to return home safely to Heavenly Father, we must develop righteous relationships with His children here in mortality. . . . Christlike communications are expressed in tones of love rather than loudness. They are intended to be helpful rather than hurtful. They tend to bind us together rather than to drive us apart. They tend to build rather than to belittle. Christlike communications are expressions of affection and not anger, truth and not fabrication, compassion and not contention, respect and not ridicule, counsel and not criticism, correction and not condemnation. They are spoken with clarity and not with confusion. They may be tender or they may be tough, but they must always be tempered. . . . Christlike communications will help us to develop righteous relationships and ultimately to return to our heavenly home safely." (Ensign, November 1988, pp. 23-24.)

The preservation of the family unit requires time. Each day we must decide on our priorities for that day and how much time we will spend in working on those priorities. The report on "The Family in America" observed: "Middle class children who are placed first in their parent's allocation of time and attention show superior academic skills when compared to children who receive less attention. Quantity of time, not quality, appears to be the central variable. Relative to verbal achievement, for example, it is not selective training and skills but a close time-intensive, on-going relationship between the mother and the child that is critical." For children, spending time together with parents and sharing feelings are of greater worth in building confidence and faith than are material things.

The eternal welfare of the family begins with the marriage covenant between a man and a woman. This covenant creates a family. The children become an extension of the family unit. Concerning decisions of marriage and related responsibilities, President Benson has said, "Some of our sisters indicate that they do not want to consider marriage until after they have completed their degrees or pursued a career. This is not right. Certainly we want our single sisters to maximize their individual potential, to be well educated, and to do well at their present employment. You have much to contribute to society, to your community, and to your neighborhood. But we earnestly pray that our single sisters will desire honorable marriage in the temple to a worthy man and rear a righteous family, even though this may mean the sacrificing of degrees and careers. Our priorities are right when we realize there is no higher calling than to be an honorable wife and mother." (Ensign, November 1988, p. 97.)

This may not be the blessing for all women at this time. Some of us live with unfulfilled expectations concerning our families in this life. But it is an unwavering conviction of the eternal nature of the gospel plan that keeps the vision of family ever burning brightly.

Some years ago a young Lamanite woman attended a university where I taught. Recently she sent me a letter in which she shared how her vision has guided her decisions and her life: "I was a new member in a small Lamanite branch with about twenty friendly people. Seven were from my family. That year [the year of her baptism] was a turning point in my life. Having been baptized and with a burning testimony, I knew answers would follow my questions. My vision of life and its purpose became clearer each day. Even as a student in junior high, I knew I wanted to graduate from seminary, high school, and college, be married in the temple, and have a family. I did not know exactly what the future held, but above all I absolutely knew that the two most important goals were temple marriage and family. I never lost sight of this vision despite the struggles, challenges, and options along the way. . . . When making decisions, especially major ones, I'd pray and then ask myself, 'What effect will this have on a temple marriage, family, and eternal happiness?' This was my model question in youth and is even today as an adult. By asking myself this question when making decisions, I do not lose sight of the vision I have of Heavenly Father's plan for me."

She achieved her goals of graduation from high school and from college and went on to earn a master's degree. She received many honors, including a Presidential appointment, worked on several national boards, and obtained a position with one of the world's largest computer companies. Shortly after that, she was sealed in the Mesa Temple. She writes: "I have recently made another important decision. I have decided to leave the company so that I can concentrate on motherhood. Some of my friends are surprised; others pleased; while others respond with, 'You are what? Rarely does anyone leave the company.' The important thing is I feel good about my decision. Yes, I will leave a fine salary, professional development, the excitement of travel and nice friends in the company, but all of that is so minor when I ponder the meaning of eternal happiness and to seek first the kingdom of God.

"Gone are the IBM titles, recruiter specialist, education specialist, and community relations specialist. In the near future I am planning on a major promotion, 'mom specialist.' As I think of that new title, my face beams with a big smile and I immediately experience a feeling of inner warmth and peace. I feel so good about my latest decision to put my career on hold. For me, making important decisions is accompanied by prayer, a momentary reflection of eternal purposes, and pondering of scriptures. Having an eternal vision is critical to making good decisions. I have tried to make these decisions with a vision of Heavenly Father's plan for me. These very decisions have made all the difference in my life."

Where there is no vision, the family perishes. But if the vision is clear, even in the most difficult times, and we are on course, we can join with our brothers and sisters who have gone before us singing, "All is well; all is well." Our Eternal Father will renew our vision daily as we seek Him in prayer. He reaches His arms to us to assist us in our crossings over the chasms of life. He will be there to welcome us with our families.
