Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 11

Relationships: A Sacred Triangle

In the musical Fiddler on the Roof, Tevye one day anxiously presses his wife, Golda, for something he yearns to know. "Golda," he says, "do you love me?" Somewhat surprised, she responds, "Do I what?" Tevye repeats his question: "Do you love me?"

She answers, "You're a fool."

"I know, but do you love me?"

"I'm your wife."

Again he presses. "I know, but do you love me?"

Golda then lists all the things she does for him, as though that were statement enough. Yet Tevye, needing to secure the relationship, puts the words in her mouth: "Then you love me."

Almost as though by discovery, she responds, "I suppose I do."

Tevye finally risks expressing his own feelings and says, "And I suppose I love you too."

Then together they sing, "It doesn't change a thing, but even so, after twenty-five years, it's nice to know."

In a marriage relationship, it is so nice to know.

Another relationship in which feelings of love were expressed is that of Thomas Moore, an Irish poet, and his wife. When he returned from a business trip, he found that his beautiful wife had locked herself in her upstairs bedroom and asked to see no one. She had contracted smallpox, and her complexion was now marked and scarred. After looking at herself in the mirror, she demanded that the shutters be drawn and that she never see her husband again.

Thomas Moore did not care about the smallpox and went to her room. She asked him to leave. He went off by himself, and that night, though he had never written a song before, he not only wrote the words of a song, but also composed the music. Early the next morning he returned to his wife's darkened room. "Are you awake?" he asked. "Yes," she said, "but you must not see me." "I'll sing to you then," he said. He sang to his wife his song, which still lives today.

Believe me, if all those endearing young charms Which I gaze on so fondly today, Were to change by tomorrow and fleet in my arms, Like fairy gifts fading away, Thou would'st still be adored as this moment thou art, Let thy loveliness fade as it will, And around the dear ruin each wish of my heart Would entwine itself verdantly still.

The song ended. Then Thomas's wife crossed the darkened room to the window, slowly opened the shutters, and let in the morning light.

Unconditional love that is expressed can bring light where there is darkness, and replace sorrow with hope and even joy. All relationships in marriage are to be tried and tested as two lives become blended into one, as they become "one flesh." (See Matthew 19:5.) A marriage relationship that is growing is also changing. When we are changing, we have to continually adjust to change and work out new challenges.

Love is learned, and until it is learned and felt and expressed unconditionally, we can have times of loneliness. As Albert Schweitzer says, "We are all so much together and yet we are all dying of loneliness." The marriage relationship can remove feelings of loneliness, but it requires time and concern for each other, a sharing of feelings.

We are all familiar with the phrase "If you love 'em, tell 'em." "I love you" are three small words, and on occasion they may be thoughtlessly repeated from habit. But when they become linked to precious time spent together, when a couple see into each other's hearts and listen and care and share, the three words blossom into full-length messages. Even without hearing the words, we listen with the heart instead of the ears: I know what you are thinking, and I love you. I know what you are feeling, and I love you. I know what you are doing, and I love you. I know what you are not doing, and I still love you. I know you, and I love you.

Early in a marriage, a couple run the risk of feeling that if one of them has a different opinion from the other, one is right and the other is wrong. While it is important that each person be at one with the other, feelings of confidence and self-worth can be undermined if one partner always has to let go of his or her ideas as wrong. There must be unity without sacrificing identity.

In time a couple learn that they have choices about how each will respond in those inevitable times of differences. One of the important discoveries is to learn that one of them doesn't have to be right all the time. This frees that individual to be right some of the time. I can be right, and you can be right. We can both can be right. There can be two rights.

It is easy in a relationship, especially in times of stress, to focus on things that aren't right instead of on all those things that are right. We can lose perspective and let little things irritate our relationship and even destroy the precious things.

After we walk the road together for a distance, the little things that may have been annoying become the sweet and precious things that we cling to with inexpressible fondness. We learn to look at both sides of the coin and give thanks for one and laugh at the other. She says, "The qualities I love in him are his commitment, his firm determination, his unwavering faith, and his strong will for righteousness. I love him most for his stalwart strength in times of storm. Yet, why do I get so annoyed with what seems to be a stubborn streak on occasion?" And he says, "I love her for her sensitivity, her beauty of thought, her tenderness, her responding to the subtle beauties that others might overlook. I love her for her compassion and tenderness and the hurt she feels at others' discomfort. Yet why am I annoyed at what seems to be an oversensitivity when I am brisk or impatient?"

When we talk disagreements out together, bonding takes place. A relationship is tried and tested in times of disappointment, discouragement, and maybe even despair. But when we link arms and tread the way to God, hand in hand, the valleys that we traverse together can bring us to the mountain peaks. Marriage relationships are tempered and welded in times of adversity. Volumes have been written on the process of building strong relationships, but experience tells us that success depends not so much on a formula that we follow as on a commitment to each other that we feel. With that commitment, we work through the barriers that could be destructive and use them as bonds to strengthen, stabilize, and weld heart to heart, and soul to soul. Then privately we go about our secret ways to bring joy to each other.

As we spend time with each other, we will begin to open up and share what is deep within our hearts so that we really get to know each other and stay close. Our relationship will determine the safety of our home and determine whether our home will become a refuge from the world or a battleground.

When we leave the security of our home, we may find ourselves battling the complex pressures of society, and on occasion we may return with battle fatigue and wounds. Our home can be a first-aid station where wounds of all kinds are healed. Expressions of love, like manna from heaven, need to be gathered every day. Love isn't something we store up. We draw it fresh from God each day. The love that we express can feed the soul of both the one who gives and the one who receives. It can become a message of power to transform lives because in expressing true love, we must dip into the reservoir of divine love, the love of Christ. We share in part the pure love of Christ, the fountain of all love.

In the relationship between husband and wife, as perhaps in no other relationship, we find this statement applicable: "Thee lift me, and I will lift thee, and we will ascend together." What does that mean?

In our marriage, my husband and I discovered early that we had strong differences of opinion on some things. Our backgrounds were different, our perspectives were different, and in some cases our interests were different. But our values and eternal goals were the same. It is in our sameness that we continue to build our relationship, not in our differences, although our differences have added to the breadth and depth and richness of our relationship. This insight often comes after years of molding, testing, giving, and sharing.

May we invite you into our hearts and share with you one of our special husband-and-wife relationships.

It was Christmas Eve. The magic of Christmas seemed more real that year, not so much because of lights and tinsel, but because we had a feeling of excitement from the inside out. Family members had gathered at our house for our traditional dinner. Then Grandpa gathered us in the living room, opened the Bible, and read once again the Christmas story from Luke.

After the stockings were finally hung and treats left for Santa, the children reluctantly, yet eagerly, went to bed. They tried hard to get to sleep while listening intensely for any sounds from the expected night visitor.

"Now, if Heber would just go to bed, I could finish my gift for him," I said to myself. I had been working on this gift for my husband for about three months, and I needed about three more hours to complete it. But despite my encouragement for him to leave the room, he kept lingering. It was evident he would wait for me. I decided to go to bed and wait until he dropped off to sleep; then I'd slip out and finish his present.

With the lights out and the house quiet, I lay in bed looking into the dark, too excited to sleep. I listened for his heavy breathing, which would let me know it was safe to slip away. To my amazement, after a little while he whispered, "Ardie." I didn't respond. A conversation now would only delay the time when I could finish my project. To my great surprise, when I didn't answer he slipped out of bed as cautiously as I had planned to.

"What is he up to?" I wondered. I couldn't get up then. I waited and waited, but he didn't return. What should I do? Maybe if I went to sleep, I could awaken at about three o'clock and finish my project before everyone got up at about six, the time Grandpa Ted had agreed that we should all gather around the tree.

I was aroused from sleep when Heber got into bed ever so quietly. Only a few minutes later, his heavy breathing assured me he was sound asleep. It was three o'clock.

Months earlier, we had talked about Christmas and made the traditional gift list that ranged from the ridiculous to the sublime. At the top of my list was a wish that we could have more time together so he could teach me his great understanding of the gospel. I was driving two hours each day to BYU, and his schedule was very busy. Our time together was precious.

Heber's list of wants was short, as usual, but he did express a concern for the responsibility he had as a stake president to lead the way for his stake members, and it bothered him that his family history was not compiled. His family group sheets were incomplete.

My gift to him was finally wrapped. I could hardly believe I had done it, but there it was—the evidence of many hours of work. I hurried back and slipped into bed just in time to hear children's voices from the other room. "Grandpa says it's time to get up. Hurry! We can't wait!" they said. Neither could I.

In the living room Heber handed me a package. I opened it and found a box of cassette tapes. On top of the box was a message: "My dear Ardie, While you are traveling each day, I will be with you. As you know, the Doctrine and Covenants has been of special interest to me over the years. I have enjoyed reading and recording for you the entire book. Reading it with the purpose of sharing it with you, I have endeavored to express my interpretation and feelings so that you might feel what I feel about this sacred book. I finished it only a few hours ago. May these tapes add to your wisdom and help unfold the mysteries of God and prepare us for our eternal life together."

Then I handed Heber my gift. He tore off the wrapping, and inside was a book of remembrance—many pages of pictures and stories never before recorded, a result of secret trips to visit and interview relatives and the assembling of records and histories.

On the first page of the gift was a message: "Dear Heber, As I have copied, reviewed, and prepared these sheets and interviewed family members, your ancestors have become very real to me, and I have an increased appreciation and understanding of the greatness and nobility in the man I married. Although I never met your father, and met your mother only once, when I meet them I know I'll love them and know them better because of this gift I have prepared for you, which really has been a gift for me."

I don't remember any of the other gifts we received that year, but Heber and I will never forget the spirit of that glorious Christmas celebration.

Looking back now to that time so many years ago when we knelt at a sacred altar in the temple and clasped our hands in an eternal triangle, we realize that we have had more than a companionship. We are not two but three—thee and me and God for eternity, a most sacred triangle, a relationship of which we are each a part.
