Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 13

All Kinds of Mothers

As my mother and I sat quietly listening to the many praises expressed in beautiful music and tender words, I glanced at her graying hair and her thin hands folded together in her lap, a white handkerchief bordered with lace tucked between her fingers.

It was Mother's Day, and the program, while it had followed the traditional pattern, seemed especially inspiring this year. The personal examples given as testimonies of true motherhood were expressed by persons of all ages. We were taught by the Spirit as each speaker expressed tender feelings of the heart. I felt a reverence for life itself, and an increased awareness of my debt of gratitude to the mother sitting beside me—she who, over the years, had experienced many challenges, blessings, and rewards, and some heartaches, each leaving in its wake evidence of the aging process so much a part of this mortal life. Just a few short years ago Mother was a child herself, and then a wife and mother, and now a grandmother. And the wheel turns ever so quickly.

With trembling hands she now graciously accepted a small pot of pink begonias, as did each mother up and down the rows. As she sat holding this small token of appreciation, I heard again in my mind the comment she had made when we entered the chapel. Half to herself, yet audible to me, she had said, "You know, I don't like Mother's Day. It always reminds me of the things I could have done and didn't." Then she added, with a serious note, "I hear about the ideal mother and wonder how my children have done so well."

While the little plants were presented to each mother, I wondered about the praises so generously given. Were they as readily accepted? Or were some held in reserve in the minds of many mothers for those who they thought were more deserving?

The question of eligibility for such honors might be raised as a mother thinks back on those times of stress when her own children emphatically declare that someone else's mother is more understanding, more trusting, and certainly more patient, even though she knows that those very times might be evidences of greater love that qualify her for the honor. And so it is that mothers of all ages may see themselves falling short of that ideal which they would hope might one day be within their reach, little realizing that at that very moment they stand on the threshold of greatness. The self-recorded ledger, which might otherwise reveal an excess of assets, may appear lacking because the recording is incomplete. It is in the heart and soul of the child, and not the ledger kept by the mother, that the record of her labors is more accurately recorded, just as the epistles of Christ were "written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart." (2 Corinthians 3:3.)

Years ago the president of a large company gave the following account: "I remember, when I was very young, a mother with three children who had very little in the way of worldly goods; on birthdays and other special days the most she could do was to give her children a small toy made with her own hands. However, she always did something else which in my mind was worth more than the most expensive toy ever made. On a child's birthday she would call him into the bedroom, sit him down in a chair, and then kneel down to pray. In her prayer, she would thank her God for blessing her with this child, and she would enumerate the pleasures that the child had given her, and pray for his continued health and happiness. . . . I can only express my personal opinion, but I do believe that there are many children today who have very expensive toys, but who would trade them all for such an experience." (Fedco Reporter, June 1957, p. 25.)

I wonder if the magnitude of that experience went unrecorded except in the life of the child.

And what of the mother whose little second grader, in the midst of snickering from his classmates, stood tall and responded to the teacher's inquiry as to who might like to be a neighbor to cross old Mr. Black in the story they had just heard. The boy's mother was unaware of her teaching recorded in the heart of her child, a teaching that rippled out to everyone in the class, as her son looked first at the teacher, then at the children, and said with conviction, "I wish Mr. Black was my neighbor, because if he was my neighbor, my mom would bake a pie for me to take to him. Then he wouldn't be that way anymore." Another child responded, "I wish I'd said that." And a mother's labors were recorded in the "fleshy tables of the heart" of her child and others.

Another mother, maybe at the expense of clean windows and polished floors at home, stood in the hallway at school waiting to retrieve the frozen salmon she had taken from the freezer that afternoon and brought to school so her son Ernie could give a report on fish. She could not possibly have made an accurate recording of her labors that day because she did not witness the miracle she had wrought while standing in the hall waiting.

Ernie had been a child with little confidence, bashful and insecure among his classmates, but that day, as he stood in front of his class, all eyes were on him, for he held in both arms against his chest a thirty-six-inch salmon. His classmates were enthralled when he told them how he and his dad had caught this great fish in the Columbia River. From that day on, it was different for Ernie. The students thought that if he could fish, he could do anything else. Instead of being last, he was now chosen first. Instead of sitting alone, he was the center of attention and everyone wanted to sit by him. He was still Ernie, but in his own quiet way he began to unfold like a butterfly emerging from a cocoon.

Something of a miracle had taken place. This mother had been about her labors, and yet when she returned to her less than orderly home that day, she might have wondered if she had accomplished anything, since the evidence of what had not been done was so apparent.

My sister Shirley, with her family of young children, described the routine schedule of her day as one crisis after another in constant regularity. One problem in this family was the habit of leaving bicycles in the driveway. According to a decision made in family council, those who left bicycles in the driveway were subject to punishment; they were to be grounded for a week.

Glancing out the kitchen window one day, Shirley saw the familiar sight—two bicycles in the driveway. It was this teaching moment that loomed more important than any other, if her children were to learn the language of the Lord through the scriptures and find the solutions to childhood problems in gospel principles.

Calling her son Lincoln to her side, she explained, "Lincoln, Jennifer has left her bike in the driveway. What do you think we should do? Should we ground her or give her another chance?" Without remembering his own negligence, he spoke in defense of his younger sister. "Oh, Mom, give her another chance. She just forgot. Give her one more chance and I'll help her remember."

Dismissing Lincoln, she then called Jennifer to her side. "Jennifer," she said, "Lincoln has left his bicycle in the driveway. What do you think we should do? Should we ground him or give him another chance?" Jenny, free-spirited and always quick to respond, did not hesitate. "Ground him," she said. "That was the decision. Ground him."

A different answer might have required less time, but the time for this lesson was now. Calling both children to her side, Shirley said, "Lincoln, if you will take your bicycle out of the driveway immediately and put it away, we will give you another chance." Lincoln looked somewhat surprised and relieved, since he had been unaware of his own offense. Jennifer, then remembering and looking a little anxious, awaited her own instruction. Placing one arm around her little girl, her mother said, "Jennifer, my dear, we will need to ground you for a week, according to the family decision." To this seemingly unfair treatment Jennifer immediately resisted. And then from the scriptures lying open on the kitchen table, frayed and worn, their mother read to them from Matthew 7:2: "For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again." Time was allowed for questions and for answers to whys, until even Jenny felt secure about the great confidence her mother expressed in her as she spoke of her unusual gifts and talents and her radiant personality that needed a little tempering. And so by the end of the day this young mother was, as usual, probably behind in many things, but way ahead in others.

With so many illustrations for comparison, how easy it would be for a mother to suffer a sense of inadequacy while she reflects on all the things she didn't do—without remembering or in some instances even being aware of all she did do.

I don't ever remember my mother taking hot cookies out of the oven when I came home from school. But I do remember working alongside her, stocking the shelves of our country store, and how she treated every customer with the same respect—the immigrants, the wealthy grain growers, the Indians, the neighbors, the friends, and the children. "Everyone," she said, "deserves to be treated with dignity," and she showed me how.

I don't remember that she taught me to sew, but I remember something of compassion and charity as I would see her put into a box of groceries for a needy family items that she never wrote on the bill. I don't remember her sitting with me while I practiced the piano, but I do recall many a child coming to our store with a penny to make a difficult selection from all the different candies available, and Mom waiting patiently while the decision was made and then often changed even after the candy had been dropped into the sack and the top of the bag twisted.

Now, years later, sitting by her side with a host of precious memories flooding my mind, I wondered if my mother suffered a little as she resisted the praises intended for her (though none seemed to fit our situation exactly) because she had tutored her young using a somewhat different approach.

To suppose that nurturing, tutoring, and mothering should be the same for all children is folly. A fable tells of the animals who organized a school at which, to make it easier to administer the curriculum and evaluate progress, every animal was to take the same subjects. According to the fable, "the rabbit started at the top of the class in running but had a nervous breakdown because of makeup work in swimming. The eagle was a problem child and was disciplined severely. In the climbing class, he beat others to the top of the tree, but he insisted on using his own way to get there. The prairie dog stayed out of school because the administration would not add digging and burrowing to the curriculum." The very skills and gifts that made each one great individually were being overlooked through a curriculum designed for blanket applications to everyone.

It is with spiritual insight and consideration of the eternal plan that the praises for motherhood take wing and fall on those women otherwise not considered for such an honor. Is a mother born only with the birth of her child? Is motherhood reserved only for those who give birth? Was not the sacred mission of motherhood foreordained by God for all women before the world was?

This lesson came to our family on Tuesday, December 19, 1978, when the telephone rang at 2:15 in the afternoon in my sister's home. A voice spoke these brief but penetrating words to my brother-in-law: "We have a baby for you, just three days old. You and your wife may pick him up at four o'clock." A flood of telephone calls followed. Excitement, anxiety, adjustment of schedules and plans, neighbors and friends and relatives running in with emergency supplies of clothing and bedding and bottles—and the whole neighborhood seemed to stand at attention in honor of this glorious event.

It was not until eleven o'clock that night that my husband and I were able to pay the newborn an official visit. All was quiet. The lights of the neighboring homes were now darkened, and only a dim light shone through the glass panel by the door as we tapped lightly and tiptoed in. There, in the love seat, with the flickering light from the fire and the soft lights from the Christmas tree casting a glow over this blessed occurrence, sat the little family: the father on one side and the mother on the other, with their arms entwined across the back of the couch, and tucked securely between them was little Shelly, now nine years of age, an only child until today. Nestled in a soft flannel blanket in her arms was her little baby brother, his head resting on her shoulder, his dark hair contrasting with her long golden curls.

Without words to distract from the sacredness of this moment, Shelly, looking a bit pale from the late hour and the emotional excitement, wiggled forward to the edge of the couch and stood up. Tenderly cradling the wee baby in her arms, she gently laid him in my arms, never taking her eyes from him until she looked up to exclaim, "I'm a real sister now!"

In that moment I witnessed not only a sister, but a real mother with her mission beginning to unfold—the gentleness, the tenderness, the caring and protection all displayed in such perfection. The baby made a sound and the child responded as a weld of spiritual oneness was felt—spirit responding to spirit. Was not the reality of motherhood inherent in the child? And what of Shelly's mother—although she did not give birth to this baby, was she not giving life and light, and demonstrating motherhood in a most divine way?

I have come to know that we can all rejoice in the sacred calling of motherhood. To give birth is only one part of this sacred mission, the miracle of life. But to help another gain eternal life is a privilege that is neither denied to nor delayed for any worthy woman. And to be a mother in Israel may be within reach of every righteous woman even now.

Motherhood is a holy calling, a sacred mission for carrying out the Lord's plan, that of nurturing the body, mind, and spirit of each of those who kept their first estate and came to earth to be proven in their second estate, "to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.) The fate of each spirit in the eternities to come depends so much on the training it receives by those who honor motherhood and that sacred trust.

Maybe it is an awareness of the magnitude of this divine stewardship and its eternal consequence that causes mothers, including my own, to consider with soberness the acceptability of their performance. And yet, we do not have to be perfect in this life to receive eternal rewards. These rewards and honors so much deserved are not reserved. They are to be conferred now on your mother and mine, and on all who are striving to bring eternal life after birth to any one of these little ones.

While the ledger may appear wanting in the eyes of some mothers, our Father in heaven hears the prayers of their children, His children, who speak in behalf of their mothers and reveal much more than the record might show. A few years ago, at age six, my niece Shelly gave a remarkable accounting of her mother's stewardship when she prayed, "Heavenly Father, I'm thankful I have a Mom to make a red skirt with pockets and a Dad to read the Book of Mormon when Mom can't. I'm thankful that you and Jesus are up there and that we have temples to get married in and for Nephi that wrote the Book of Mormon."

And even the record kept by a child bears witness of labors not recorded by the mother, yet with eternal consequences. From two journal entries of my friend Becky Smith, just eleven years old, we read:

"July 15, 1978: Mark and Kevin were riding bikes when they saw two swallows swoop down so they stopped. It was a robin (less than a month old). The two parents had been killed by a cat so they buried the parents and brought the baby to me! So I am now the mother to a baby robin. We don't know if it will live since it doesn't have its true parents but I hope so!!! We got it on the 15th."

"July 16, 1978: My poor little robin. It's so sick. We gave it a blessing and I'm staying home from church. I was holding it in its little blanket when it looked up at me as if to say, 'Thank you for trying to help me,' and closed its dear little eyes for good. I buried it in a gold box under my rose bush. I'm very sad but where it is I know it is safe and I hope to see it in heaven. I know it is happy and that God will take care of it."

And then a final entry for that day: "My Mom and I went to the mountains to get some wild flowers. It was fun. She is a great great comforter."

Because of her mother's part in that happening, recorded in the heart of the child is increased reverence for life, for birds, flowers, and mountains, and for all of God's creations. Her mom, her "great great comforter," reached out to the tender feelings of her child.

And that reaching out by mothers continues day after day as one month follows another while the years slip by. Her caring is continuous and even increases at those times when the opposing forces are most threatening.

Because of what is recorded in the hearts of the children by those who carry out their foreordained sacred mission of motherhood, I believe words similar to these will one day be heard: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For you nurtured my spirits and helped them to keep their second estate, so that they might have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever."

And many righteous women will probably answer, "But when did I help prepare them? What did I do?"

And the response will be heard: "You baked a pie for your little boy to take to Mr. Black. You took a salmon to school. You took care of the bicycle in the driveway my way, and taught your little ones charity and patience. You went to the mountains and picked wild flowers. You knelt with your child in prayer. You stayed steady in times of trouble and storm. You made red pockets for your little girl's dress.

"And inasmuch as you have done it unto one of the least of these my children, you have done it unto me."
