Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Part IV

We Learn as We Live

Chapter 14

The Joys of Teaching

It was a matter for immediate attention, some discussion, and a little humor when the editor picked up what appeared to be a slight error while proofreading a catalog listing. The new manual (which was to become a valuable resource for teachers throughout the Church) was listed in the catalog as "Teaching, No Great Call." Was it possible that just two missing letters could make such a difference in meaning? No time was wasted in making the simple correction. The accurate title now read "Teaching, No Greater Call."

While this error was quickly resolved, a much more difficult and important challenge would be to make the same correction in the heart and mind of anyone having the impression that teaching is "no great call." Yet that serious error does exist. "Just a teacher," some say of their involvement professionally, in the Church, and even in the home. And with that thought, seeds of attitude are sown that, like heavy clouds on a sunny day, cast a dark shadow over what might otherwise have been a glorious time of teaching from dawn till dusk.

Instead of teaching being "no great call" as some may think, instead of it being "just a job" in the minds of others, the understanding of the joy that accompanies the sacred trust to teach is reserved for those who discover that teaching is more than a job. Teaching extends far beyond the responsibility to disseminate information, facts, theories, and knowledge. That alone makes teaching a job. But it is usually as one is absorbed in instructing that the joy of teaching bursts open like fireworks exploding into magnificent flashes of color, illuminating the heavens. Similarly, the student, while persistently struggling through the darkness in the quest for learning, suddenly experiences a glorious burst of insight and knowledge.

For Jeff there were hours and hours of constant encouragement by his teacher while he tried to understand for himself the difficult process of long division. Page after page of newsprint was covered on both sides by "just one more try." Jeff, with his teacher's help, continued the struggle to unlock the door that would allow him to learn this process. Tuesday passed. Wednesday melted into Thursday. On Friday, in the late afternoon while his classmates were quietly reading their favorite books, Jeff finally released from his worn-down pencil onto his very smudgy paper some numbers that for the first time, for him, made sense. In an explosion of ecstasy he burst forth with words never before spoken by this timid yet persistent child: "Hey, I'm not dumb after all!" Everyone looked up, and for the teacher, at least, it was like beautiful, colorful fireworks bursting forth in a darkened sky.

On another day Julie squinted her eyes with her little face turned upward as if trying harder to hear and understand what the teacher was trying hard to explain. The teacher's voice was becoming a little more intense as she tried yet another way to explain what she had already gone over several times before. I was Julie's teacher, and with little experience in teaching, I began to feel very worried about my responsibility to this child. It was as I stood anxiously over her—observing her shoulders leaning forward, her head lowered close to the page, the firm grip on her pencil, and her tireless efforts to keep trying—that the real impact of team teaching flashed into my mind. I paused a moment and pleaded silently, "Father, help me teach this child who is thy child. Don't let her confidence slip while I struggle to master the art of unlocking doors. Allow me to learn the ways of the Master Teacher while I share in this sacred responsibility of teaching one of thy little ones."

With that immediate and constant access to the ever-present resource of a divine "team teacher," I tried once again. This time the key turned and the door swung wide. "Finally you said it right!" was Julie's jubilant outburst. Her broad smile and increased confidence were reward enough for the time it took to finally "say it right."

Even the most difficult, sometimes disagreeable, and even heartbreaking job of teaching can be transformed into the joy of teaching when we begin to grasp the eternal nature of such a call. Elder John A. Widtsoe gave a wider perspective to our understanding:

"In our pre-existent state, in the day of the great council, we made a certain agreement with the Almighty. The Lord proposed a plan conceived by him; we accepted it. Since the plan is intended for all men, we became parties to the salvation of every person under that plan. We agreed right then and there to be not only saviors for ourselves, but measurably saviors for the whole human family. We went into a partnership with the Lord. The working out of the plan became, then, not merely the Father's work and the Savior's work, but also our work. The least of us, the humblest, is in partnership with the Almighty in achieving the purpose of the eternal plan of salvation." (Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, October 1943, p. 289.)

If we have "so much the advantage in the world to come" because of the knowledge and intelligence we have gained in this life through our diligence and obedience (D&C 130:19), then surely anyone who assists in any way in contributing to a person's knowledge, reassuring him in his diligence, and encouraging him in his obedience becomes a teacher "in partnership with the Almighty in achieving the purpose of the eternal plan of salvation."

Bodies are born only once, but many rebirths take place as teachers gently and reverently lead their students to discover their own gifts and endowments, talents and abilities so generously bestowed by a divine Father, for which the student is steward. It is in understanding the eternal nature and the divine potential of the material with which a teacher is entrusted that she leaves her imprint in the human clay that transforms a routine job to inexpressible joy.

Teachers are allowed, on occasion, to assist their students in unlocking the door to a vault of eternal talents, talents that at times have been locked up too long by those suffering from feelings of inadequacy, discouragement, and lack of faith in their own ability and in their own divine potential.

In the fall of the year, a young woman was completing her student teaching in a third-grade class. She had been diligent in learning the mechanics and methodology, and by the standards of the academic world was an excellent teacher. Yet, in her heart she felt no joy of teaching; rather, hurt and often nagging discouragement and lack of confidence, like spreading aphids on a rosebush, were sapping her strength and hampering her growth.

We sat together at the close of the school day. The classroom was quiet, the children gone. The smell of chalk dust filled the air, adding a heaviness to the silence that seemed to be closing in. "I can't do it," she said, her eyes filling with tears. "I just can't do it." I knew of her great desire to be a good teacher and her untiring efforts to succeed, yet her confidence was so weak that she saw everything she did as less than acceptable. She had gradually convinced herself that she was doomed to failure and there was no escape.

The curriculum for this important moment had not been provided. As I listened to her, I felt myself reaching out, pleading for an answer. A thought began to unfold, and I found myself posing questions—not so much about her performance, but about the children's increased achievement because of her efforts in teaching. Was not Sarah doing better in spelling than she had done even a week ago? What did it mean to have the children crowd around her desk during recess and ask for "just one more song" as she played their favorite tunes on her guitar and sang with them? Had not a child raised his hand indicating a need for help, a need to which she responded? On the playground that very day, had not her voice blended with the cheering that brought Jimmy home safely in the winning home run? Had she not opened doors for children—many doors, doors that in some cases might even have remained closed, at least for a time?

Her troubled countenance softened slightly, with the hint of a smile. It was in discovering the evidence of others' progress that she began to discover her own. During the following weeks she spoke more often about what was happening to the children in her class and less often about what was happening to her. The disruptive worry about her own inadequacies seemed to be gradually slipping away as she recognized her ability to help others. Some weeks later I received a letter from her. "What do you say to thank a person who has helped to change your life? You've pointed out to me things that I always thought were just part of me, instead of bad habits that could be changed. I know it's going to be a long process, but I know that if you've got confidence in me, I can do it. Thank you for a new life. You are the vehicle by which it was sent. Love always."

It is only through team teaching that the inspiration for some lessons can be realized, allowing the teacher and the student to be taught. "And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me." (D&C 18:16.)

Into the sacred realms of another's heart, the teacher must proceed reverently, with deep respect, and teach clearly and forcefully truths to which the Spirit can bear witness. President J. Reuben Clark stated: "The mere possession of a testimony is not enough. You must have besides this, one of the rarest and most precious of all the many elements of human character,—moral courage. For in the absence of moral courage to declare your testimony, it will reach the students only after such dilution as will make it difficult if not impossible for them to detect it; and the spiritual and psychological effect of a weak and vacillating testimony may well be actually harmful instead of helpful." ("The Charted Course in Education, "J. Reuben Clark: Selected Papers on Religion, Education, and Youth [Brigham Young University Press, 1984], p. 250.)

It is not in knowing perfectly the twenty-third Psalm and then teaching with great skill the meaning of each word that a teacher experiences the ultimate joy. It is, rather, in coming to know the Shepherd and then reverently guiding another person to that same knowledge. Only then is a teacher privileged to take part in His work, which is also our work.

The sacred mission of teaching and the ultimate joys that attend—those most lasting, those felt most deeply—are often borne out of struggle, anxiety, and determination that is sustained only through unwavering faith in God. The moments of greatest anxiety can become forerunners to the deepest joy and ultimate ecstasy when a mother teaches her own child. In the inspiring example of Ruth Yancey, as she has dedicated her life to teaching her children, and especially her son Steven, I witnessed evidence of this great joy borne out of struggle.

In the first few days after Steven's birth, Sister Yancey and her husband began suspecting something might be wrong with their precious baby, although he had gained several pounds since his two-pound eleven-ounce birth weight. An ophthalmologist confirmed the young couple's grave concern. Heavy doses of oxygen used to save his life were more than the tiny blood vessels of his eyes could stand. Those blood vessels had ruptured, and he was blind.

One morning after her husband had gone to work, Sister Yancey cradled her son close to her and began pleading with the Lord. "Help me to know how to teach him, what to say, how to show him so he can accomplish each task," she prayed. "Inspire me, because I am your tool in teaching this special spirit. I'm weak. I'm uneducated. I'm unknowledgeable about what should be done. Help me to know what to do and how Steven and I can accomplish it."

With faith in God, this dedicated mother willingly and anxiously shouldered the responsibility of teacher and walked carefully into those first fundamental lessons. "We thought that when children got teeth they'd know how to chew," she said, "but they don't. Children learn from imitation, by seeing others chew. So I would put food in my mouth and place his little hands on my jaws and chew. Then I would put food in his mouth. He would spit it out or start to choke, but after a while he began to learn how to manipulate his jaws." Months later she realized the joy of that first accomplishment—he had learned how to chew.

When her son was just a little older, this faithful young mother had to prepare for other lessons, one after the other. "In teaching Steven to walk, I couldn't say, 'Walk to your daddy,' because he couldn't see his daddy. So we bought a little push toy for him that we called his lawn mower. He learned to walk with that. He wouldn't dare walk around the house without it, because he was afraid he would bump into something."

While the lessons were very difficult for the child, it was his mother who had to be willing to suffer if the next hurdle were to be crossed.

"When Steven was two years old," she continued, "we built a fence around our backyard so he would have a protected area to play in, and I would feel more secure about his safety. The plan was good only for a while, until the day when he found his way to the gate. Day after day he would stand at the gate and cry."

Sister Yancey told how she and her devoted husband together found the strength to do what had to be done. They bought Steven a little toy truck with a steering wheel and a seat. When he sat on the truck his feet touched the ground, and he could "walk-ride" the truck down the sidewalk. This provided something he could hold onto and something that would be ahead of him and protect him from falling in case of interference in his path.

"The first few times I would open the gate and let him out on the sidewalk alone, then go into the house and watch the clock. I would tell myself that I must not check on him for two full minutes. I would force myself to let him be gone for two long minutes at a time, then I would run out to see if he was still on the sidewalk and going in the right direction. Then I would go back into the house and wait another two full minutes."

Gradually, with faith, the teacher's confidence in herself and her child grew. Steven would go to the end of the block and turn around and come back. In time it was two full blocks. Without the struggle required to open the gate, the rewards and victory might have been withheld, to the detriment of mother and child.

In the events of those very early years, there were also moments of great joy. About two months after Steven's second birthday, the Yanceys moved into a new home. Steven and his four-year-old brother, John, were playing in the living room while their parents were busy putting things away. Suddenly Brother and Sister Yancey heard "America" being played on the piano. Both came running into the living room. "We thought John must be playing the piano. But it was not John. We just stood there. It was like a miracle. This baby for whom we had concerns about brain damage, his hearing, his sight, and all those kinds of things, was playing 'America' in octaves with his third fingers resting on the tops of his index fingers on both hands just to get enough strength to play the notes."

From then on young Steven could duplicate on the piano the melody of any music he heard. He played hymns, nursery rhymes, popular music. By the time he was four or five he could play almost anything, but still just in octaves. "Whenever I played the piano he would climb up on my lap and lightly place his little hands on each of my arms so it didn't restrict me at all, but he could feel the movement of my playing. It was so easy to teach him music, whereas most of the things I taught him were quite a struggle. We worked; we had frustrations; we both had tears. Sometimes we wondered if we were going to make it—like the effort to help him learn to tie his shoes—but teaching him music was a joy."

When Steven was a little older, his parents, anxious to provide maximum opportunities for him, purchased a second piano. Sister Yancey, an accomplished musician, would sit at one piano and he would sit at the other. "No matter what I would play, how big the chord, or how long the phrases, he would always be just a split second behind me. He would learn it and memorize it as we would go. His mind is like a tape recorder; once a piece is there, it is not forgotten."

During Steven's senior year in high school, he took a class in music history and composition in which he had to orchestrate a song. He chose "Sunrise, Sunset" from Fiddler on the Roof. He wrote the parts for all the instruments in a full band—twenty different scores. Together Steven and his mother discussed the characteristics and voice range of each instrument. He would experiment on the piano until he could decide what he wanted each instrument to do. Then he would dictate that part to his mother, and she would transcribe it on staff paper. Together they would transpose it to the key of that instrument. "With his ear, having perfect pitch, and my eyes, we made a pretty good team. I couldn't have done that without him and he couldn't have done it without me. What a thrill it was when the Viewmont High School concert band played it for us. There have been many such times of great joy."

Graduation from high school presented more challenges. The ceremony was to be held in a very large auditorium on a circular stage. "Steven wanted to walk across that stage by himself. His father and I helped him work out a way this could be accomplished. We took him to the auditorium. The custodian told us which ramp the graduates would be using, and where they would leave the stage. So Steven and his father and I counted the steps from the end of the carpeted ramp over to the table where he would receive his diploma, and from there over to the other ramp. We walked through it together many times. His dad would guide him up the ramp, Steven would walk the full width of the stage unhesitatingly by himself, and I would be there at the other ramp to receive him. This way Steven would be getting that diploma all by himself."

The graduating class that year was large, and the conducting officer requested that there be no applause. Well, there was no applause until they announced Steven's name—then the whole senior class stood up and applauded. Steven not only received his diploma, he also received a college scholarship in music. "It was one of the proudest and happiest moments of my life," his mother said. "It really was."

For a young bird, pushed gently from the security of the nest, there comes a time for the solo flight, when the teacher must stand in the wings trusting that the teaching has been sufficient for the immediate challenge, and wings are spread in flight and there is no turning back. It was at the airport that Steven made final preparations for his solo flight. His mother and father, brothers and sister would remain behind. He had accepted a call to serve the Lord on a two-year mission to the Anaheim California Mission. Steven grabbed the handrail and made his way carefully into the big jetliner that would take him away to unfamiliar places. "As he left my side I got such a feeling of peace," his mother recalled. "It was that feeling of putting him into the hands of the Lord, as the Lord had put him into my hands. I had done my best, and now I knew the Lord would care for him."

Instead of waiting for two full minutes after opening the gate, this trusting mother was prepared, with peace in her heart, to wait two full years with less anxiety than the two full minutes had previously demanded. Much, much learning had taken place. "I feel pride in him, and sometimes pride in myself that I was able to help him. But that is secondary. The most important thing is the feeling of gratitude, even to the point where I'm grateful for those hard things to learn and to teach. Life could be easier and more pleasant if we didn't have struggles, but we don't grow much that way." This great teacher expressed her joy and gratitude by saying, "I'm thankful I've had the chance to cope with things I would not have chosen to cope with because we've all learned so much."

The Yanceys are still learning and striving and serving as they share their talents and gifts with others. At a recent concert presented by Steven and his mother, the attentive audience filling the hall waited with almost a sense of adoration while this saintly mother, refined through struggle, guided her handsome young son to the grand piano. She then moved quickly to the organ some distance away and took her place. The entire audience seemed to be wondering just how these two performers would begin together the very difficult classical selection that Steven had announced as their first number. After a brief second of anticipation, the whole auditorium was filled with the beautiful tones of piano and organ in perfect unison.

Later Sister Yancey smiled as she confessed, "It may have sounded as if we began precisely together, but actually I was just a split second behind him. That's the way we work—he goes first and I follow." Her explanation sounded almost like an echo of years gone by when she spoke of Steven's efforts as a five-year-old. She had explained then, "No matter what I would play, he would always be just a split second behind me." But there was a difference now. He went first, and the teacher's work was glorified through another.

It was the Master Teacher who opened the gate, allowing each of us to learn the lessons, even the difficult ones, that would ensure our continued growth and give us the opportunity to reach our divine destiny. He marked the way and invited us to follow. As we feed His sheep, we are drawn most closely to Him and feel His nearness through the joy of teaching.
