Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 15

The Book of Mormon: Letters from Home

I have a little set of scriptures that my mom and dad gave me when I turned seventeen. I had read the Book of Mormon before, but one day it was different. Perhaps I was more in tune with the Spirit or maybe I had studied more diligently and prayed more fervently. I was young, but I wanted to know for myself if the Book of Mormon was true.

On that particular day I came to the part about faith in the thirty-second chapter of Alma. As I finished that chapter, I experienced a feeling that I recognized as a witness from the Holy Ghost. I knew the Book of Mormon was true. I wanted to stand up and shout. I wanted to tell the whole world what I knew and how I felt, but I was alone. So, with tears of joy streaming down my face, I wrote on the margins, all the way around the page, the feelings in my heart at that moment. I made a big red star in the margin on top of the page and wrote, "May 31st, 7:30 A.M. This I know, written as if to me." Then I wrote in the margin on one side of the page, "I have received a confirmation. I know the Book of Mormon is true!" Across the margin on the other side of the page I wrote, "One month ago I began fasting each Tuesday for a more sure knowledge. This I know."

I am anxious for you—my neighbor, my sister, my friend—to know and love the scriptures so they can be a comfort when you climb the steep and scary and risky trails of life. When I read the Book of Mormon, I feel as if I am getting letters from home from my Heavenly Father, who is guiding me with inspiration in the important choices I must make each day. When I consider how much I love the Book of Mormon and how frequently I turn to it for guidance, inspiration, encouragement, confidence, and increased faith, I wonder sometimes if my great love for this book might have been passed down to me by my great-grandmother.

Almost a century and a half ago, a copy of the Book of Mormon was brought into the home of Susan Kent, my great-grandmother, when she was sixteen years of age. After studying the book, Susan gained a testimony of its messages that was so strong that she could not reject it, although to accept it meant a great sacrifice for her.

At the time Susan was engaged to a young man, and she felt that she could not endure being separated from him; but he would have nothing to do with anyone who would join the Mormons. She did not stop to count the cost. She chose the path of peace for her conscience. However, her heart was so grieved that she could partake of no nourishment for several days. She lapsed into a coma so profound that it had the appearance of actual death. Preparations were being made for her funeral when she awoke asking, "How long have I slept?" With tender care she slowly regained her health, and she and her sister, Abbegale, and their parents joined the Church. I will be eternally thankful to Susan Kent for her testimony of the Book of Mormon and what it meant in her life and now in mine.

Just a few years ago, our bishop called me to his office and asked me if I would accept the calling to chair a committee that would encourage every young person in our ward to read the entire Book of Mormon within the next seven months. At that time my aged mother was in extremely poor and failing health. Late one evening as I sat by her bedside, I pondered the bishop's challenge. Something about the spirit of that evening, with my mother's life hanging in the balance, caused me to think about eternity and the importance of this life and how quickly it passes. I reflected on the important messages of the Book of Mormon and wondered how the other youth leaders and I might motivate young people to experience reading these sacred scriptures in such a way that each one of them would gain an unwavering testimony or at least the beginning of a testimony.

Together we did a lot of planning and praying. Ten of the young people were called and set apart as "captains of ten" to direct the program we devised, which we called "The Moroni's Promise Project." We launched this program at a special meeting on a Sunday evening. That was a memorable Sunday for me, for that very morning, as if to test my own commitment to the Book of Mormon and to this program we were about to begin, my mother passed away. At our meeting that evening many testimonies were borne and commitments were made. For me, it was a special opportunity to pay tribute to my mother and the inspiration I had received concerning the Book of Mormon while sitting at her bedside.

That was a glorious year, as young people read and reported, read and reported. Seeds were planted and testimonies were strengthened. Some began reading for the first time. One young captain, Michelle Gardner, reminded us of a promise President Gordon B. Hinckley made to all members of the Church who read the Book of Mormon: "There will come into your lives and into your homes an added measure of the Spirit of the Lord, a strengthened resolution to walk in obedience to his commandments, and a stronger testimony of the living reality of the Son of God." (Ensign, November 1979, p. 9.)

As the young people reached the end of the book of Alma, they each received a T-shirt imprinted with the letters "S.T.O.M.P." The letters stood for "Students Trying Out Moroni's Promise." They were well on their way to finding the reality in the promise of Moroni, chapter 10, verse 5.

For those who completed their reading of the Book of Mormon, the letters "S.T.O.M.P." took on even greater meaning. They learned that a testimony of the Book of Mormon will "stomp out" discouragement. It will "stomp out" feelings of loneliness. It will "stomp out" lack of faith. It will "stomp out" disobedience. It will "stomp out" anger. It will "stomp out" despair.

How does the Book of Mormon do all this and much, much more? As we read and study these inspired scriptures, the Spirit touches our hearts and we come to know and to love our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Our awareness of His infinite love for us increases. We learn about the atonement and how, through the ordinances and covenants of the gospel, our Father in heaven has provided a way by which we can qualify ourselves for all of the blessings He has in store for those who are obedient. We learn how to repent, how to forgive, and how to love one another as our Savior loves us. With intense desire, we come to want to be like Him and to one day be with Him. We gain greater understanding of the purposes of this life and why we need to be tried and tested. And we learn to walk by faith.

My testimony of the Book of Mormon is not only what I know in my own heart, but what I have witnessed in the hearts of others, such as the valiant youths who accepted our bishop's challenge, as the Book of Mormon has become a part of their lives. The Book of Mormon is the anchor to my faith. I thank my Heavenly Father for it and for my testimony, which is my most priceless possession. My greatest desire would be that every woman, young and old, throughout the entire Church—yes, even the world—will study and pray about the truth in the Book of Mormon and gain a personal testimony for herself of this great gift that God has given us.
