Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 16

Confirm Thy Soul in Self-Control

The last line of the third verse of "America the Beautiful" has an important message for each of us: "Confirm thy soul in self-control." What does this mean? I believe it means having harmony and unity within us, which provides agreement between our spirit and the desires of the flesh. It means having inner strength and inner peace because we have accepted responsibility for ourselves and developed controls that make us whole.

Self-mastery is a continual process. Sometimes we wish it were easier than it is, and at times the very lessons that provide the greatest growth are the ones we would like to avoid, or at least to ignore, if possible. For example, one day my niece, who was practicing the piano, became very exasperated while going over a difficult part of her assigned piece. Finally, with both hands resting heavily on the keys, she said, "Mom, it's too hard!" Her mother, in an effort to encourage her, said, "My dear, just try that little segment five more times. . . . No, Mom, not five," was the response. Her mother, wanting to place the responsibility where it belonged, said, "All right, my dear, you decide." "No, Mom," my niece said, "you decide—but don't choose five."

Sometimes we, like this budding little musician, would like to shift the responsibility for our actions to someone else, or we find excuses for how we feel or how we react. Often we have conflicts that we need resolve. We don't want things to be too hard for us, but still we want to reach our goals. On one hand we have good goals and want to be pushed to meet them. On the other hand, we resist change. We are not sure that we want the struggles that come with bringing ourselves from where we are to the goals we want to reach.

Growth is often painful. It requires letting go of the old and reaching for new heights. Someone has said that "if fate would destroy a man, it would first separate his forces and drive him to think one way and act another. It would rob him of the contentment which comes only from unity within." Our thoughts and our actions have to be in harmony. I believe that it is in confirming or securing our souls in self-control that we find ourselves, that we discover who we really are.

May I share an eternal truth that has helped me to better understand not only our opportunity but also our responsibility to gain self-control, or self-mastery. In the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord tells us, "The spirit and the body are the soul of man." (D&C 88:15.) If we are to each confirm our soul in self-control, it will come as we experience the process that puts the spirit in control over the physical body. We need to know what we are trying to control. There is often a battle going on while our spirit struggles to get control over our body and overcome desires of the flesh.

When we set goals and don't reach them, make personal commitments to ourselves and don't keep them, we experience the sensation of battle fatigue. Why is this so? President Brigham Young taught: "The spirits that are in men are as pure as the gods are. Then why do they consent to do evil? Because of the influence of evils that are in the flesh. When mankind gives way to evil and suffers the flesh to rule and contaminate the pure spirit tabernacled within it, the spirit within does not answer approvingly. Although the inhabitants of the earth are in darkness and blindness, yet they are not so ignorant as they represent themselves to be. There is a spirit in them that reproves them continually when they do wrong."

Thus, if fate would destroy us, it would cause us to think one way and act another, causing the spirit to be in conflict with the desires of the flesh. When we live with integrity, as the Young Women Value states, we make our actions consistent with our knowledge of right and wrong. Gaining self-control is a gradual process. It comes as we have repeated experiences that demand the spirit to reign supreme.

A simple illustration of this principle can be observed in an experience I had at a girls' camp a few summers ago. It was late at night and the girls were all in their sleeping bags. The lights had been turned out except for one flashlight in an upper bunk. I got out of my sleeping bag and climbed up on the bunk to check on Becky, who was sitting there with her flashlight under her arm, working on a little piece of handiwork with yarn and a needle. I asked, "Becky, what are you doing at this time of night?" "Making a pillow for my mother," she said. "Her birthday is next week." I noticed on the side of the canvas little pieces of brown yarn at ten-row intervals. She explained, "If I do ten rows every day between now and then, I'll have it ready in time." I could see there was no possibility of diverting her from her goal, so I encouraged her to continue while I went back to my sleeping bag.

But I didn't go to sleep immediately. I lay in the dark and wondered about this pillow. Suppose Becky were to go to sleep after completing eight rows and then did twelve tomorrow? Or, considering the coldness and the inconvenience of using her flashlight, couldn't she finish the pillow when she got home? It wasn't until I took my mind off the pillow and thought of the pillow-maker that I got an insight into the greatness of what was going on. After the pillow will be long forgotten, the experiences that were being woven into this young woman would last forever. It was the discipline of the pillow-maker that mattered most. The pillow was not of any eternal consequence, but the process of setting goals and being in control was.

The next day I was thrilled when I observed what I considered a transfer of self-mastery from one area to another. Becky was at the head of all of the others as we climbed up the steep mountain. She was also the one who responded when help was needed in the kitchen. She wasn't lagging behind; she was out in front. The confidence she had in herself seemed to say, "I can do it," and the reward for such discipline gave her exhilaration for life and new opportunities. I think this is the very concept that President Kimball was encouraging when he said, "I believe in goals, but I believe that the individual must set his own goals. Success should not necessarily be gauged by reaching a set goal, but by progress and attainment."

Each of us has a rendezvous with destiny, a mission in life. There is an urgency that we be responsible for the progress we make every day. We must avoid the danger of being lulled into a loss of precious time by allowing ourselves to think that days and seasons will return again and again and are recycled through our Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday; January, February, March; winter, spring, summer, and fall. There will be other Fridays and there will be other springs, but not this particular one. This day lost will never return, nor will the opportunity of this day. While our daily duties and sometimes our tiresome tasks and laborious labors may not seem of eternal consequence, what happens to our spirit as we labor is of eternal consequence. Living the gospel won't protect us from the trials and tests, but it will help us to grow from them as we master how we will respond to circumstances.

What is this power we seek that puts us in control of ourselves? It is much more than will power. Will power comes and goes. We get it and we lose it for a time. No, what we seek relates to spirituality, spiritual power that comes when we strive to be totally obedient to all of the laws of God and make Christ the center of our life. In Isaiah, we read, "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." (Isaiah 40:31.)

In the song "America the Beautiful," the last line of the third verse concludes, "Confirm thy soul in self control, thy liberty in law." Liberty and freedom come from obedience to divine law. Unfortunately, our society today has done much to supplant self-control and encourage disobedience to divine laws. Through artificial means and the use of drugs, we can control almost any physical or emotional need. We can be pepped up or tranquilized. We can escape the feelings of hunger through diet pills. Moral laws can be broken with seemingly considerable protection from any responsibility. Many people actually escape life while they live it, willfully fleeing the realities of their life's mission, thinking that control in other areas compensates for lack of control within.

With every law, there is a blessing. It is through obedience to a specific law that we receive a specific blessing. When we understand the law and the blessings, we can better discipline ourselves to abide the law. As we strive to live in complete harmony with the laws of God, we are on our way to self-mastery and to becoming more like our Savior. Obedience to the laws of God brings harmony within, happiness and peace; while disobedience to the laws of God brings misery, unhappiness, and disunity within. How we find ourselves in the morning and at noon and in the evening will depend upon our ability to confirm our souls in self-control. Sometimes we will experience battle fatigue, our spirits battling to control the desires of the flesh. For some the battle may be physical or social or spiritual or emotional—or even intellectual or financial, but we are all to be tried and tested so that we can grow.

Without developing self-control through a multitude of little victories, so to speak, we may never be prepared for the big tests and may never experience the liberty and freedom that come through abiding the laws of God. If we fail in the process of becoming totally responsible for our actions, we may find ourselves becoming more concerned with our daily conveniences than our eternal covenants, more attuned to our personal desires than our unwavering devotion. We cannot realize full joy because we will not experience necessary sacrifice. Our cannots become stronger than our commitments. We live the gospel casually but not devotedly. In the words of Julius Caesar, "The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves."

I witnessed the joy and blessings of self-mastery at a Relief Society birthday celebration some time ago. It was a small ward, with a small gathering of sisters in the Relief Society room. After I gave my talk to the sisters about how we need to help each other on our way back home, I felt impressed to ask the young sister who had given the opening prayer to come to my side. Shaking, she stood beside me and I put my arm around her. I asked, "Is there anyone in this group who has really helped you on your way back home?" Her head dropped and she waited. I explained, "I suppose there are several, but is there one whom you could identify?" She looked up, her eyes moist, said, "Yes," and she called one of the sisters by name.

I looked over the small group and recognized immediately who that sister was. Tears were filling her eyes and moistening her cheeks. I asked her to join us at the front of the room, and she came up and stood by my side. I put an arm around her. Then I said to the first sister, "Would it be appropriate to ask how this sister has helped you on your way back home?"

She waited a minute, then looked up and said in a choked voice, "We worked in the Relief Society together over a period of time when we had a lot of misunderstandings, some conflict and disharmony, and struggles in our relationship. Then one day we got together." Sensitively she didn't say who initiated that coming together, but she explained, "One day we got together and we talked together. Oh, what I learned from her. I felt a change of feeling in my heart. For this understanding that came over me, I will be eternally grateful."

I turned to the other sister and asked, "Did you know she felt that way about you?" Tears were in her eyes and she said, "No, I just knew I felt that way about her." My arms were still around the shoulder of each of these sisters, but behind my back I could sense that they were reaching out to each other with arms entwined. I said to the audience, "Sisters, I want you to see what's going on behind my back." Then I held these two women firmly, with one on each side of me, and we turned around so other sisters could see them in touch with each other. We then turned back to the audience. "Don't let anything come between you," I said.

I stepped back, and these two sisters embraced, tears flowing freely, then took their seats. We all had been touched by the Spirit because they had let go of their resentment. They had taken control and allowed the Spirit to overcome the frustrations and anxieties they had allowed to build up.

Are you acquainted with the circumstances that surrounded the writing of the song "School Thy Feelings"? Let me share it with you. Charles Penrose, who wrote the lyrics, recorded the experience in his history: "This hymn was . . . written for myself, about 1860, when I was in Birmingham, England, before I immigrated. I had been insidiously accused, not openly, but certain things had been said about me and my presidency of the Birmingham Conference [District], and particularly in relation to my family affairs and possessions. . . . When I went to Birmingham . . . I had taken a good deal of furniture and stuff belonging to my family that did not belong to the conference. It was intimated by one of the Elders from Zion that I was endeavoring [when reclaiming the furniture prior to moving] to lay claim to the property that belonged to the Birmingham Conference, and it touched me to the quick. I had labored then over ten years in the ministry, most of the time as a traveling elder, literally without purse or scrip. I started that way and had continued, suffering a great many hardships and difficulties and trials . . . and this touched me right to the heart. I did not know how to bear it. Weltering under these feelings I sat down and wrote that little poem, right from my soul." (Karen Lynn Davidson, Our Latter-day Hymns: The Stories and the Messages [Deseret Book, 1988], p. 323.) These are the words he wrote:

School thy feelings, O my brother; Train thy warm, impulsive soul. Do not its emotions smother, But let wisdom's voice control. School thy feelings; there is power In the cool, collected mind. Passion shatters reason's tower, Makes the clearest vision blind. —Hymns, no. 336

A few years ago I had one of the most spiritual experiences in my life. My father, who was one of my dearest friends, was coming to the time of graduation—that's what he called it. He had stomach cancer, and over a period of time I witnessed literally the process of seeing what happens when the spirit is magnified and outgrows this mortal flesh. At this point he weighed less than one hundred pounds, his body almost gone. But his spirit was magnified to such refinement that to be in his presence was a spiritual experience.

Every day we would walk down a slight hill to the bridge about half a block from our home. A week before his graduation we walked down to the bridge once again. I had my arm around him to sustain him, and he had his arm around me to sustain me in the things that I needed. As we walked down the hill, we looked out across the valley to the Great Salt Lake. The sun was shining down through breaks in the clouds, casting shadows on the lake. We stopped to rest on a little rock wall in front of a neighbor's house. Then this great spirit, one who had confirmed his soul in self-control, said quietly, "The world is so beautiful. It's been a good year."

"Dad, how can you possibly say that?" I asked.

In the same tone that he had often used to counsel me as a child, he said, "You can't ever look at one little part alone. You must see the whole picture. Just look at the beauties all around us. It's been a good year."

"Dad, how did you learn to always look at things like that?"

"Well," he said, "I had to learn to not let things bother me. It was I who had to determine how I would feel, not the circumstances around me. I learned I must be happy with the way things were for me." Then he repeated, "It's been a good year, Ardie, and a good life."

We made it to the bridge and rested, and then on the way back up the hill he reached into his unlimited reservoir of wisdom that he had memorized over the years and shared these lines: "I believe that God created me to be happy, to enjoy the blessings of life, to be useful to my fellow beings, and an honor to my country. I believe the trials which beset me today are but fiery tests by which my character is strengthened, ennobled, and made worthy to enjoy the higher things in life which I believe are in store for me. I believe that I am the architect of my fate. Therefore, I will be master of circumstances and surroundings and not their slaves. I will not yield to discouragement. I will trample them under my feet and make them serve as stepping stones to success. I will conquer my obstacles and turn them into opportunities."

Again we stopped for a little rest on the familiar rock wall. After catching his breath he continued, "My failures of today will but help to guide me on to victory on the morrow. The morrow will bring new strength, new hope, new opportunities, and new beginnings. I will be ready to face them with a brave heart, a calm mind, and an undaunted spirit. In all things I will do my best and leave the rest to the infinite." Then, with added emphasis, he concluded, "I will not waste my mental energy by useless worry. I will learn to dominate my restless thoughts and look on the bright side of things. I will face the world bravely. I will not be a coward. I will assert my God-given birthright as a man, for I am immortal and nothing, nothing will overcome me."

One spring I had an opportunity to stand on that sacred ground in Gethsemane and at Calvary, where we see the divine example of self-mastery. We read in James E. Talmage's book Jesus the Christ that it was customary prior to the crucifixion for the executioners to offer to the condemned person a narcotic drink for the merciful purpose of deadening his sensibility. When the cup was passed to Jesus, he was so much in control that he refused the drink. He was determined to meet even death with faculties alert and mind unclouded. In the hour of agony he prayed, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." Only when his atoning sacrifice had been accepted by the Father and his mission completed did he bow his head and voluntarily give up his life.

As I stood in Gethsemane and then walked to the garden tomb, I thought, He did all that for me, though he didn't have to. But he did. Whatever he asks, is it too much? Then I pondered the thought, Maybe it's not enough. Surely it's not enough.

May we each confirm our souls in self-control and experience liberty—eternal, divine liberty—through obedience to God's laws.
