Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 17

On Our Way Back Home Together

Often as I address an audience, I am impressed with the realization that in all the history of the world, with the millions that have come and gone before us and those waiting in the wings, our turn on earth, yours and mine, is during a shared period of time. This gives me reason to ponder what our eternal relationship might have been. When I returned from a tour of the Holy Land, I realized that all of us in that particular group who traveled together and shared that common experience now have a bond of closeness that gives us a concern for each other. Whenever we see each other, it is as if we share a coming-home feeling because of that experience we shared in the Holy Land.

Putting that in an eternal perspective, it really makes me wonder and care deeply about you and each of my brothers and sisters. I consider you my fellow travelers. We are on our way back home together. Somehow that gives us a bond of closeness that ties us together. You and I are away from our heavenly home and our heavenly parents, traveling in a strange land. This life is a pilgrimage to a place far removed from our eternal home, but while we are away, we are blessed in having access to continuous communication and revelation.

On my desk is a little sign that reads "You are a child of God. Call home." I really like that. On good days and not so good days, it's good to know that while we are away we can call home. I once heard a report that following an area conference, someone inquired of President Spencer W. Kimball, "With all you have on your mind, how do you ever get to sleep at night? Do you count sheep?" He reportedly replied, "No, I don't count sheep. I talk to the Shepherd." Wouldn't it be wonderful if each of us were not just to count sheep or list concerns, but rather talk to the Shepherd, to develop a close relationship so that in no circumstance do we ever feel we are traveling alone, for we are not.

Some years ago I learned a great lesson from another little journey. Actually it was just a little hike. My niece Shelly, then just six years old, started out on a hike with her parents. What was intended to be a three-mile hike turned out to be a fourteen-mile hike because her mother misread a sign. They were not seasoned travelers. As they came to the crest of a hill, when they realized that the trail was going to be much longer than they had anticipated, Shelly's mother determined to make the best of the situation and also make it a teaching opportunity. She explained to Shelly that this would be a good chance to see if they were made out of bricks or straw. The comparison had a familiar ring because of the favorite childhood story "The Three Little Pigs." She explained that their final destination was still their camp, so that while they had to go much farther than they had planned, at least they weren't lost and they knew where they were going. This sounded like an adventurous opportunity to Shelly. Though she didn't fully realize the drama of the situation, she was anxious to get on her way and find out, as she said, "what we're made of."

As with many teaching opportunities, the newness and novelty soon wore off. Then the real lessons and the real testing began. Driven by the desire to find out what she was really made of, this little six-year-old kept walking and walking. She welcomed the little periodic rests along the way, and as the day wore on, they became more frequent. Something within her nature would not let her give up. She just kept on walking. Near the end of the day, as the sun was setting and the water from the canteen was gone, and little Shelly's face was flushed and sunburned, she came up over a steep incline. Finally she stopped, ready to make an accounting to her parents. She paused a moment and then said, "Mom, I guess I'm made out of straw. I can't go any further." Her mother dropped down on her knee, wrapped her little girl in her arms, and said, "Honey, the camp is just around the corner. We've made it. You're made of brick."

Every so often that little girl, having grown a few years since then, will say, "Sure I can do it, because I'm made of brick."

Each of us has opportunities to find out what we're made of as we travel the sometimes steep inclines of life. I love the words of the song that says,

In the furnace God may prove thee, Thence to bring thee forth more bright, But can never cease to love thee, Thou art precious in his sight. God is with thee, God is with thee; Thou shalt triumph in his might. —Hymns, 1985, no. 43

When we've gone as far as we can, we can be sure that the camp is in sight, and we won't be asked to go any further than we can. How far that is, how long the path or how hot the sun or how steep the climb may be, or when the end may come, I don't know. It is different for each of us. But of this I am sure: The path is too long, the trail too steep, the rocks too big, and the sun too hot for any one of us to make it back to camp alone. We will never reach home trying to walk by ourselves. That will come only as we develop faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ, and faith that He knows us and loves us individually, and when we walk with our hands in His, knowing that He will walk with us each step of the way if we will allow Him to. It is only when we choose to get off the path that we voluntarily separate ourselves from His companionship. But even then He offers His hand. He gave His life to ensure our safe return, but He won't force us to take hold, lest it thwart our progress.

Sometimes in our anxious uncertainties, our hearts might cry out and say, "Father, how much farther before it's enough? How many more steps must I take? Where is the camp? It's getting dark and late, and I feel far from home."

While standing on the banks of the river Jordan, I thought of Joshua leading all of Israel to that river and the great challenge they faced in crossing the water. As the great mass of people approached the river Jordan, the Lord spoke to Joshua and instructed him to go to the very brink and then to stand still. He was apparently telling Joshua what He is telling us—to go as far as we can and then stand still, stop, be calm, and listen to the voice from within. The Lord further told Joshua, "And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand upon an heap." We go to the brink, stand still, feel the Spirit, and then prepare to go just a little further if necessary. After Joshua had obeyed, we are told, "the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground." (See Joshua 3.)

The Lord tests us and tries us. He tests all of His saints. There is no question that the harder the test, the higher the reward for passing it. Abraham laid all that he had on the altar, thus proving himself worthy of exaltation. Our Father knows where we are on the path, and He knows when it is enough and when to provide the ram. We never walk alone. Because He loves us, He will not deprive us of the growth that comes from our tests, however hard they may be. It is comforting to know that He will never test any of us beyond our ability to withstand. We know that "there hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it." (1 Corinthians 10:13.)

One of the really exciting things about reading the scriptures is to learn how our Father has cared about His children through the ages. We know that He will care about us no differently. We know what to expect, and our faith grows stronger because we know He is unchanging, and that His rules do not change. We know that He abides the law even when it must hurt Him dreadfully to see one of His children leave the path and wander off into dangerous territory.

Sometimes we may hear an anxious person crying out, "How could a loving father allow this to happen? It isn't fair." But it is because He is a loving father, and He gives us unwavering assurance that we can depend on Him, that it is fair. He does not change His mind or the rules. It is on this very principle that our faith must be built and will grow strong even if, in our shortsightedness, we might wish the rules could change just this once. We sing, "Lead kindly light, amid the encircling gloom. Lead thou me on. The night is dark and I am far from home." (Hymns, 1985, no. 97.) It is often in that very darkness, when there is no place else to turn, that we find our way to the Savior and come to know Him as we never would otherwise know Him.

In the book Gospel Truth, by President George Q. Cannon, I read one day what was an exciting truth for me. He said, "We humble people, we who feel ourselves sometimes so worthless, so good for nothing, we are not so worthless as we think. There is not one of us but what God's love has been expended upon. There is not one of us that He has not cared for and caressed. There is not one of us that He has not desired to save and that He has not devised means to save. There is not one of us that He has not given his angels charge concerning. We may be insignificant and contemptible in our eyes and in the eyes of others, but the truth remains that we are the children of God and that He has actually given His angels—invisible beings of power and might—charge concerning us and they watch over us and have us in their keeping." (Gospel Truth, pp. 1-2.)

Isn't that a wonderful thing to know? Maybe there are situations in our lives when we might be inclined to look heavenward and say of the guardian angels, "Where were you when I needed you?" But then there are other times when the Spirit whispers to us that surely our guardian angel must have been with us. Occasionally we might flippantly say, "Boy, your guardian angel must have been with you," when in fact we may be speaking a truth.

Sometimes when the sun is hot and the trail seems steep and it's the end of a long day, I have been known to go inside my home and close the door and say, "I don't want to have any more growing opportunities today." Isn't that always when the telephone rings or someone knocks at the door or maybe a child cries out in need of help, and we have another opportunity to keep going on? I believe that the progress that puts us closer in touch with our heavenly home is determined more by what happens on the inside than what takes place on the outside; what happens to the traveler rather than the conditions of the hurdles or even the detours along the path.

Our Father in heaven has surrounded us with evidences of His great love for us, even the air we breathe and the food we eat and the very path that we walk. Sometimes if we stumble and fall, we might find ourselves questioning whether or not He still loves us. Even while we are down, we have an opportunity to see things from a different perspective—beauties that are otherwise hidden.

A friend who likes to ski once told me that she has often observed that when skiers fall down, they usually become very frustrated. But occasionally she will notice someone who, after falling, lies quiet and calm, looking at the beauties all around. "When I made that observation," she said, "I almost anticipated my next fall because I wanted to lie there on my back and look up through the pine trees with the sun filtering down through them and see things I never had seen before. I have seen beautiful things I would not have seen had I not taken advantage of looking up when I was down."

Just as with Joshua, it is when we have gone as far as we can that we should stand still, remain calm, and listen to the quiet voice from within. As we observe evidences of our Father's hand in all creation and trust in the miracle that can come to pass in our lives after the trial of our faith, we can be calm enough for the Spirit to whisper to us.

Our Father's love for us is unconditional. It is not conditional upon our righteousness. He has told us, "If ye love me, keep my commandments," but His love for us is always unconditional, even when He must sometimes allow us to suffer the consequences of our wrong choices. It is when we come to know these things that we will have the courage to stand alone in defense of right, and when we will be able to help others find their way, even if the trail is steep and the sun hot and the camp temporarily out of sight.

On our way back home, there will be those along the way, just as with the good Samaritan on his way to Jericho, who will be in need of our help. As we become unwavering and unhalting in our direction and know who we are and, more important, whose we are, there will be others who will look to us to help guide them home safely. We will find ourselves traveling our own Jericho Road.

My sister Sharon tells it this way:

"A certain sister went down from her home to the supermarket and fell among thieves who stripped her of her confidence and self-esteem when she overheard them talking about her and her children, and they walked away, leaving her alone.

"And by chance there came down the aisle a certain lady dressed in fine clothes, and when she saw her, she passed down another grocery aisle.

"And likewise a lady who was a leader in the community, when she was at the place, came and looked on her and passed down another aisle without speaking.

"But a certain sister came down the aisle where she was, and when she saw her, she had compassion and went to her and bound up her wounds as she said, 'Let's go talk.'

"And at a time of doubt and discouragement, one sister ministered to another as she spoke of faith and hope and extended unconditional love—charity."

Occasionally when we may think we are guiding someone else along the path, we learn that in reality they were guiding us.

One spring day I was sitting in a fourth grade class, with the windows open, and all the world was coming into blossom outdoors. The children were sitting in their seats, busily doing their routine work. I pondered my responsibilities for these children and asked myself what curriculum was really important at that moment. Maybe because of the springtime or the scent of the blossoms in the air, suddenly the classroom routine was burdensome. I got up from my desk, walked to the chalkboard, and erased the arithmetic assignment on the board. Then I said softly to the children, "Please put your pencils down and clear your desks. Put everything away. We are going out of doors to experience life. I'd like you to take with you all of your senses. I'd like you to take with you your eyes and your ears and your mouth and your sense of touch."

I explained that we were going to go out to discover and explore and uncover and feel and hear and taste and sense all of life around us. I also asked that no one speak or interfere with anyone else's experience in nature. Then, when I gave them a signal, they were to come back in and write down their own feelings about their personal experience with life.

Outside I noticed one little boy sitting on the sidewalk and looking up at the sky. My impulse was to urge him to move around and to explore and experience, but I resisted. After an appropriate length of time I signaled to the children to come back in and invited them in a whisper to write on paper what they had experienced. In time the little boy who sat so still motioned to me. I went over to his desk, and he eagerly pushed his paper toward me and said, "Read mine." I read it in a whisper and it said, "I like blue. It's a place that never ends. It makes you feel like you could fall right through—blue." I realized that he had experienced the beauties of the sky that surrounds us in a way I had never realized. I was grateful that I had not interrupted his exploration into life to force him to experience what I was experiencing.

Another little child motioned to me. Her paper began, "Spring is a wonderful time of year. You can think. You can see. You can smell. You can hear." Her thoughts went on for a full page, unfolding her joy in nature.

I looked over at another little girl, Kristine. This was a child who always came to school late and said she liked the fourth grade because her teacher didn't yell at her when she came late; a little girl whose arms and elbows and lips were always chapped, whose dress was held together with a large safety pin, and whose hair was unkempt. I noticed that she was chewing on her pencil, struggling to find the words to express her feelings. Finally she gave a sign that said, "I want to share." I walked toward her desk and knelt down by her so that we would be on the same level, eye to eye. She was laboriously writing down the last word on a paper that had been erased so many times it was torn through. She handed it to me, and I read, "I never knowed the world looked so good." Kneeling beside her, which I thought was putting us at the same level, I realized she was much higher. I said in my heart and to her, "Thank you, Kristine. I never knowed the world looked so good either."

When we draw strength from within, we can see beauty everywhere. And we build that strength as we strive always to see God's hand in all that is good, in all of His creations. Every morning a new day is born, evidence of God's great love for us.

As we travel on our way back home and strive to follow the prophet, to study the scriptures, to pray for understanding, and to live the commandments, on occasion we will feel the overwhelming assurance of the close and sweet companionship of our Savior. And it will be so real that we will feel an ever-increasing desire to stay on the path until we reach home and rejoice again in that personal relationship that we once knew with Him.

On our way back home, may we come to know that with our Savior as our companion, we can make it. He made it possible. And we can expect to renew our friendships with those with whom we have shared the journey. "And the same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory." (D&C 130:2.)
