Ardeth Greene Kapp, My Neighbor, My Sister, My Friend ( 1990)

Chapter 18

Is It Okay to Believe Just One More Year?

A few years ago, my little niece approached her mother one December day as the spirit of Christmas began awakening. The gift-giving symbolized by Santa Claus and the other wonderful traditions were emerging with each new day. In a quiet moment away from the hustle and bustle, this little girl, with her heart full of childlike excitement and yet on the verge of growing up, cornered her mother and, in all soberness, posed this thoughtful question: "Mom, is it okay if I believe just one more year?"

In our grown-up world, sometimes we quit asking the questions because we are sure we already know the answers. And yet with each new year, there awakens within our hearts a yearning to reach far enough to somehow comprehend more fully the significance of that singular event, the birth of the Savior of the world and what it means to each one of us individually and collectively, as brothers and sisters, disciples, Latter-day Saints. Off in a quiet corner away from the hustle and bustle, we might well ask ourselves, What think I of Christ?

An unknown author makes this observation: "Though Christ a thousand times in Bethlehem be born / If He is not born in thee, thy soul is still forlorn." And even though we know the answer, consider with me this question: Is it okay if I believe just one more year?

In celebrating the event of the birth of our Savior, there are many pageants, plays, programs, and performances. Having taught elementary school for a number of years, I can personally give an account of a varied number of Josephs and Marys; and old bathrobes tucked up and tied around little bodies to give some resemblance of a shepherd; and angels with tinsel halos made from coat hangers mounted in such a way as to keep the haloes attached to the heads of the constantly moving little angels. You could always tell the wise men from the shepherds because they carried odd-shaped boxes adorned with jewels brought from home. Faithful parents would come: fathers in business suits looking as if they may have just slipped out from some large business meeting, and mothers and grandmothers sitting on little chairs far too small for comfort.

As a teacher, I would take my place midway between the performers and the audience. I never did quite determine where the greater performance was taking place. Was it on the makeshift stage or in the audience, where each pair of radiant eyes was riveted on performers as though each were doing a solo number?

Perhaps you are familiar with the school pageant where the little innkeeper forgot his lines and responded from his heart instead. When Joseph asked if there was room in the inn, the young innkeeper hesitated and the prompter whispered his lines from the wings: "There is no room. Be gone." The young innkeeper repeated the words. The young actor, Joseph, sadly placed his arm around Mary, and the two little people who had rehearsed their lines so well started to move away according to the script and the rehearsal. Suddenly this Christmas pageant became different from any other. "Don't go, Joseph," the innkeeper cried out. "Bring Mary back. She can have my room."

Contrary to the actual account of this event, for this pageant there was room in the inn. The room was in the innkeeper's own room; it was in his heart. The question we each must ask ourselves in our overcrowded lives: Is there room in the inn? Will we take the Savior into our life, into our heart, into our very soul, so that He becomes the center of our lives?

Late one evening the Christmas lights sparkled like jewels as we drove through the snow-packed streets to the outskirts of town. The lights were not as plentiful here, but each colorful bulb added beauty to the more humble homes nestled together in the gently falling snow. Driving down one street and then another, we tried with difficulty to read the street signs. Finally we found the address we were looking for. Making our way through the deep snow of the unshoveled walk, we rang the doorbell and were immediately greeted by Brent, an eight-year-old boy. He invited us in. The living room was small, but warm and cozy with a fire burning in the fireplace. The boy's eighty-six-year-old grandfather, with his leg in a cast, rested on the couch near the tree. He had slipped off the roof while attempting to shovel the heavy snow that had fallen the night before.

As we exchanged greetings and hugs, Brent stood anxiously waiting for the first opportunity to ask a question. In a most forthright and direct way he asked, "Have you ever shaken hands with the Prophet?" The eagerness with which he asked gave me reason to believe that he may have rehearsed that question in his mind several times in anticipation of our visit. "Yes, Brent," I said, "I have shaken the hand of the Prophet." "Oh," he said. His eyes were wide and his voice reminded me of what a great privilege that is. "If only I could just shake the hand of the Prophet," he went on. His tone suggested that should that be a possibility, it would surely be the greatest Christmas gift he could receive. And if not the greatest, at least it would be among the very best.

Sensing the love and respect Brent obviously felt for our Prophet, and wanting to somehow provide a tie between the Prophet and the young boy, I reached out my hand. "Brent," I said, "this hand has shaken the hand of the Prophet." He grabbed my hand and shook it vigorously. Then he let go and turned his hand over from front to back to examine it thoroughly. "I'll never wash my hand," he said. Considering the problems this decision might cause, I suggested that he probably should wash his hand and just keep the memory in his mind. This suggestion was not acceptable. He had a better idea. "Okay," he said. "I'll wash my hand, but I'll save the water." That seemed like a good suggestion, although I supposed he was only joking.

Brent left the room. A few minutes later, he returned this time carrying a plastic bag dripping with water. Before anyone could question him, he proudly announced, "I washed my hand," holding up the bag full of water for all to see. We talked about the water in the bag and how that was a distant connection to the Prophet. Then our visit about Christmases past continued. Brent sat on the floor facing the Christmas tree, his knees peeking through his faded bluejeans, and from the corner of my eye I watched him examine the bag of water as if he were expecting to see some evidence that this was holy water. The fire burned low and the lights on the tree seemed to brighten.

After a few minutes, Brent got up and, taking his treasure with him, left the room. While I wondered if we would see him again before we left, he returned, this time without the plastic bag full of water. He had determined a better solution for his desire to be in touch with the Prophet. Standing in the doorway with his T-shirt wet all the way down the front, he explained what he had done. "I drank the water," he said.

This creative solution was not to be viewed as a joke or something to be made fun of. Brent was serious. He was carrying something important, not on the outside where he could lay it down, but on the inside. The water from the hand that he had washed, a hand that had shaken the hand of someone who had shaken the hand of the Prophet, was now part of him, on the inside, and he would keep it. He made room on the inside.

Would it really make any difference? What did it really mean to Brent? It was much more than water, I was sure. But in the rush of the Christmas season, the incident slipped from my mind until a few days later. Then at sacrament meeting on the Sunday before Christmas, I received some understanding of what this young boy was feeling and wanting. The sacramental prayer had been offered and the sacred emblems were being passed quietly and reverently. The Sunday before Christmas brings a sensitivity that makes important things even more important, a time of recommitment and rededication, of sorrow for wrong doings, and of resolve and hope to do better in the new year. As the sister on my right passed the sacrament tray and held it while I raised the small cup of water to my lips, into my mind came this thought: "I want to get this water on the inside."

I thought of Brent, a newly baptized member. I remembered the baptismal covenant. I thought of the symbolism of the water, the washing away of our sins. The cup of water of which I would partake renewed the promises and blessings of the atonement of Jesus Christ. It was His birth we were celebrating. I could hear in my mind again the sacramental prayer on the water: " . . . that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen." The water symbolizes His blood, which was shed for each of us so that we might live and have eternal life. "Thank you, Brent," I said to myself, "for this wonderful gift you have given me: an increased desire to drink the water, the symbolism of His atonement, to get it on the inside, to make room in my life for Him so that I might become more like Him."

To the question from Brent, "Have you ever shaken hands with the Prophet?" my answer is yes. But I have also shaken hands with a little eight-year-old boy, and I've learned important and eternal truths from both.

President Marion G. Romney gave us great insight when he explained, "Now there is a doctrine abroad in the world today which teaches that the physical emblems of the sacrament are transformed into the flesh and blood of Jesus. We do not teach such doctrine, for we know that any transformation which comes from the administration of the sacrament takes place in the souls of those who understandingly partake of it. It is the participating individuals who are affected, and they are affected in a most marvelous way, for they are given the Spirit of the Lord to be with them." (Conference Report, April 1946, p. 40.)

In the spring of 1980, my husband and I went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the town of Bethlehem. We walked the paths where Jesus walked and felt His presence there. We stood beneath the gnarled olive trees in the Garden of Gethsemane, where the Savior of the world suffered and shed drops of blood.

As we looked on the brow of the hill at Golgotha, we could hear in our minds the words, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." We envisioned the setting of the Last Supper, where He may have been thinking of the imminent events that were to follow, and where He taught His apostles and gave the commandment to love one another. We thought of Him moving up the streets of the old city and carrying the cross toward Golgotha, because there was no room for Him in the hearts of the persecutors. In the quiet of that hour, we each asked ourselves, "Why did He do this all for me? How in God's name can I ever pay?" And we wondered if we, like the innkeeper, would call, "Come back, come back. You can have my room. My heart. My time. My life. My vote. I give it all. All that I have. All that I am. All that I ever hope to be."

Oh yes, it is okay to believe one more year and another and another and another. We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost. We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved through obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. At those very times when we feel least worthy, least comfortable about carrying His holy name and have a keener sense of our imperfections—those moments when the flesh is weak and our spirits suffer disappointments knowing what we can become—we might feel a sense of withdrawing, a pulling away, a feeling of needing to set aside for a time at least that divine relationship with the Savior until we are more worthy. It is at that very moment, even in our unworthiness, that the offer is again given to us to accept the great gift of the atonement, even before we change. When we feel the need to pull away, we can reach out to Him. Instead of feeling the need to resist, we can submit to His will and partake of His gifts. What do we give in return? Love to one another. Then as our faith grows stronger, His Spirit fills our hearts. The Light of Christ burns brightly, and we take upon us His countenance.
