George C. Lambert, George Q. Cannon, Gems of Reminiscence: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 17 ( 1915)

PREFACE

"Gems of Reminiscence," the title selected for this volume, is sufficiently comprehensive to include incidents from real life on a wide variety of subjects, so long as the effect is to promote faith.

The articles included in this volume are sufficiently varied as to subject matter to interest most of those into whose hands it may come.

In making this volume double the size—that is, double the number of pages—of its predecessors, we have acted upon the suggestion of a literary friend who has had enough experience in publishing books to realize how difficult it is to secure any profit from publishing small editions of books of 96 pages each and binding the volumes separately at the low price of 25 cents per volume, retail. The opinion was expressed that most of those whose taste would lead them to buy such a book would just as willingly pay 50 cents retail for a volume that contained double the number of pages in the same style of binding. We decided to try the experiment and if this venture meets with encouragement, future volumes issued will probably be in the larger size and the price 50 cents per volume instead of the smaller volumes at the price of 25 cents each, as in the past.

That there is an abundance of material in the experience of faithful members of the Church to furnish subject matter for an indefinite number of volumes, of a faith-promoting nature, and that the young people of the community may be benefited more by that class of reading than any other, is as evident now as it ever has been in the past.

We bespeak the interest of all faithful members of the Church in this work of providing the best of reading matter and at the same time perpetuating a knowledge of incidents in their lives that might otherwise be lost to posterity, and trust that all who have had experience that would be faith-promoting if published, will furnish us the material to continue the publication of the Faith-Promoting Series as long as there is need for it. We can not promise them pecuniary profit for so doing, but to those who will conscientiously and intelligently help in the manner indicated we can promise the kind of reward that has thus far encouraged us, that is, a consciousness of having placed benefits within the reach of young Latter-day Saints that will be appreciated in the future if not now.
