George C. Lambert, George Q. Cannon, Gems of Reminiscence: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 17 ( 1915)

CHAPTER II.

CATHOLIC PRIESTS JEALOUS OF HIS SUCCESS—ARRESTED ON A TRUMPED-UP CHARGE—TRIED BEFORE GOVERNOR'S AID-DE-CAMP—FRIGHTFUL SCENE AMONG A SCHOOL OF WHALES—FARCE OF A TRIAL BEFORE THE GOVERNOR OF THE PROTECTORATE—INSPIRED TO PLEAD HIS OWN CAUSE—IMPRESSION MADE UPON THE GOVERNOR—AMERICAN CONSUL'S FRIENDLY ACT—BANISHED FROM TAHITI—BEFRIENDED BY A QUEEN.

THE natives were eager for the Gospel, and he lost on time in commencing the work of proselyting among them. He also engaged in conducting day schools among the natives with good effect, the natives being anxious to attend and quick to learn. The Catholic priests of the region, however, who were making almost frantic efforts to proselyte as well as to establish schools in imitation of those of Elder Brown, were so jealous of his success and so chagrined at their own failure, that they set about devising schemes to discredit Elder Brown and gain an advantage over him. They even went to the extreme of taking forcible possession of a meeting house built and exclusively owned by the Latter-day Saints, and trying to monopolize the use of it. They presumed upon their influence with the officers of the French protectorate to sustain them in this arbitrary and high-handed conduct, and continued it even in the face of a decision against them, when the officers could find no warrant even in the rank anti-"Mormon" prejudice then prevailing for favoring the priests, much as they desired to do so.

While at Putuhara, on the island of Anaa, Elder Brown was arrested on a trumped-up charge and haled before the governor's aid-de camp, who had arrived on the French war frigate "Durance." It was soon evident that the Catholic priests had conspired to entrap him for the purpose of breaking down his influence with the natives and closing his schools. When the charges, which were both frivolous and absurd, were read to him he plead not guilty and asked the privilege of being tried in the vicinity, where he felt sure he could soon establish his innocence. This privilege was refused on the plea that his offense was too great and he was too dangerous to be tried before any less personage than the governor. He would therefore have to go to Tahiti and appear before the governor. After being compelled to witness the most shameless and revolting immorality on the part of the guard who had him in charge he was thrust into a filthy and foul smelling old oil boat and thus conveyed to the war frigate, which was lying off shore, there being no harbor or anchorage at that island. While the boat was proceeding to the frigate it ran into a school of whales that numbered hundreds if not thousands. The native oarsmen propelling the boat were almost paralyzed with fear, and withdrew their oars and scarcely dared to breath while the whales were passing. Elder Brown in relating the circumstance admitted that although he had been in a great many dangerous places he had never felt the hair on his head so much inclined to stand on end before as while witnessing the passing of those huge sea monsters, so close as to be touched with the hand, and having the power if they had chosen to exert it, to smash the boat and send its passengers into eternity by a mere whisk of the tail.

The voyage ended at the port of Papeete, November 3, 1851, and the prisoner was soon transferred from the war frigate to a cobblestone dungeon in the town. From there he was taken before the governor and arraigned on the charges preferred against him. A native Catholic was first introduced as a witness. He had evidently been coached in regard to what he should say, but not sufficiently so to have it clear in his mind, or else he had scruples against perjuring himself, for he hesitated and seemed confused. The governor evidently thought his confusion due to the prisoner looking at him, for he ordered Elder Brown not to look at the witness, and told him that his "countenance was so fierce and vivid as to baffle the most substantial witness." The next person used against him as a witness was a man who had been brought to Papeete as a prisoner, but never arraigned. He evidently thought that his own immunity from prosecution depended upon his furnishing damaging evidence against Elder Brown, and he seemed more than willing to testify to anything.

Not liking the way the trial was proceeding, if it was a trial, as he was being given no opportunity to defend himself, Elder Brown arose and claimed his rights as an American citizen, making as strong a plea as he could in his own behalf, and quoting international law and treaties that came to his mind spontaneously upon the occasion, without his ever having read or heard the same quoted before.

The governor and others present seemed to be profoundly impressed by what he said, the result being that with much embarrassment the hearing was closed and he was immediately marched back to his filthy cell.

About this time the American consul, W. H. Kelly, having heard of the proceedings, called upon the governor in the interest of Elder Brown, as an American citizen. The governor informed him that the prisoner was a very dangerous as well as a very learned man, thoroughly familiar with international laws and treaties, which he was able to quote from memory, and that he was undoubtedly a military man of no mean ability. Inquiring what he could do for the relief of the prisoner, he was told that he could put up a 50,000 franc bond for the good conduct of the Elder during the remainder of his stay under the jurisdiction of the French protectorate, in which case he might regain his liberty, but that he must leave the protectorate by the first out-going vessel, no more to return on pain of perpetual imprisonment. The consul accordingly put up the bond and Elder Brown was released and turned over to him.

The consul advised that he confer with his friends and see what could be done about complying with the terms of the governor's decree. The missionaries were accordingly called together and discussed the decree of banishment, with the result that they decided that Elder Brown had better sail on the little schooner "Ravai," owned by the Saints and commanded by B. F. Grouard. It was bound for a cruise among the Tuamotu group of islands, and to make a final landing at Laivavai, four hundred miles south-east of Tahiti, and outside of the protectorate. The vessel was accordingly got ready and he sailed on board of it November 17, 1851.

As the boat was leaving the Tahitian harbor it encountered severe headwinds and had to beat its way against wind and wave until it became somewhat disabled. Provisions also ran short, and it became necessary to change the course of the vessel and head it towards Tubuai. When within eighty miles of that island, the provisions became utterly exhausted and a dead calm set in. After severe suffering, Tubuai was reached on the 29th of November.

When Pitamai Vehene, the queen, heard that Elder Brown had been banished, she went out to the vessel in her own canoe and invited him to go ashore with her and partake of her hospitality. She said "this is my island, and the French have no right here. I will be responsible for all the trouble that may arise." He accepted the invitation, was entertained at the queen's mansion for a number of days, and then continued his voyage to Laivavai, where he relieved Elder Pratt, who was then presiding there.
