George C. Lambert, George Q. Cannon, Gems of Reminiscence: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 17 ( 1915)

A Sailor-Saint's Adventures

CHAPTER I.

E. R. S. SCHNELLE'S BELIEF IN A PROVIDENCE OVER HIS LIFE—BIRTH AND SUCCESSION OF ACCIDENTS—GOES TO SEA AS CABIN BOY—CRUEL TREATMENT—PUMPING SUGAR AND WATER—SHIP CRUSHED AGAINST BREAKWATER—RECKLESS JUMP—WOES AS A COOK.

ACCORDING to the old fatalistic saw: "If a man is born to be hung, he can never be drowned." This is far more trite than true. So far as it implies that any man is born or predestined to be hung, it is not true. But that some have been marvelously and repeatedly preserved from drowning, and that there is evidently some reason for their apparent immunity, is true.

Brother Ernest R. S. Schnelle has had many narrow escapes from drowning, and been subjected to very many accidents of other kinds. He firmly believes that there has been a Providence over his life, and that his willingness to accept the Gospel and devote his life to the service of the Master may be the sequel therefor.

He was born on the 25th of May, 1852, in Bremen, Germany. He fell in the fire when only a few months old, and narrowly escaped burning to death. He bears the scar of the burn on his forhead even now. He was almost drowned in a mill race when he was only two years old. Of course he doesn't remember the incident, but was told so by his parents.

His mother was a consistent member of the Protestant Church, but his father while nominally of the same creed had a poor opinion of preachers in general and was never known to attend Church but once, and that was on the occasion of the confirming of his eldest son; and then he seized his hat and left in the midst of the sermon, not having patience to remain longer.

Without explaining her reason for the belief, the mother used to say that the time would come when one of her boys would believe in the God of Heaven. Of the parents and seven children which the family included, Ernest (the subject of this sketch) and one brother are all that are now alive, and Ernest has had such a checkered career that it is a wonder that he has survived.

When five years old he accidentally fell from a housetop, and was supposed to be dead when picked up, but, to the surprise of all his friends, he soon recovered.

When seven years of age he threw a snowball at a girl in a spirit of fun. She resented it by taking off her wooden shoe and crushing his skull in with it.

When nine years old he had an accidental fall, and broke his right arm, and also fell from a ladder and drove his front teeth through his lip.

When he was fourteen years of age he went to sea, as cabin boy, in a Spanish barque, called the "Tres Hermanos," of Allicante, Spain, bound for Havana, Cuba. During the voyage the crew mutinied, some Spaniards being among them who used their knives quite freely. The chief officer was beaten most shamefully and almost killed, but the captain finally brought the rebellious men under subjection.

On reaching Havana, Ernest quit the vessel, and shipped on the Spanish brig "Michael Angel," bound for Falmouth, England. The very first day after sailing from Havana he was stricken with yellow fever, a disease that was so prevalent in Cuba that many ships in the harbors were unable to sail for want of crews, so many of the sailors having died of the fever.

Ernest had the fever so badly for nine days that he was not expected to recover; in fact, no one thought it worth while trying to save him. He was delirious as a result of the fever, and was fastened in the sail locker at night, and allowed to lie on the water casks in the day time. However, he lived in spite of the neglect with which he was treated, but before he had recovered his strength he fell overboard. The cook happened to hear the splash as he struck the water, and on looking around saw him come to the surface and threw a rope to him, by which he was hauled on board.

On the 8th of December, 1866, the ship encountered a terrific storm in the Bay of Biscay, during which the starboard bulwarks was washed away, and the ship sprang a leak. The cargo consisted of crude sugar and cacao beans, and the sugar became dissolved through the water rushing into the hold. The crew had to be kept busy for two and a half days, pumping the sugar and water out of the hold, to keep the ship afloat.

Falmouth was reached in the beginning of January, and the ship was repaired. On the 18th of January she set sail for London, with a channel pilot on board. The next day she encountered a severe storm in which she lost her foremast head, and the pilot thought best to return to Falmouth, which place was reached the following day. The storm increased in fury and the ship, dragging both anchors, was being driven on to the break water. Her signals of distress brought no relief, for all the ships near by had enough to do to take care of themselves. The ship struck broadside against the breakwater, damaging it to such an extent that it sank within a few minutes.

Ernest was standing upon the deck when the collision occurred, and sprang towards the breakwater. It was a very daring—in fact, foolhardy thing for him to do, as he had about one chance in a thousand of escaping death, but fortunately he did escape, by clutching the timbers of the breakwater, almost as a cat would, and clinging on thereto.

As the ship sank the crew clambered up the breakwater and were saved.

Ernest had been so cruelly treated while on board the brig that he had little regret at the loss of the vessel. The captain was a Spaniard, and a most hard-hearted, cruel man. He was the owner of the vessel, and was so avaricious that he actually begrudged the boy the food required to keep him alive. He expected him to subsist upon such scraps as were left from his own meals, and if there were none left, for him to go without, and would curse him if he asked for food, telling him that he was a poor Spaniard, and couldn't afford to feed him. When the ship was lost, not being insured, he was indeed poor. The crew were so incensed at him, because they couldn't collect the pay due them, that several of them actually drew their knives and attempted to assault him in the Spanish Consul's office at Falmouth.

Ernest was kept at the Cornwall Sailors' Home for a few weeks, as he neither had any means of subsistence nor chance to go home, and then was told to get out and shift for himself. He began seeking employment among the ships in port, and soon succeeded in finding a captain who was willing to employ him as cabin boy at $5.00 per month.

His new berth was soon found to be but little better than his former one, so far as treatment was ocncerned. The first job given him to do was to black the captain's shoes. The shoes were wet, and he didn't succeed in making them shine as nicely as they otherwise would have done, and he received a clout for it that almost made him see stars. However, he had sufficient to eat, and was thankful for that. The vessel was a Hanoverian brig, the "Lucy von Leer," Captain Jensen commanding, bound for Antwerp.

He soon found out that, in addition to serving as cabin boy, he was also expected to cook for the officers and crew. While preparing his first dinner he was sent aloft to shorten sail, and when he came down the peas he was cooking were burned, and that brought down upon him the wrath of all the officers and men who learned of it. The channel pilot yelled for some one to beat him, and he had to run the gauntlet to escape the blows aimed at him.

After arriving at Antwerp, while waiting for the crew to be paid off, and when he had just finished cooking the Sunday dinner, several of the crew volunteered special praise for the quality of the soup he had made for them. He was so overjoyed thereat that he forgot to take the spoons from the water in which he had been washing the dishes, and threw them and the water together overboard into the dock. The spoons were not missed until supper time arrived, and then the failure to find them resulted in his recalling and confessing his forgetful act, and receiving such a general and merciless beating that the crew of a Norwegian barque, lying in the dock near by interfered, and threatened to come to his relief and thrash the Hanoverians if they didn't desist. They stopped beating him, but the chief officer swore that he would get even with the boy when he got to sea.

Fearing the threat might be executed, Ernest watched his chance to escape, and succeeded in getting away two days later, probably saving his life by doing so, as the boy taken in his place died of yellow fever in Rio Janiero, whither the ship sailed.

Ernest succeeded in finding a chance to return home by working his passage on a Hanoverian barque called "Emil," commanded by Captain Onkier. When he went on board the ship, it being in the night, a big Newfoundland dog seized him and nearly worried him to death. The dog not only bit him severely, but so thoroughly frightened him that he crouched in a corner, not daring to stir until the carpenter discovered him there the next morning and released him.

Being at the mercy of the crew on the voyage to Bremer Haven, he was compelled to steal provisions and liquor for them, and was caught in the act by the Captain who struck him on the side of the head with such force that it sent him reeling, and he was subsequently beaten by the crew for his lack of success. During the nine days' voyage he had no bed to sleep on or cover himself with, and he was about as comfortless as when he shared the bed of the dog.

He reached home nine months after first embarking, about half clad and without a cent to show for the time he had been absent.

His parents, however, gave him a hearty welcome, and were horrified at learning of his narrow escapes and severe treatment.
