George C. Lambert, George Q. Cannon, Gems of Reminiscence: Faith-Promoting Series, no. 17 ( 1915)

Warned by The Spirit

CHAPTER I.

CHAUNCEY W. WEST SENT ON A MISSION TO ASIA—DREAMS OF THE WRECK OF A VESSEL UPON WHICH HE HAD ENGAGED PASSAGE—LEFT THE SHIP, AND AFTERWARDS LEARNED FROM THE CREW OF THE VESSEL BEING WRECKED JUST AS HE HAD DREAMED THAT IT WOULD BE—WHILE AWAITING ANOTHER OPPORTUNITY TO SHIP TO CALIFORNIA WAS PROMPTED TO VACATE A HOUSE WHERE HE AND COMPANION ELDER WERE STAYING—HOUSE IMMEDIATELY AFTERWARDS CRUSHED BY LARGE STONE ROLLING DOWN FROM SIDE OF MOUNTAIN.

NUMEROUS instances have occurred in the experience of the Saints in this age, and especially of the missionaries, of their lives being preserved through their heeding the warnings of the Spirit. Bishop Chauncey W. West, of Ogden, who was sent on a mission to Asia in 1852 relates some instances of this kind in a sketch of his life published in Tullidge's Histories. The field of labor to which he was assigned was Siam, but after laboring for some time in India and trying in vain to secure passage to Siam, he and Elder Dewey took passage as sailors to China. After a very trying voyage of four months they landed at Wampoo in China, near the city of Canton. Finding it still impractical to make their way to Siam, they determined if possible to get back to San Francisco. Among others to whom they applied for passage was Captain Deble, of the American Vessel "Hiega." They agreed upon the terms of their passage, and took their luggage on board on the 11th of May, 1854. Some difficulty was experienced in getting out to sea, after which fair winds soon wafted them to Hong Kong, where they arrived on the evening of the 14th. There they remained until the 23rd. Just before the time fixed for their departure Elder West had a dream in which he saw the vessel upon which they had engaged passage wrecked upon a reef, with hundreds of Chinamen clinging to her hull, while many more were in the water. The dream was repeated several times during the night, and made such an impression upon his mind that he determined to leave the ship. The Elders accordingly effected a settlement for their passage that far, and were rowed to the shore in a small boat. After spending some time at Canton and Hong Kong, being entertained at the latter place at the home of a Mr. Young, with whom they had become acquainted, Elder Dewey was taken very sick with chills and fever. Elder West waited upon him with great solicitude and he soon began to recover. One day Elder West felt impressed to remove his friend from the house to a vessel called the "Cressy," upon which he was trying to arrange for their passage to California. He was in such haste to act upon his impression that their trunks were left in the house to be sent for later.

It had been raining very hard for several days, and soon after they left the house a large rock on the mountain side, loosened by the storm, came rolling down at a terrific speed, striking and demolishing the house they had just vacated. The immates fled, in terror from the house, but not in time for all to escape injury, as one man was killed and several others more or less hurt. The lives of the Elders were doubtless saved by their acting promptly on the warning of the spirit, for had they remained where they were a few minutes longer they would have been crushed. Elder West also subsequently met the captain of the "Hiega," who insisted upon knowing why the two Elders had abandoned the ship after engaging their passage. Elder West told him it was because of a dream he had of the vessel being wrecked. The captain then asked why he did not tell him of the dream. Elder West replied that he did not believe the captain would have had any faith in the warning that the dream conveyed to him, but would probably have denounced him as a fool for believing in it. The captain admitted that he was probably right in his conclusion.

The Elders soon found another chance of engaging passage to California, and arrived safely in San Francisco on the 7th of September, 1854.
