The First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles have announced the creation of two new missions in Africa. The Ghana Cape Coast Mission and the Uganda Kampala Mission were organized in July 2005. The two new missions bring the total missions worldwide to 341.

Ghana Cape Coast Mission

The Ghana Cape Coast Mission was created from countries previously covered by the Ivory Coast Abidjan Mission. The new mission includes Togo, Benin, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, and the western half of Ghana. The Ghana Cape Coast Mission includes 13,590 members of the Cape Coast Ghana, Kumasi Ghana, and Takoradi Ghana Stakes and the Assin Foso Ghana and Swedru Ghana Districts. Lindsay Thomas Dil, originally called earlier this year to begin serving as the mission president of the Ivory Coast Abidjan Mission on July 1, 2005, has been reassigned as the mission’s new president.

The Ivory Coast Abidjan Mission’s new president is Norbert Kalogo Ounleu. This mission now includes only the Ivory Coast and the Church’s 9,149 members in the Abidjan and Abobo stakes.

The creation of the new mission also affects the boundaries for the Ghana Accra Mission. The Ghana Accra Mission now covers the countries of Sierra Leone, Liberia, and the eastern half of Ghana. The realigned boundaries include 19,151 members in the Accra Ghana Christiansborg, Accra Ghana Lartebiokorshie, and Monrovia Liberia Stakes, and the Abomosu Ghana, Koforidua Ghana, Bo Sierra Leone, and Freetown Sierra Leone Districts.

Uganda Kampala Mission

The Uganda Kampala Mission covers Uganda and Ethiopia. Ralph L. Duke has been called to serve as the mission’s president. Church membership within the mission includes 3,959 members of the Jinja Uganda and the Kampala Uganda Districts.

The Kenya Nairobi Mission, which formerly included the countries of Uganda, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Tanzania, will now cover Kenya and Tanzania. The mission includes 6,099 members in the Nairobi Kenya Stake and the Chyulu Kenya District.
