Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Our Lord and Master

We live in an age of doubt, faithlessness, and sin when even eternal verities are being questioned and discarded. Many of the pulpits of the land are being turned into pipelines to collectivism—preaching the social gospel and denying the basic Christian concepts and the very existence of God and the divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Some time ago I attended a three-day convention known as the New England Rally for God, Family, and Country, which concluded on Independence Day, July 4.

In the evening at an informal dinner in a hotel in Boston, brief informal remarks were made by prominent participants in the conference. One of those was Tom Anderson, publisher of nine state farm papers in the South. In the course of his remarks he said, in substance:

Ladies and gentlemen, I have been accused of leaving my church. I want you to know I did not leave my church, my church left me. My church no longer teaches that Jesus is the Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of the world, the very Son of God, as I was taught at my mother's knee and in my Sunday School class as a boy. My church no longer teaches the reality of the holy atonement, the resurrection, and the final judgment. I still believe these concepts of Christianity as taught to me in my childhood. But my church no longer teaches these basic concepts. Instead my church is teaching the social gospel, and, like many other Christian churches, the pulpit has become a pipeline to collectivism. Again, I say, I did not leave my church, my church left me.

Thank God for faith, for testimony. Thank God for the Church of Jesus Christ. It has not left us—it will never leave us. Thank God for the eternal truths of the gospel of peace and salvation. Thank God for the anchor, the feeling of security, the inner calm that the everlasting truths of the gospel bring to every faithful child of God.

Each year as the Christmas season approaches, all true Christians direct attention to one of the greatest events of all realms and of all eternity. The Lord Omnipotent who reigneth came down to earth and mortality, becoming the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh.

His mother, Mary, of the tribe of Judah, was undoubtedly the most marvelous and beautiful of all virgins, having been chosen for this extremely high honor. "And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. . . . Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS." (Luke 1:28, 30-31.)

The Babe of Bethlehem became the Nazarene, the Man of Galilee, the Life and Light of the world, the Savior and Redeemer of mankind, the miracle of all time. More books have been written about him, more buildings have been erected to his honor, more men have died with his name on their lips than any other person who ever lived.

Men have tried to summarize his life. One such effort by J.A. Francis was sent to me by President Heber J. Grant in 1938 and reads as follows:

Here is a man who was born in an obscure village, child of a peasant woman. He grew up in another obscure village. He worked in a carpentry shop until he was thirty, and then for three years he was an itinerant preacher. He never wrote a book. [Not one small scrap of evidence exists that he ever wrote or dictated so much as a single personal letter.] He never held an office. He never owned a home. He never had a family. He never went to college. He never put his foot inside a big city. He never traveled two hundred miles from the place where he was born. He never did one of the things that usually accompany greatness. He had no credentials but himself. He had nothing to do with in this world except the naked power of his divine manhood.

While still a young man, the tide of popular opinion turned against him. His friends ran away. One of them denied him. Another betrayed him. He was turned over to his enemies. He went through the mockery of a trial. He was nailed upon the cross between two thieves. His executioners gambled for the only piece of property he had on earth while he was dying, and that was his coat. When he was dead he was taken down and laid in a borrowed grave through the pity of a friend.

Nineteen wide centuries have come and gone and today he is the center of the human race and the leader of the column of progress. I am far within the mark when I say that all the armies that ever marched, and all the navies that were ever built, and all the parliaments that ever sat, and all the kings that ever reigned put together, have not affected the life of man upon this earth as powerfully as has this one solitary life.

The sweetest story ever told is the story of the coming of the Christ child, through whose perfect life and by compliance with whose teachings all may find peace of mind and soul-contentment.

Yes, it is possible, even in this wicked, war-torn world, to glorify God, to have peace in the soul, and to feel a spirit of goodwill and fellowship. I have been a witness to this truth in many lands on both sides of the iron curtain. We are all brothers and sisters, members of the family of God. There is a divine spark in every soul who comes into this world.

Never has this spirit of the Christ in our Father's children impressed me as it did in a little Baptist Church in atheistic Russia in Moscow in 1959. May I let one of the twenty members of the American press who accompanied me tell the story—with apology for my name in it. This is the same man, somewhat of a humorist but a fine Christian, who affirmed that his church had left him.

His report, which was carried in several farm papers, is headlined, "A Visit to a Russian Church With Secretary Benson," and it reads as follows:

Imagine getting your greatest spiritual experience in atheistic Russia! We had just left Moscow's citadel of atheism, fantastically ugly Red Square where thousands of subservients come daily to worship the incarnation of history's foremost mummies, Vladimir "The Body" Lenin and "Good Ol' Joe" Stalin, their carcasses perfectly preserved in their glass showcase in the red marble mausoleum. They're the only well-dressed people in Moscow—all dressed up and no place to go. . . .

Sunday schools in Russia are not permitted to exist. All "education" belongs to the state—and so do the children. Six days a week for 40 years the children have been taught atheism in school. It would be inconsistent to let them be taught about God in a Sunday school!

A person can lose his job or be demoted for church attendance. Starting next year young people have to either be confirmed in church or join "youth confirmation" (Communist) groups. If they choose the church, they won't be able to get a job when they're old enough to work. Most people under 60 have sold out God for jobs, security, convenience. Or maybe they've simply concluded that coexistence, with atheism, is better than no existence.

Our Intourist guide had informed us that intelligent people don't go to church; that religion, which they refer to in the past tense, is a fairy story. With a straight face the beguiling guide had told us that churches were closed because the people no longer wanted them open; they had "learned better," she said. In spite of this unsolicited wisdom, we drove from the ornate, atheistic Kremlin to a little out-of-the-way faded stucco Baptist Church on a narrow cobblestone street. The central Baptist Church, one of the few open-for-business churches left in Moscow, was playing to its usual three-times-a-week standing room only crowd of about 1,000.

Behind the pulpit glowed a stained-glass window inscribed with "Bog est lyubov (God is love)." It glowed quite differently from the diffused orange-colored light which bathes the carcasses of the enshrined killers on display in Red Square.

Every face in the old sanctuary gaped incredulously as our obviously American group was led down the aisle. They grabbed for our hands as we proceeded to our pews which were gladly vacated for our unexpected visit. Their wrinkled old faces looked at us pleadingly. They reached out to touch us almost as one would reach out for the last final caress of one's most-beloved just before the casket is lowered. They were in misery and yet a light shone through the misery. They gripped our hands like frightened children.

A member of our group was unexpectedly called to the pulpit. His voice choked with emotion, he preached a sermon of love and faith, hope and truth.

"I believe very firmly in prayer," he said. "It is possible to reach out and tap that unseen power which gives us strength and such an anchor in time of need.

"Be not afraid. Keep this commandment: love one another. Love all mankind. Truth will endure. Time is on the side of truth." Thus spake Ezra Taft Benson, Mormon Apostle and Secretary of Agriculture.

The Secretary's wife and two beautiful daughters raptly drank in his words, with tears streaming. "God lives, I know that He lives, that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of the World. We are eternal beings."

As each sentence was translated for the audience by the Russian minister the women removed their handkerchiefs from their heads and waved them like a mother bidding permanent goodbye to their only son. Their heads nodded vigorously as they moaned, "Da, da, da! (yes, yes, yes!)"

As their gnarled hands folded in fervent prayer, it made you think of the ancient Christians about to be thrown to the lions. Most were old women. The old can attend church. They have no jobs to lose. They can "afford" to go to church. There were a handful of teenagers, one of whom stood beside me. I wished mightily that we could break the language barrier and talk. A youth with the courage to oppose history's most godless dictatorship—to worship God!

Cynical newspaper correspondents who'd griped about a "command performance" in church with Benson stood there crying openly.

These people have what has been described by some bubbleheads as "freedom of religion." It is freedom to live out their last few years without being shot in the back of the neck; freedom to go on existing in a living hell under a forced choice between God and their own families.

These old souls live by faith alone, unlike the Communist high priests who're backed by the all-powerful state and the firing squad.

The Communist plan is that when these "last believers" die off, religion will die with them. What the atheists don't know is that God can't be stamped out either by legislated atheism or by firing squad. Then [referring to himself] this Methodist back-slider who occasionally grumbles about having to go to church, stood crying unashamedly, throat lumped, and chills running from spine to toes. It was the most heartrendering and most inspiring scene I've ever witnessed.

As we filed out, they sang, as I've never heard it sung before, "God Be With You Till We Meet Again." And all knew we never would, not on this earth.

In our group, we also knew that if we have the morality and the courage—I am convinced we have everything else it takes in super abundance—if we have the morality and the courage, the greatest force in the world, love of God and love of freedom will destroy and wipe out communism. We shall not have to co-exist with this diabolical conspiracy of hate. (Tom Anderson, Straight Talk, Western Islands, 1967, pp. 183-86.)

Yes, our thoughts turn to the Babe of Bethlehem, Jesus the Christ, our Savior and Redeemer. And why did he come to earth accompanied by the singing of heavenly hosts? Following his resurrection when he appeared to the Nephites on this hemisphere, as recorded in Third Nephi, he gives us the answer as he emphasizes the name for his church. These are his words:

Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me.

And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil—

And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works. (3 Ne. 27:13-15.)

It is my testimony that the Babe of Bethlehem, Jesus the Christ, is the one perfect guide. Only by emulating his example and adhering to his eternal truth can men realize peace on earth and good will toward men. There is no other way. He is the way, the truth, the light.
