Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Joseph Smith—Man of Destiny

As a divinely called special witness of the Lord Jesus Christ, I bear testimony that God our Father in heaven lives; that Jesus is the Christ, our Savior and Redeemer; and that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God, the representative of the Lord who stands today at the head of this the last and greatest of all gospel dispensations. This I know with all my heart, and I thank God for this priceless knowledge.

It is my testimony also that that glorious event, the first vision of the boy prophet Joseph Smith, which ushered in this last dispensation, is the most important happening in this world since the resurrection of the Master.

As I have thumbed through more than a score of volumes on the Prophet in my own library, and recalled there are reported to be more than 1600 separate volumes and more than 20,000 books and pamphlets that refer to the Prophet in the library of the Church, I am prompted to ask, what except testimony and further witness can be added as we honor our greatest countryman around the world and acknowledge him as a prophet-representative of the Lord Jesus Christ without a peer?

As I have reflected on present world conditions and reviewed the life and mission of a true and stalwart prophet of God, two impressively true and courageous statements have come to me again and again.

The first comes from an immortal poet. James Russell Lowell lived during the time of the Prophet Joseph; I quote from his inspired poem of courage, "The Present Crisis":

Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide; In the strife of Truth with Falsehood, for the good or evil side; Some great cause, God's new Messiah, offering each the bloom or blight, Parts the goats upon the left hand and the sheep upon the right, And the choice goes by forever 'twixt that darkness and that light. * * * Careless seems that great Avenger; history's pages but record One death-grapple in the darkness 'twixt old systems and the Word; Truth forever on the scaffold, Wrong forever on the throne,— Yet that scaffold sways the future, and, behind the dim unknown, Standeth God within the shadow, keeping watch above his own. * * * Then to side with Truth is noble when we share her wretched crust, Ere her cause bring fame and profit, and 'tis prosperous to be just; Then it is the brave man chooses, while the coward stands aside, Doubting in his abject spirit, till his Lord is crucified, And the multitude make virtue of the faith they had denied.

Yes, time is on the side of truth—on the side of God's prophet.

The other item comes from the sorrowing followers in the dark days following the martyrdom of him who went "like a lamb to the slaughter" but who was "calm as a summer's morning" because he had a "conscience void of offense towards God, and towards all men."

Hear the words of his sorrowing followers:

To seal the testimony of this book and the Book of Mormon, we announce the martyrdom of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Hyrum Smith the Patriarch. They were shot in Carthage jail, on the 27th of June, 1844, about five o'clock p.m., by an armed mob—painted black—of from 150 to 200 persons. . . .

Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which it contained, to the four quarters of the earth; has brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints, founded a great city, and left a fame and name that cannot be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood. . . . (D&C 135:1, 3.)

Thus did the Prophet Joseph Smith climax his earth life and fulfill the mortal part of his divinely appointed mission. This mortal mission, he made clear, was not to end until fully completed. Like the mission of the Savior, "a lamb slain before the foundation of the world," Joseph was truly foreordained to his great mission.

To get a vision of the magnitude of the Prophet's earthly mission we must view it in the light of eternity. He was among "the noble and great ones" whom Abraham described as follows:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. (Abr. 3:22-23.)

So it was with Joseph Smith. He too was there. He too sat in council with the noble and great ones. Occupying a prominent place of honor and distinction, he unquestionably helped in the planning and execution of the great work of the Lord to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man," the salvation of all our Father's children. His mission had had, and was to have, impact on all who had come to earth, all who then dwelt on earth, and the millions yet unborn.

The Prophet Joseph Smith made this eternal fact clear in these words: "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the grand council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that grand council. It is the testimony that I want that I am God's servant, and this people His people." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 365.)

The calling and testing of men for assignment of responsibility in the great work of salvation is, no doubt, going on on both sides of the veil. The calling of men to sacred office is not confined to earth life only. There is organization, direction, and assignment in pre-earth life and in post-earth life also.

The greatest activity in this world or in the world to come is directly related to the work and mission of Joseph Smith—man of destiny, prophet of God. That work is the salvation and eternal life of man. For that great purpose this earth was created, prophets of God are called, heavenly messengers are sent forth, and on sacred and important occasions even God, the Father of us all, condescends to come to earth and to introduce his beloved Son.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was not only "one of the noble and great ones," but he gave and continues to give attention to important matters here on the earth even today from the realms above. For in the eyes of the Lord, the God of this world under the Father, it is all one great eternal program in which the Prophet Joseph plays an important role, all through the eternal priesthood and authority of God.

Sometimes the veil becomes very thin. Faithful men and women do sometimes get glimpses of eternity—assurance that the work here and in the realm beyond the veil is all one great program of a loving Father for the blessing of his children.

The very nearness of the world beyond was brought forcibly to the attention of my own family through the passing of a noble woman, Barbara S. Amussen, a temple officiator for more than a score of years in the Logan Temple. I know that the veil may become thin indeed.

Yes, the glorious work of salvation and exaltation goes on over there with the knowledge and, at least to some extent, the direction of the work here on this side of the veil. And in this direction the Prophet Joseph Smith, head of the greatest and last gospel dispensation, occupies a sacred place.

Let me give you one convincing item of evidence. There are others.

You will recall that President Heber J. Grant was chosen to be an apostle October 13, 1882, at twenty-six years of age. Referring to this calling, he said that from October 1882 until February 1883, he was in a most unhappy frame of mind. He felt that he was unworthy to be an apostle and should resign. This troubled him greatly.

While on the Navajo reservation in Arizona during a visit to one of the stakes, he was riding horseback alone, pondering on this situation, when he seemed to hear a discussion going on in a council in heaven about the vacancies that existed in the quorum prior to his calling. In this council the Savior, the Prophet Joseph Smith, his father, Jedediah M. Grant, and others were present. They discussed whom they wanted chosen and decided that the way to remedy this situation was to send a special revelation to the President of the Church. "It was made known to me," said President Grant, "that the Prophet Joseph Smith and my father asked that I be called to that position. . . . It was also made clear to me that from that day on it depended upon me and me alone whether I made a success or failure of my life." (See Gospel Standards, pp. 195-96.) That settled forever the question that troubled him.

Yes, we operate through the Lord's organization on both sides of the veil. And in this all-important operation the Prophet plays a most important leadership responsibility.

It is but reasonable to believe that ancient prophets were permitted to see and rejoiced over the ushering in of this, our great gospel dispensation preparatory to the coming of the Lord in glory. They no doubt rejoiced in the forthcoming mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. At least one such person saw the coming of the Prophet Joseph and caused a record to be made more than 1500 years ago, which record Joseph Smith, the Prophet, translated under the gift and power of God.

About 600 years B.C., just before the destruction of Jerusalem, Lehi, an Israelite prophet, under the direction of the Lord, led a small colony to this western continent. Father Lehi, a direct descendant of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, brought with him sacred records, including some of the sacred writings of their famous ancestor, Joseph. Favored of the Lord, Joseph was shown what would befall some of his posterity in our day.

Lehi, quoting from the writings of Joseph, declared to his posterity:

Yea, Joseph truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them, even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers. . . .

And his name shall be called after me; and it shall be after the name of his father. And he shall be like unto me; for the thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand, by the power of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation. (2 Ne. 3:7, 15.)

As the earthly representative of the Lord Jesus Christ and his great church, many revelations were received by the Prophet. From time to time the Lord made crystal clear his support of the Prophet and admonished the Church and individuals thereof to give heed to the Prophet's counsel and support him in his holy calling.

In D&C 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants, given the same month in which the Church was organized, the Lord gives a revelation containing instructions regarding the duties of members and the functions of offices in the priesthood:

The rise of the Church of Christ in these last days, being one thousand eight hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh, it being regularly organized and established agreeable to the laws of our country, by the will and commandments of God, in the fourth month, and on the sixth day of the month which is called April—

Which commandments were given to Joseph Smith, Jun., who was called of God, and ordained an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the first elder of this church; . . .

And this according to the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory, both now and forever. Amen. (D&C 20:1-2, 4.)

The Lord assured the Prophet that "there is no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper; And if any man lift his voice against you he shall be confounded in mine own due time." (D&C 71:9-10.)

How often in the life of the Prophet and following his martyrdom was this promise fulfilled!

Brigham Young understood this when he declared to enemies of the Prophet who were secretly plotting the life of Joseph: "You cannot destroy the appointment of a prophet of God; but you can cut the thread that binds you to the prophet of God and sink yourselves to hell."

The Lord admonished his church that "if ye desire the glories of the kingdom, appoint ye my servant Joseph Smith, Jr., and uphold him before me by the prayer of faith." (D&C 43:12.)

Men of the world have appraised this prophet of God—Joseph Smith—as an unusual man of destiny. Many have seen him as a man of character, a man of courage, a man of deep spiritual insight.

One of the best known statements is from Josiah Quincy, mayor of Boston, whom the Prophet took on a tour of Nauvoo. A genius in sizing up men, he later published an essay on the Prophet in his book Figures of the Past, which included the following:

It is by no means improbable that some future textbook, for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet. And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite as startling as this. (Page 317.)

Quincy ends his essay as follows:

Born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without book-learning, and with the homeliest of all human names, he had made himself at the age of thirty-nine a power upon the earth. Of the multitudinous family of Smith, none had so won human hearts and shaped human lives as this Joseph. His influence, whether for good or evil, is potent today, and the end is not yet. (Page 337.)

On September 4, 1843, a writer in the New York Times declared:

This Joe Smith must be set down as an extraordinary character, a prophet hero, as Carlyle might call him. He is one of the great men of his age, and in future history will rank with those who, in one way or another, have stamped their impress strongly upon society.

It is no small thing, in the blaze of this nineteenth century, to give to men a new revelation, found a new religion, establish new forms of worship, to build a city with new laws, institutions, and orders of architecture, to establish ecclesiastical, civil, and military jurisdiction, found colleges, send out missionaries, and make proselytes on two hemispheres. Yet, all this has been done by Joe Smith, and that against every sort of opposition, ridicule and persecution.

Stephen A. Douglas, the "little giant" as he was known in the Congress of the United States, said of the Prophet Joseph: "If I could command the following of Joseph Smith, I would resign my seat in Congress and go out to Oregon. In five years a noble state might be formed, and if they would not receive us into the union, we would have a government of our own."

From the Weekly Bostonian of about August 1842 comes this interesting statement:

Smith is decidedly the greatest original of the present day. He carries all before him when he undertakes an enterprise—knows no impediment—and never halts in his course till he has accomplished his object. His post, at the head of the Mormons, is a conspicuous one, and a few years, with such advancement as he has met with for the past year, will give him a numberless host of followers. We should not be surprised if he should become as omnipotent as ever the Pope was in his palmiest days. He is a genius—and a rare one—and all the armies of Satan, should they confront him in a solid phalanx, would be sure to meet with sore discomfiture, if not complete annihilation. The true philosophy of "go-a-headity"—the quintessence of concentrated moral and spiritual energy, fears no combat, and although, we cannot say it exactly courts danger, it never flies from a post of duty on its approach. We have so high an opinion of Joe Smith, that we intend to open a correspondence with him, in order to acquaint ourselves with all his secret springs of action, and thus get all the secrets of his success, public and private, worldly and ecclesiastical.

From the interesting little volume Joseph the Prophet As He Lives in the Hearts of His People by Daryl Chase comes this unusual statement by the poet John Greenleaf Whittier:

Once in the world's history we were to have a Yankee Prophet, and have had in Joseph Smith. For good or for evil he has left his track on the great highway of life, or to use the words of Horne "knocked out for himself a window in the wall of the nineteenth century" whence his rude, bold good-humored fact will peer out upon the generations to come.

I hope the good Lord has permitted Whittier to meet the "Yankee Prophet" in the realms above.

Much has been written and said about the Prophet. His life was an open book. He preached many sermons, wrote letters and epistles, translated the Book of Mormon (two-thirds the size of the Bible) and the Book of Abraham, and gave us scores of revelations and six volumes of journal history. Yet no one apparently has undertaken a comprehensive biography. Why? Is it too much for mere man to undertake—to write the story of him who declares "no man knows my history"?

Summaries of his noble and inspired achievements have been attempted. One sometimes quoted is from a book on the flyleaf of which appears a statement as follows:

Here is a man who was born in the stark hills of Vermont; who was reared in the backwoods of New York; who never looked inside a college or high school; who lived in six States, no one of which would own him during his lifetime; who spent months in the vile prisons of the period; who, even when he had his freedom, was hounded like a fugitive; who was covered once with a coat of tar and feathers, and left for dead; who, with his following, was driven by irate neighbors from New York to Ohio, from Ohio to Missouri, and from Missouri to Illinois; and who, at the unripe age of thirty-eight, was shot to death by a mob with painted faces.

Yet this man became mayor of the biggest town in Illinois and the state's most prominent citizen, the commander of the largest body of trained soldiers in the nation outside the Federal army, the founder of cities and of a university, and aspired to become President of the United States.

He wrote a book which has baffled the literary critics for more than a hundred years and which is today more widely read than any other volume save the Bible. On the threshold of an organizing age he established the most nearly perfect social mechanism in the modern world, and developed a religious philosophy that challenges anything of the kind in history, for completeness and cohesion. And he set up the machinery for an economic system that would take the brood of Fears out of the heart of man—the fear of want through sickness, old age, unemployment, and poverty.

In [fifty-three] nations are men and women who look upon him as a greater leader than Moses and a greater prophet than Isaiah; his disciples now number over two million; and already a granite shaft pierces the sky over the place where he was born, and another over the place where he . . . received the inspiration for his Book. (John Henry Evans, Joseph Smith, an American Prophet, Deseret Book, 1966.)

I testify to you that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of God, one of the truly great prophets of all time, a man of destiny, a man of character, a man of courage, a man of deep spirituality, a God-like prophet of the Lord, a truly noble and great one of all time.

Joseph Smith the Prophet went willingly to his death. He sealed his testimony with his life—his own blood. On that fateful day in Nauvoo, Illinois, as he looked back upon his city and people whom he loved, on his way to Carthage Jail and his martyrdom, he declared: "This is the loveliest place and the best people under the heavens; little do they know the trials that await them." (Documentary History of the Church, vol. 6, p. 554.)

Later the Prophet said feelingly, but calmly and courageously, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am as calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. If they take my life I shall die an innocent man, and my blood shall cry from the ground for vengeance, and it shall be said of me, `He was murdered in cold blood.' " (Ibid., p. 555.)

Following his martyrdom, his saddened and devoted followers who revered him as a prophet of God issued to the world a statement that appears in a sacred volume of scripture, the Doctrine and Covenants. (D&C 135.)

Yes, the fourteen-year-old boy stood true against the world. God knew his son when he was chosen. He knew he would be loyal and true even to death: "He had known Joseph and his loyalty and dependability in the Grand Council in Heaven before the foundations of the world were laid."

Only thirty-eight years, six months, and four days old when he was martyred, the Prophet stands alone without a peer among men of all time. As a translator of scriptures, a revealer of new truth regarding the origin and destiny of man, as a builder and as a leader and inspirer of men, he is without a mortal equal.

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., has given this concise capsule summary of the life and labors of this young man of destiny—prophet of the living God:

He led his people through years of tragic persecutions, of burnings, plunderings, robbery, rapings, and butchery. He founded cities, erected buildings, built two temples, planned two others, and for one of them the cornerstone was laid. Men followed him to their death, because they loved him and the cause for which he stood. He led alike in prosperity and in disaster, and the Saints never stood closer to him than when fiendish persecution threatened their very existence. He performed mighty miracles. He was visited by heavenly messengers. The Father and Son came themselves to him. All of this before he was forty years old,—a record unequalled by any other mortal in the world's history. (Church News, December 7, 1949, p. 16.)

In view of his divinely inspired record and the ever-accumulating evidence of his prophetic powers, it is easy to understand why his rapidly increasing followers around the world join in saying: "Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah! Jesus anointed that Prophet and Seer. Blessed to open the last dispensation, Kings shall extol him, and nations revere." (Hymns, no. 147.)

Yes, Joseph Smith, the latter-day Prophet, was an instrument in the hands of the Lord in opening a new gospel dispensation, the last and greatest of all gospel dispensations.

He witnessed and participated in the greatest event that has transpired in this world since the resurrection of the Master. Here is a partial description, in his own words, of that great and all-important event:

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!'' (Joseph Smith 2:15-17.)

This glorious vision of God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, in broad daylight in the spring of 1820, is the greatest event that has transpired in this world since the resurrection of our Lord.

Joseph Smith, Jr., who witnessed it, was and is a prophet of God. Today more than 15,000 missionaries and more than three million members of the Church throughout the free world bear witness of this important fact.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, founded and directed by a prophet of God, has been before the world for nearly a century and a half. It has met mob violence, persecution, drivings, and deception by wicked men, and prejudice and misunderstandings by many people throughout the world. Yet, in spite of widespread opposition, ambassadors of truth have carried, from the very beginning, and are today carrying to the world the all-important message of the restored church as directed by Joseph Smith the Prophet.

Paraphrasing the words of Apostle Paul, this thing has not been done in a corner. (See Acts 26:26.)

The world has generally revered the ancient dead prophets and rejected the living ones. It was so with Joseph Smith. Truth is often on the scaffold, error on the throne. But time is on the side of truth, for truth is eternal. The message of Mormonism is a world message. It is the truth. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a world organization.

The message of Joseph Smith—the message of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the message of Mormonism—is the most important message in this world. And Joseph Smith the Prophet, who lives today, continues to have an important part in its direction here on earth.

The Church is a world organization—the true Church of Jesus Christ restored to the earth in its fulness—and is intended to bless all of our Father's children. These things I know, and to them I bear humble witness.

God lives, Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of the world, with his latter-day base of operations here in America, and Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of the living God.

This is my witness and testimony to all the world.
