Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Essentials for Missionary Success

Our message is a world message. It is not a message just intended for a handful of Latter-day Saints. When God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ come to earth, as they did in 1820 when they appeared to the young boy prophet, Joseph Smith, it is not something that concerns only a handful of people. It is a message and a revelation intended for all of our Father's children living upon the face of the earth. It was the greatest event that has ever happened in this world since the resurrection of the Master. Sometimes I think we are so close to it that we don't fully appreciate its significance and importance and the magnitude of it.

One of my favorite sections of the Doctrine and Covenants is the first section. It's not the first revelation given; it wasn't given until November 1831, but it was given at a conference of elders in the early days of the Church when they were considering whether or not the revelations given up to that time should be published to the world. At first the Lord had counseled that the revelations not be made public, but now the Church had been organized for a year and a half, and the whole consideration was what is good for the kingdom. What is best for the kingdom? What is best for our Father's work? During that conference the Lord gave a revelation to his church through the Prophet Joseph, and in the very first verses of that revelation the Lord makes it very clear that he was speaking not only to his church, but to the world, to all of our Father's children living upon the face of the earth; and he made it very clear that this work, this message, is a world message:

Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together.

For verily, the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated. (D&C 1:1-2.)

And then the Lord indicates the responsibility resting upon his disciples—you and me—to carry this message to the world, and he makes probably the most glorious promise ever made to a group of disciples when he said, in the fifth verse: "And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them."

No group of workers anywhere in the world outside of the kingdom have such a promise. And so it is well that we keep in mind not only the importance of our message, but the promise that has been given that in this work we cannot fail if we do our part. This is not our work. It is the work of the Lord that we are called upon to help with, to carry this message to our Father's children. It is a message of salvation and exaltation. It is a message that will save and exalt the souls of the children of men. There is no other way, because this is the only true message and the only true church upon the face of the whole earth. Those are not my words; they are the words of the Lord Jesus Christ as found in the revelations. This gospel in its purity, now restored to the earth, is intended to reach all of our Father's children, and what a glorious thing it is to be permitted to participate in it! ". . . this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) That's the whole purpose of the Church, the whole purpose of the program, the whole purpose of missionary service, and we are called to help carry that out.

I am very happy to report to you, after visiting some forty nations of the world and traveling almost 100,000 miles per year, that the work of the Lord is prospering everywhere it is in operation. I think the outlook has never been more favorable than it is today. Our numbers are increasing. The devotion of our people and the faith of our people, I am confident, is increasing. And I think the devotion of our missionaries is as great as it has ever been, and the effectiveness of our work per person, per missionary, is the best it has ever been. It's not as good as it could be. It's not as good as it will be. But I think it's the best it has ever been.

And so, to our missionaries who are engaged in a wonderful work, I would like to make three or four suggestions as to how you might make your work a little more effective.

First of all, I would like to suggest that you heed the counsel of your mission president and those in authority over you, and that you accept that counsel well and willingly and readily with all your heart. Therein is safety, and by so doing you will make the maximum progress.

I would like to emphasize that it is so important that you lose yourselves in this work, that you don't worry about "what is it going to do for me." You are not out in the world with self-improvement as the major objective, but you can't help getting a maximum amount of self-improvement if you lose yourself in the work of the Lord. I don't know of any better preparation for life than two years of devoted, unselfish, dedicated service as a missionary. Now it's all right to keep that in the back of your minds, but you have been called to carry the Lord's message to the world, not to improve yourselves particularly. However, you can't carry this message to the world without doing yourself a lot of good.

The busy missionary is the happy missionary. I cannot recall a missionary who was really active and busy ever going astray. Occasionally we have missionaries who make mistakes. It usually starts when they become idle, when they stay in their lodgings when they ought to be out with the people, when they try to find excuses for not going out and tracting and knocking on doors and holding meetings with the people. Occasionally you will find a missionary who is looking for excuses for not going out—who can look out the window and see a storm coming when there isn't any, who can see rain when it isn't raining. The important thing is to get out with the people, to keep active, to be devoted. Do not sleep longer than is needful. The same Lord who gave the Word of Wisdom in the 89th section also gave that instruction in the 88th section, and it is just as binding as the counsel that you are not to use tobacco or alcoholic beverages. So cease from all lightmindedness, cease to sleep longer than is needful, and retire to your bed early. You will be more effective, you will do more work, you will be happier, and you will have better health.

There are four or five essentials for successful missionary work. Without them you cannot possibly succeed. First of all, you must have a burning testimony of the divinity of this work if you are going to succeed. Now it is almost a foregone conclusion that missionaries, when they come into the field, have that testimony. Sometimes there will be missionaries who are not quite certain. Then your first obligation is to get that testimony through prayer, through fasting, through meditation, through study, through appealing to the Lord to give you the testimony, through responding to calls when they come to you. You must have a testimony of the divinity of this work. You must know that God lives; that Jesus is the Christ, the Redeemer of the world; that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God; that the priesthood and authority of our Heavenly Father is here; and that you bear that priesthood and have the authority to represent him in the world.

Second, you will never be effective as a missionary unless you are humble in your work. The Lord has made it very clear in the 12th section of the Doctrine and Covenants when he says that no man can assist with this work unless he is humble and full of love. But humility does not mean timidity. Humility does not mean fear. Humility does not mean weakness. You can be humble and still be courageous. You can be humble and still be vigorous and strong and fearless. In the early days of the Church the elders were human also, and the Lord was not always pleased with them, as he made very clear in some of the revelations. But great teacher that he is, he would often commend them for the work they had done and then correct them. That's good psychology. My wife uses it on our children and sometimes on her husband. The Lord used it with the early elders of the Church and one time was pretty severe on some of them, and I am sure it must have caused them to have very serious reflections. Speaking to the elders, those who are the men who were called to bear his name, he said: "But with some I am not well pleased, for they will not open their mouths, but they hide the talent which I have given unto them, because of the fear of men. Wo unto such, for mine anger is kindled against them." (D&C 60:2.) That is pretty plain, isn't it? Sometimes we have among our missionaries those who are afraid because of the fear of man, and if you permit yourselves to get that spirit of fear, the adversary will back you up. He will support you. He will encourage you in it until you get to the point where you are afraid to exercise your authority and to bear testimony regarding this message. Remember the promise made in the first section: "And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them." There is no place for fear. There is no place for discouragement, because you can't fail in this work if you do your part. There is no place for timidity or hesitancy. Humility, yes, but you can be humble and courageous and fearless and effective.

Third, I think that if you are going to be successful, you must develop in your heart a love for people with whom you work. They need the gospel as they need no other thing. Develop in your hearts a love for them, a desire to lift them up, and a desire to help them and to bless them by teaching them the principles of the gospel. The gospel will absolutely revolutionize their lives, change their outlook. People are hungry for something that will give them an anchor, that will satisfy the questions of their souls, that will bring peace to their hearts and a feeling of security, inner satisfaction. They are not getting it and they need it, and only the gospel can provide it.

Fourth, you must live an exemplary life. Maintain the standards of the Church fully. Adhere to the counsel and the standards that have been set up for missionary service. Be true to every requirement and every regulation. They are all given for your benefit and blessing—not to bear you down, not to limit your freedom, but to make you more effective as missionaries. The eyes of the world are upon you. As you travel among the people, you may think that nobody knows you, but there is always someone watching you. Of course our Heavenly Father always has his eyes on us, but it is surprising how many people outside the Church know who you are and what you are doing and what the requirements are for missionary service.

Let me give you an example. Many years ago, a member of our district council in the mission in Washington was traveling by plane. He had been in Canada, and on the flight back the plane developed trouble and had to land on an auxiliary landing field in Pennsylvania. It was a cold night, and the passengers were told that the plane would probably be on the ground for an hour. They got out and stretched and wandered around a little, and then they noticed over in the brush a light. They walked over toward this light and found a CCC camp, and as they opened the door they got the aroma of hot food. So they got courage and walked in, and they were invited to join the CCC boys at dinner. Now, the member of our district council found himself seated between two CCC boys, and when they brought around the hot coffee our friend, who didn't use it ordinarily, thought, "The coffee is hot and I am cold and there isn't anything else readily available to drink." So he took some and engaged in conversation with the two boys beside him. One of them said, "Where do you come from?" He said, "I come from Washington, but originally I came from Utah." "You don't happen to be a Mormon, do you?" "Yes," he replied, "I am a Mormon." The boy said, "You are not a very good one, are you." Well, he was a pretty good one, and it was an awful shock to him to hear this comment. He said, "What do you know about the Mormons?" The boy said, "Well, a couple of years ago I was in St. George, Utah, and I attended Mormon services. I know you Mormons have in your church what you call the Word of Wisdom, and that good Mormons live it." Can you imagine how the district councilor felt? It wasn't the cup of coffee—that is not going to destroy anyone—but it was the fact that he hadn't maintained that which he believed in. He hadn't kept the standards.

It never pays to let down on your standards in this church. You will be thought more of if you live the gospel, if you will be what you profess to be. You will be happier, you will have a better feeling inside, you will do more good in the world, and you will be more effective as missionaries. So live church and missionary standards wherever you go.

I wish that a record were available of the number of people who have been attracted to the Church because of the example they have seen in missionaries. I heard two wonderful women in a meeting one night bear testimony that they were first attracted to the Church by seeing a couple of Mormon elders go by their window day after day. One said that she would see them go out in the morning, come back about noon, go out shortly after lunch, and come back in the evening. She said, "Sometimes we would be working in the garden, but mostly we would be sitting in the front room and we would see them go by. They made such an impression upon us that we asked the police officer in our neighborhood who they were and what they were doing." And she said, "It was that example that first compelled us to go to one of their meetings. Now we are members of the Church."

Brother William A. Martin and his companion stood on an empty street corner in Ireland one night, trying to hold a street meeting, with only a policeman there to hear them. It was a stormy night, and they thought their effort had been in vain, but up in a second floor window were two young women who heard them sing "O My Father" and heard part of the testimony they bore, and they inquired of the police officer who those two young men were. Later one of those women became Brother Martin's wife, joined the Church, and immigrated to Utah. I heard Brother Martin tell this story when I was on my first mission in 1922 in England, when he was secretary of the mission under Elder Orson F. Whitney and later President David O. McKay.

You never know the amount of good you are doing. You are sowing seeds, you are planting a thought, you are setting an example. The Lord has said that you will not fail in this work, and so you must go forth and do your duty. Keep the commandments. Maintain the standards. Be true to your mission, to the charge that has been given you as representatives of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And then one final thought: I hope you and your companion are true to each other. I hope you feel you have the best companion in the world. I hope you draw close to each other as companions, that you uphold and sustain each other before the Saints, before our friends, before the world. I have seen many examples of this, but one of the most impressive occurred in Philadelphia some years ago. I had been in a meeting of agricultural leaders all day, and in the evening I left my hotel to mail a couple of letters. As I walked into the post office I heard the strains of a familiar Mormon hymn coming through the window from the opposite side. I dropped my letters in the box, walked over to the window, and looked out, and there were two young men in dark suits standing on the steps of the post office holding a street meeting. One of them was speaking and the other was holding in one hand two hats and in the other some copies of the Book of Mormon and some tracts. When they finished their meeting I went out and introduced myself. Then I said to the young man who was holding the hats and the copies of the Book of Mormon, "What were you doing while your companion was speaking?" His answer was most satisfying. He said, "Brother Benson, I was praying to the Lord that he would say the right thing that would touch the hearts of the people who were listening."

That's the kind of support I'm referring to. When you reach the point where you can enjoy and rejoice in the success of your companion, even when that success exceeds your own, then you've got the real missionary spirit, the real unselfish spirit of love, the spirit of the gospel. When you can rejoice in the success of your companion, then you've got a spirit that will make you effective as a missionary. Then you will really be truly, truly happy. Then you will have lost yourself in the service of this wonderful gospel, in service to our Father's children—the greatest work in all the world.

Remember what the Lord said: ". . . the worth of souls is great in the sight of God. . . . And if it so be that you should labor all your days . . . and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!" (D&C 18:10, 15.) And remember also that "any man that shall go and preach this gospel of the kingdom, and fail not to continue faithful in all things, shall not be weary in mind, neither darkened, neither in body, limb, nor joint; and a hair of his head shall not fall to the ground unnoticed." (D&C 84:80.) Now if you have become weary in this work you had better give yourself a good self-examination, because the Lord has said that no man shall be weary in this work.

There are at least twenty-seven sections of the Doctrine and Covenants that refer to missionary work. The first great responsibility placed upon this church in our day was to carry this message to the world. It is still a major responsibility. It is going on here on earth and it is going on in greater volume on the other side, and whether you do it here or over there doesn't make very much difference, just so long as you are missionaries. If you are laboring as you should, if you love this work, you will be engaged in helping to save the souls of the children of man throughout eternity until they have all heard it. And so it is the greatest work in all the world. There isn't anything like it in magnitude, in importance, in size, in promise.

And so, my brethren and sisters, I invoke God's blessings upon you. I see a great future for the work of the Lord. We have just scratched the surface of our possibilities. "The field is white, already to harvest." God bless you in your efforts. May he bring you joy and happiness—the happiness that surpasseth understanding, the happiness of which the world knows nothing, and may he crown your efforts with success, which I know he will through your faithfulness.
