Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

A Love for the Work

I have many happy memories associated with my brethren in the Council of the Twelve. There were eight years when I was not able to meet with them often, and how I missed being there! But I felt that I had received a call from our prophet when, on learning of the possibility of my being appointed Secretary of Agriculture in President Dwight D. Eisenhower's Cabinet, President David O. McKay said, "My mind is clear, and if the invitation comes in the right spirit, I feel you should accept."

I remember leaving with a promise of staying two years, and then at the end of two years, the insistence of President Eisenhower that I stay another two years, and then four years more.

One morning I received in my office in Washington a call from the White House. The appointment secretary on the other end of the line said, "We have a man here by the name of David O. McKay from Salt Lake City who has asked to see the President. Do you know him, and do you think we should have him see the President?" I said I was sure the President would feel honored to see David O. McKay.

After his interview with the President, President McKay came over to my office and said, "Brother Benson, I didn't even tell my counselors that I was leaving this morning. I just received the impression to get on the plane and come back here to see the President and ask if he wouldn't release you now that the 1956 campaign is over and he has been reelected. You have been here four years."

I said, "President McKay, I hope you were successful."

He said, "No, I was not. Of course they can't force you to stay, but I think we have an obligation to our country and that we should accede to his wishes. I think you should stay on."

But there were very few weeks while I was in Washington that my thoughts didn't turn to the Salt Lake Temple on Thursday, because I knew that on that day of the week the members of my quorum, whom I love most deeply, would be on their knees with the First Presidency, and then they would be gathered around the altar, dressed in the robes of the holy priesthood, and on that day I would be especially remembered.

Often wonderful things happen when you are shut out, and sometimes wonderful things happen when you are shut in. There came to my mind an experience my wife, Flora, had when she was on a mission in Hawaii.

She had been officiating part-time in the temple while on her mission, and this particular night the session had run a bit late, and she had been delayed for some reason. So when she got to the door she found that it was locked. She was in and everyone else had gone, and she was alone in the temple. The mission home in those days was situated across a stile, over a fence, and through some trees. When she found she was locked in, she tried the door and said, "Yes, I can open it from the inside." But she said a prayer that she would be protected, because in those days there was a camp in the trees just off the trail to the mission home, and there had been some incidents, so she was worried. She prayed to the Lord that she would be protected, and then she started toward the door. As she stepped outside the door, there was a circle of light all around her person and that circle of light accompanied her all the way to the mission home—over the stile, through the trees, to the door of the mission home.

I know, too, that the Lord can touch the hearts of men behind the iron curtain. I have seen it happen. I have been very close to it. I remember very well our efforts to get to Warsaw, Poland, in 1946 and my desire to get up to Selbongen in East Prussia where we had one congregation, the only congregation in Poland and the only Church-owned building in Germany at that time. There was one plane going, taking supplies to the American Embassy, but no passenger service. We had to get permission from the Russians and the Poles to get into Warsaw. Brother Fred Babbel, who was with me, had tried to make arrangements without success, and then I had tried, and we still weren't successful. But our plane was to leave in two days, and so we did some fasting and praying. At last I went to see the Russian general who was in charge of the Poles and finally, after about two hours in his office with him, he signed the document to permit us to go. Then we made arrangements to ride on the plane with the Americans who were carrying supplies to the American Embassy. I learned later that this general lost his commission because he had given permission for an American to go into Poland, and I always felt that the Spirit worked on this man, because he had previously turned us down.

In Warsaw there was only one hotel that was even partially intact, and that was the Polonia Hotel. I shared one room with seven other men, most of them members of the press. We got the Americans to loan us a jeep, and we drove up to Selbongen. It took us all day to drive there on Sunday, through two rainstorms and with no cover on the jeep. When we drove into the little town of Selbongen we found the name had been changed to Zelback, because the Poles had changed all the names throughout the area. There was no one on the street because it was Sunday, and as we approached our little chapel, we saw a woman running away from us. She had seen this military vehicle and had thought it meant more trouble, because the people had been persecuted and their homes had been ransacked.

Well, we stopped the jeep and I jumped out. When the woman saw we were civilians, she turned around and came walking toward us. Then she recognized us—I guess from a picture, I don't know how else—and she screamed, "Oh, it's the Brethren! They have come at last!" She ran to us with tears in her eyes and then guided us to the home of the branch president. I think I never saw so many tears shed by a small group as we saw that day, as the word spread and the people came into the branch president's home. Then we held a meeting. I said, "Haven't you had your meetings today, yet?" They said, "Yes, we have had our meetings—priesthood, Sunday School, and sacrament meeting—but now that you are here we want another meeting." It was five o'clock, just starting to get dusk, and so we set the meeting for six and sent the members out to notify the Saints. At six o'clock the little chapel was filled.

During the service, as I was speaking near the time of closing, two Polish soldiers came in the front door and took a few steps into the building. I motioned for them to come forward. There were only two vacant seats, on the front row. Then, through the interpreter, I told them why I was there and on what authority and something about our work. I went ahead speaking to the people after the soldiers had taken seats at my invitation. I could tell the people were frightened of them, because as they came down the aisle the women would push away from the aisle. As we came to the end of the service and were starting to sing the closing song, they left the meeting place.

We had planned to close the meeting, but three or four people stood up immediately and asked, "Couldn't we have another meeting? This was not like a real meeting with soldiers here." One lady said, "I have a candle at home I have been saving for a special occasion [there were no lights in the building]." She said, "I will go get it if you want to read from the scriptures." And so we held another meeting for an hour and a quarter with these wonderful people.

The next morning they took me around to the side of the chapel and showed me a little mound. It was the grave of a young man. He and some other men had been lined up by the soldiers, who demanded that they give them cigarettes. In those days cigarettes were a lot more valuable than money; they were a medium of exchange in war-torn Europe at the end of the war. When they asked this brother for cigarettes, he said, "I don't have any." They thought, of course, that he was not telling them the truth, and so they repeated their demand, and, of course, he didn't have any. He was a good Latter-day Saint. And there in the presence of his young wife and his mother they shot him down. He was buried beside the little chapel where he was shot.

I thought about that experience and the manner in which we got to Poland. I thought of our first interview with General McNarney, the top general in the American forces. It was in the I. G. Farbin building in Frankfurt, which had been spared by "pin bombing," because the Americans expected it would be their headquarters when the war was over, as it was.

We had driven our little jeep up to the building, parked it, and gone in to see if we could get an appointment with the general. We had been in Europe just a few days. We wanted to get permission from him to make our own distribution of our welfare supplies to our own people through our own channels. In those days, of course, everything was being distributed through the military. We were told by the colonel at the desk that we couldn't get an appointment for three days. The general was very busy, with important delegations coming to see him. We returned to our car and had a prayer together, then went back in. In the meantime, the secretary at the desk had been changed, and, in less than fifteen minutes, we were in the presence of General McNarney.

Then I saw the Spirit operate on that man. I heard him say, "Under no conditions can you have permission to distribute your own supplies to your own people. They must come through the military." And, of course, we recognized immediately that if we had to go through the military, our Saints wouldn't get much of the supplies. And so we started telling him about the program of the Church, and when he saw we were somewhat determined, he said, "Well, you go ahead and collect your supplies, and probably by the time you get them collected the policy will be changed." I said, "General, they are already collected; they are always collected. We have ninety warehouses full of supplies. Within twenty-four hours from the time I wire our First Presidency in Salt Lake City, carloads of food, bedding, clothing, and medical supplies will be moving toward Germany." When I said this, he said, "I never heard of people with such vision." And before we left him we had written authorization to make our own distribution to our own people through our own channels, and from that moment on we had wonderful cooperation.

So I know that the Spirit can operate on nonmembers of the Church in high positions when it is in the interests of the work of the Lord. I have seen it with my own eyes.

I thank the Lord for the missionary work of the Church, and I am thankful that even during the last world war, the First Presidency saw fit to issue an official statement in which they said, "No act of ours or of the Church must interfere with this God-given mandate" to carry the message to the world. (Conference Report, April 1942, p. 91.)

In the early days of the Church some of the elders, after receiving a testimony of the gospel, would ask the Prophet Joseph to inquire of the Lord as to how they could best spend their time. One of those who came was John Whitmer, who came with Peter Whitmer, Jr. This is the word of the Lord to John Whitmer through the Prophet Joseph:

Hearken, my servant John, and listen to the words of Jesus Christ, your Lord and your Redeemer.

For behold, I speak unto you with sharpness and with power, for mine arm is over all the earth.

And I will tell you that which no man knoweth save me and thee alone—

For many times you have desired of me to know that which would be of the most worth unto you.

Behold, blessed are you for this thing, and for speaking my words which I have given you according to my commandments.

And now, behold, I say unto you, that the thing which will be of the most worth unto you will be to declare repentance unto this people, that you may bring souls unto me, that you may rest with them in the kingdom of my Father. Amen. (D&C 15.)

This is the great work for which we are responsible—the greatest work in all the world. And the most profitable manner in which we can spend our time is to proclaim the word and bring souls unto him. God help us in it.
