Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

The Things That Endure

I would like to say a word, if I may, about our standards and our obligations as young people and leaders of youth. At a June Conference session, the general YMMIA president whispered to me, "One of our board members opened the door to a rear room in this building just before the meeting started and found one of our young speakers on his knees for a last word of prayer to his Heavenly Father for aid."

There is not anything that this nation needs more than for all of our people to be on their knees, night and morning, recognizing the need for divine guidance and divine support. As we were visiting at the home of my son in Washington, D.C., waiting until time for our plane to leave, we were talking about some of the eternal things of life, those things that never change, those things that are all-important. Our son Reed, who loves literature and has helped to make our family love and appreciate it, read, among other things, lines from a wonderful poem by William Watson, entitled "The Things That Are More Excellent."

As we wax older on this earth, Till many a toy that charmed us seems Emptied of beauty, stripped of worth, And mean as dust and dead as dreams,— For gauds that perished, shows that passed, Some recompense the Fates have sent: Thrice lovelier shine the things that last, The things that are more excellent. Tired of the Senate's barren brawl, An hour with silence we prefer, Where statelier rise the woods than all Yon towers of talk at Westminster. Let this man prate and that man plot, Or fame or place or title bent; The votes of veering crowds are not The things that are more excellent.

When we talk about our standards and our ideals, our basic concepts, our principles, we are talking about those things that are more excellent. True, the Lord has given us leeway in implementing programs to move forward the great objectives that he has set. The methods may be our own, but the basic principles, the basic concepts, the eternal verities, are unchangeable, and it is my conviction that these basic principles are not on trial. You and I are on trial; the world is on trial.

I think of the story of a prominent American businessman who was visiting the Louvre, that great gallery in Paris. As he was leaving that wonderful gallery, he turned to the attendant at the door and said, with a wave of the hand, "Not a thing here, not a thing worthwhile." And the old man looked up at him and he said, "My good sir, the paintings in this gallery are no longer on trial. The spectators are."

Now, the eternal principles of the gospel are no longer on trial. The history of the race, the experience of man, the testimonies of people living and dead are evidence that these things are true and that only through adherence to those eternal concepts can men and women find happiness here and happiness and exaltation hereafter.

I am so grateful that the world is coming, at least in a measure, to recognize the value and the importance of some of these basic standards, these things that are more excellent, that from a part of our program for youth in the Church.

Many years ago when I first lived in Washington, in the early thirties, I had gone down to my office early one morning in the hope that I might get some work done before the telephone started to ring. I had just got seated at my desk when the telephone rang, and I picked it up a bit reluctantly. The man at the other end introduced himself, a total stranger, and asked me if I would have lunch with him during the day. Well, he was so sincere that I accepted finally, reluctantly, and at one o'clock I faced him across the luncheon table in a downtown hotel. He said, "I guess you wonder why I have asked you to come here."

I said, "Yes, I am a bit curious to know."

He said, "Well, two or three days ago at a businessmen's luncheon meeting in Chicago, I was talking to some of my associates, and I told them I had been asked by our corporation to go to Washington, D.C., to open an office and to employ a young man to represent our corporation there in the nation's capital. I began telling them the kind of a young man I would like to have represent our firm. First of all," he said, "I indicated to them that I wanted a young man whose integrity would never be questioned, a young man of real character. I would like a young man who did not use liquor and would not be serving liquor as a means of trying to influence people." He said, "I wanted a young man who, if married, would be devoted to his wife and family, and who if unmarried would not be chasing cheap women around. I told them that I would prefer to have a young man who did not even smoke."

Then he said, "One of them spoke up and said, `What you want is a returned Mormon missionary.'" He told me, "I had heard about the Mormon Church a little; in fact, I remembered two young men in dark suits calling at our door one day and leaving us a copy of the Book of Mormon. But that was about the extent of my knowledge. However, as I rode to Washington on the train, I began thinking about the comment of my friend, and I said to myself, `Well, probably, that is just exactly the kind of a young man I do want. Why not?' So," he continued, "as I registered at my hotel last night, I said to the clerk, `Are there any Mormons in Washington?' He said, `I don't know, I suppose there are—they seem to be everywhere.' I said, `Do you know any?' And he said, `No, I can't say that I do, but the manager of the hotel is right here, and he will probably know someone.'" And then my host said, "I asked the manager, and he gave me your name. Now that is why I have invited you to lunch. Can you give me the names of three or four young men whom I might interview, who meet the standards I have outlined?"

Well, of course, you know it would be an easy matter for any one of us to give to any man who makes such inquiry the names not only of three or four but of a dozen or more who meet those standards.

The dean of one of our great agricultural colleges once came to my office and said, "I have something to tell you. Your church has just organized a stake in our state, the first one in our state." I said, "Yes, I know. I read about it." He said, "I want you to know that they really pick good men for stake presidents. They have taken one of my associates, a professor in my department." He added, "I never met a finer man." And then he started to tell me about the man's standards and ideals and principles and the things that guide him.

On a visit to Purdue University, where I was attending a meeting of large stock producers from twelve Midwestern states, I was seated at a table with the president of the university. He said, "Well, I see you Mormon people have done it again." I said, "What do you mean?" And then he told me the figures that he had just been reviewing regarding the achievements of Utah in the field of education. He said, "I cannot understand this. Your state is not one of the great, wealthy states in terms of dollar income. How is it that you make such a record in the field of education?"

I said, "I am not sure that I have the answer, but probably I can give you part of the answer." Then I told him about our people and their love for education, how it has been emphasized from the very inception of our great latter-day work, and I quoted some of the revelations that the Prophet Joseph had received. I referred to the great MIA program and made reference to our great slogan, "The glory of God is intelligence." When I quoted those lines, he said, "What did you say?" I said, "The glory of God is intelligence, or in other words, light and truth." He said, "I never heard anything like that. That is wonderful."

Then he called the attention of the rest of the group at the table—there were perhaps fifteen or twenty men there—and repeated essentially the conversation we had had together.

After the luncheon we went into the Music Hall, where the meeting of some 7,000 livestock producers was to be held. We listened to a male chorus sing two numbers, one having a state setting and the other, "America, the Beautiful." After the chorus left, I was to take my part on the program. In his introduction, before 7,000 people, the university president again repeated our conversation at the luncheon table and told about the MIA and its slogan. In my talk I paid tribute to the wonderful chorus, and so afterward he said, "Would you like to go up to the room where they have been rehearsing? This building is so beautifully constructed that acoustically it is almost perfect, and you could not hear them rehearsing above, but they have been up there rehearsing all during this meeting."

So we went up and I was invited to speak briefly to them. I told them of our love for music. I quoted the Lord's words, given through the Prophet Joseph and found in the 25th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, on the important part music plays in our worship. When I had finished with my final remarks, the leader was kind enough to say, "I wish we had had the recording machine on today. I am going to make you a proposition. If, when you go back to your office, you will record essentially what you have said today and send it to us, we will record the two numbers we sang, which you liked so well, and send them to you." Well, the exchange has been made.

Why do I mention these things? I mention them because when our standards and our ideals, our concepts, our principles are understood, even by men of the world, they cannot help but appreciate them.

I have in my files tear sheets from a little national magazine of limited circulation, Listen, with a feature article under the title "The Mormons Find Fun in Abstinence." At the top of the page is a picture of our beloved President David O. McKay and a quotation from him as follows: "A spotless character founded upon the ability to say no in the presence of those who mock and jeer wins the respect and love of men and women whose opinion is most worthwhile."

There is also a quotation from Elder Richard L. Evans regarding the Word of Wisdom, a picture of the Tabernacle Choir, a picture of our young men in action in a basketball tournament, and a comment regarding that. The editorial comment is as follows:

[From time to time Listen has featured various church organizations taking a strong stand in the matter of alcohol education and the personal use of intoxicants. This feature by the nationally known writer, Don K. Anthon, notes the basic philosophy and belief of the Mormon Church in this regard, along with factual evidence showing the beneficial results appearing in the every-day lives of its members.]

What at first seemed to be another routine sailing of the Saxonia from Montreal to Greenock, Scotland, August 13, 1955, proved instead to be one of the ship's most eventful Atlantic crossings. Plans for a concert tour of Europe led to the making of reservations on the Saxonia for 600 passengers, the majority of whom were members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, more commonly known as Morons, with headquarters in Salt Lake City. The passengers, including 375 members of the renowned Tabernacle Choir of the Mormon Church, and these choir members together with their families and friends, completely filled the Saxonia. Altogether it was a happy group, anticipating a vacation filled with new scenes and pleasant associations. And as they marched up the gangplank, they indulged in much singing and gay conversation. As the captain of the ship looked them over, he remarked to his mate, "It looks as if we are going to have a lively passage." The barkeeper beamed with delight from behind his line of glasses in anticipation of the heavy demand upon his supplies when the ship got underway.

However, it was not long after leaving port before the bartender became aware of the fact that there had not been a single call for a drink. Convinced that this was very unusual, he quieted his apprehensions by concluding, "Oh, well, they will soon be showing up. They always do." The ship was well under way, and still there was no business at the bar. The hope for eager customers dimmed, and in frustration he appealed to the captain, "I can't understand it. I haven't had a single drink. Such a thing has never happened before." The captain agreed that it was a strange situation, especially since the passengers all appeared gay and happy, and he said he would investigate to see what he could find out.

Quickly contacting one of the passengers who appeared to be a hopeful candidate for information, he asked what he considered the favorite drink of the party. The prompt reply came back. "Mormons do not drink any liquor." That seemed incredible to the captain, but he said, "Well, what do Mormons drink? Surely they must have some social drink." In reply, the honest Mormon said, "We drink milk mostly, and sometimes fruit juices." "Well," ejaculated the captain, "milk for six hundred passengers? We don't have that much on board."

The bartender who stood within hearing distance gave expression to his amazement by a doleful countenance. Between captain and bartender they agreed that the unusual situation must be met, so the ship pulled into Quebec and a king-sized supply of milk was put aboard. From that time until the end of the voyage, the barkeeper was busy serving milk straight, malts, and fruit cocktails.

Then the article goes on to tell about their arrival in Scotland, the wonderful impression the choir made, and the bartender's final comment at the end of the journey. He said, "Never in my life have I known a shipful of passengers to have so much pleasure and enjoy so much fun and at the same time be cold sober."

Of course, this is not anything new to us. But the thing that pleases me is that it seems to be appreciated a little more as time goes on—these standards, these ideals we talk about in the Church. So I am very happy that today there is more evidence in support of the truth of the Word of Wisdom than ever before, and with the passing of time, the evidence will accumulate and increase. Why? Because in the Word of Wisdom are announced the eternal, basic principles that never change, and we must always remember that time is on the side of truth and the Word of Wisdom is the truth, as are the other standards and ideals of the Church.

So our young people and our leaders of youth cannot afford in the least degree to let down in their standards. They cannot afford not to uphold wholeheartedly the ideals, the basic concepts, these eternal principles upon which our programs have been established. We have everything to gain and nothing to lose by living the standards of the Church, the standards of truth.

Sometimes our friends speak more truth than they realize. Many distinguished visitors come to Washington, D.C. Some time ago, the King of Belgium visited, and in his address he said this: "I who am a young man come from a country old enough to have been spoken of proudly by Julius Caesar. I come to a country [meaning the United States] which for centuries God kept hidden behind the veil until its appointed hour when it took into its young arms the people of the Old World."

Well, you can imagine what I thought as I heard those words. I was determined that this wonderful, fine-appearing young monarch should read the account of the very truth that he spoke, recorded in the Book of Mormon.

At a party at the Beverly Hills Hilton Hotel in Los Angeles, I had been asked by the President of the United States to greet the president of one of our newer republics, the president of eighty-eight million people scattered on some 3,000 islands a thousand miles long, a nation that had been in existence only a few years. As we sat there at this dinner, which was sponsored in large measure by the motion picture industry and at which many movie stars were present, I could look out a beautiful bay window. Down the avenue, on the elevation, I could see the soft floodlights around our glorious Los Angeles Temple, and I had the joy of pointing it out to my guests and to friends at our table and other tables. I thought, as we sat there, "Much of what goes on tonight is simply the froth of life. The things that endure, the things that are real, the things that are important are those things represented in the temple of God."

In our experience in Washington, never once was there a single occasion when we had cause to feel any embarrassment because of our standards, our principles, our ideals, the things for which this church stands.

When my good wife entertained the First Lady and the wives of the Cabinet members in our own home, it was a different luncheon than probably they had been used to. Sister Benson said very graciously, "Now, you will find some things different in our home. There will not be any tobacco, there will not be any cocktails, there will not be any tea and coffee, but we will try to make it up to you in our own way." I wish you could have heard the comments afterward.

No, you will never have any occasion to be embarrassed among people who count, real men and women, because you live according to the standards, the teachings, and the ideals of the Church. I know whereof I speak.

I have had dinners tendered in my honor to which have been invited leaders from dozens of nations, and out of respect of me, there has not been even tea and coffee served-just fruit juices throughout the dinner. There have been other times, too, when, as host, it has been my privilege and pleasure to entertain the representatives of several other countries, and there has never been any embarrassment because there has not been liquor served or because there has been a blessing asked on the food. In fact, I have felt from my own personal experience that there has been a little feeling of appreciation and added respect, and ofttimes inquiry leading to gospel conversation, because of some of these simple things.

May I just quote from one editorial from a fine newspaper in Pennsylvania:

We will take Ezra Taft Benson without a martini in his hand to any other public official with one. We prefer men of distinction who got that way without a cocktail calling card. We like the image of Washington we learned from the school books. We deplore the preference of some for martini-government. We think it is time officials who have the courage of their convictions against such goings-on be told they have friends and supporters back home.

There is a lot of sentiment in this country, outside the Church, in support of our ideals and standards as Latter-day Saints. Let us not fail the Church. Let us not fail ourselves by being so unwise as to feel we have to let down in our standards in order to be accepted by the world. It is not true. The world may not live by our standards, but they have respect and appreciation for those of us who have the wisdom and the courage to maintain those standards.

Some day we may be called upon as a people to exert great influence in helping to preserve the liberties and freedoms and blessings vouchsafed to us as a people in the Constitution of this land. Some of our inspired leaders have had words to say on that subject. I hope and pray that we will be ready when the time comes—in fact, I am inclined to feel sometimes it is going to be a gradual process. Maybe it is underway now. We will not be able to discharge our obligations unless we adhere strictly to the standards and ideals of the church and kingdom of God.

That we may do so with all our hearts and receive the inner satisfaction, the inner peace, and the joy that comes from keeping the commandments of God is my humble prayer.
