Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

The Latter-day Saints and the World

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a world organization. Our message is a world message. The Book of Mormon prophets who were permitted to see our day noted that the members of the Church of Christ would be relatively few in numbers. They also noted that they were distributed worldwide. I have been impressed with this fact, particularly while supervising our missionary work in Europe and in Asia. And even as far back as 1946, at the end of World War II, while serving an emergency mission in Europe, I was impressed with the wide distribution of our people as I traveled through the war-torn countries of the world.

Never has the Church been so well-known as it is today. Almost everywhere we are now known for what we really are, and not for what our past enemies have said about us. The interest in the Church and its message is worldwide, at least in the free world. I noted this in Japan at Expo '70, where some seven million people crowded through our relatively small pavilion, and eight-hundred thousand of them signed cards inviting missionaries to visit them.

On my last of several visits to Israel as a Cabinet member of the United States government, and later as a Church official, Sister Benson and I spent a delightful evening with Mr. and Mrs. David Ben-Gurion, at their invitation, in their home in Tel Aviv. As we were leaving that evening, Mr. Ben-Gurion said, "I want you to pray to God that he will spare me for ten more years. I'm writing a history of the Jewish people, and it will take me ten years to finish it. I would like you to send me all the information you have about Orson Hyde's visit to the Holy Land in 1841, including a copy of the prayer he gave as he dedicated the land of Palestine on the Mount of Olives. I want to incorporate it all into my history." Then as a last word as we were leaving, he said, "There are no people in this world who understand the Jews like the Mormons." To this I responded, "Mr. Ben-Gurion, there are no people in this world who understand the world like the Mormons." And he answered, "Oh, I'm not sure I'd go quite that far, but what I said is true."

Leaders of this church, called by revelation, bearers of the priesthood of God, see clearly the problems of the world and know what is needed for their solution.

We live today in a wicked world. Never in our memory have the forces of evil been arrayed in such a deadly formation. The devil is well organized and has many emissaries working for him. His satanic majesty has proclaimed his intention to destroy our young people, to weaken the home and family, and to defeat the purposes of the Lord Jesus Christ through his great church.

As Latter-day Saints, we know the adversary will not succeed. The Church stands stronger today than ever before in its history. We are not only growing in numbers, we are also increasing in faith and testimony as measured by attendance at meetings, the payment of tithes and offerings, support of the great missionary program, the building program, temple work, and other phases of our program. Today we have the fullest and the richest program for the blessing of our Father's children to be found anywhere upon the face of the earth. I know this is true.

But we live in a day of wickedness. It seems that almost everything that is good, pure, uplifting, and strengthening is being challenged as never before—yes, almost discarded by many.

From time to time I hear from my non-Mormon friends. Many of them are fine Christians, honorable men of the earth. A prominent executive in the eastern part of the United States closed his letter with these words: "God bless you—and your wonderful work. I pray that Satan will be kept out of your church, since we have failed to do so in ours."

As Christian people, as members of the true church of Jesus Christ, we face difficult days. But they are also days filled with challenge, hope, and assurance. We have clearly before us the answers to the problems facing mankind. We know what the Lord expects of us. He said that we should all "arise and shine forth" and "be a standard for the nations." (D&C 115:5). We know the course we should follow. Do we have the faith and courage to follow that course? I hope and pray we do.

You will recall the parable of the wheat and the tares in the thirteenth chapter of Matthew. The disciples at the time seemed not to understand this parable set forth by the Savior, and they asked him for an explanation. He said to them:

He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man;

The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one;

The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.

As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world.

The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity. (Matt. 13:37-41.)

In modern revelation, the Lord has said, "Behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields." (D&C 86:5). He also said in this same revelation that he would "let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe; then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned." (D&C 86:7.)

The Lord has also said in our day in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph, "I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth. I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man." (D&C 63:32-33.)

In section one of the Doctrine and Covenants, the introduction to the Lord's book of commandments, he made it clear that "the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion." (D&C 1:35.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith said in 1967, "Peace has been taken from the earth. The devil has power over his own dominion. The Spirit of the Lord has been withdrawn. Not because the Lord desires to withdraw that Spirit, but because of the wickedness of mankind, it becomes necessary that the Spirit of the Lord be withdrawn." ("The Predicted Judgments," BYU Speeches of the Year, March 21, 1967, p. 6.)

Prophets of God, ancient and modern, have predicted that judgments would be poured out upon the world unless the people repented. Prophets and leaders of the Church from the days of the Prophet Joseph have spoken out clearly and courageously regarding the calamities, destructions, and plagues that would visit the earth unless the people repented of their evil ways.

President Wilford Woodruff, in an address in Brigham City, Utah, in June 1894, said:

God has held the angles of destruction for many years lest they reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth and there is a meaning to these things. Remember this and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we shall have protection and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and safety. Read the scriptures and revelations. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, p. 230.)

Yes, peace has been taken from the earth, and "if prophecy is to be fulfilled, there awaits the world a conflict more dreadful than any the world has yet seen." ("The Predicted Judgments," p. 9.)

President Brigham Young said:

When the testimony of the Elders ceases to be given, and the Lord says to them, "Come home; I will now preach my own sermons to the nations of the earth," all you now know can scarcely be called a preface to the sermon that will be preached with fire and sword, tempests, earthquakes, hail, rain, thunders and lightnings, and fearful destruction. (Journal of Discourses, vol. 8, p. 123.)

Why is the Lord angry with the wicked? Because they have rejected the gospel. They have rejected Jesus Christ as the God of this world. They have rejected the Author of salvation. As President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

When you reject the gospel, when you reject the Author of our salvation, what have you to rely on? Nothing! Nothing but the devil's plan. What is the devil's plan? To force men; to take away from them their agency; to compel them to do the bidding of someone else, whether they like it or not. That is the feeling that has spread over the world. Naturally, the Lord says the time was near at hand, and he said that over one hundred years ago and it is now, of course, much closer. . . .

We hear a great deal about the thought that we are fighting now for liberty—the liberty of the people, the liberty of the nations. I hope so, but if we want to insure the liberty of the people, then we must turn back again to Jesus Christ who is the God of this land. I say "we." I mean the people of the United States, the people of this continent. We cannot afford to forsake the God of this land who is Jesus Christ. If we do, we lose our strength. The Lord has promised to protect this nation, this whole continent, this whole hemisphere. He would fortify it against all other nations; He would fight our battles on one condition: That we would keep His commandments.

Now there is our danger. We must not forsake God. If we are not in this life abiding in His truth, you may be sure that He is not going to be on our side. He will leave us to ourselves. ("The Predicted Judgments," pp. 12-13.)

It should be comforting to all Latter-day Saints that the Lord has given great promises in that sacred volume, the Book of Mormon, promises that should give us comfort and assurance on the condition that we live the gospel. How I wish that every person would read the Book of Mormon, and in it the prophetic history of the Americas and the clear warnings for the future.

Read what Father Lehi said in 2 Ne. 1:6-8. Read what his son Jacob said in 2 Ne. 10:10-14. Read also 1 Ne. 22:17, when the Lord said through his prophet, "Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire." And further, "the righteous need not fear, for they are those who shall not be confounded. . . ." (1 Ne. 22:22.) Then, in the twenty-sixth verse: "And because of the righteousness of his people, Satan has no power; wherefore, he cannot be loosed for the space of many years; for he hath no power over the hearts of the people, for they dwell in righteousness, and the Holy One of Israel reigneth." (1 Ne. 22:26.)

But we must all keep in mind the warning of the brother of Jared:

And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God.

Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ. . . . (Ether 1:9-10, 12.)

My beloved brethren and sisters, these things are true. This work is true. God the Father and his beloved Son did appear to Joseph Smith. This was the greatest event that has transpired in the world since the resurrection of the Master. This is our message and our warning to the world. It is a world message from a world organization—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. These warnings of the prophets, ancient and modern, shall in very deed be fulfilled. The Lord is "angry with the wicked." He is "holding his Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth." The one hope for this wicked world is to accept and live the gospel, to keep the commandments, to heed the warnings of the prophets, ancient and modern.

I bear witness that these things are true and pray that all of us will heed the inspired counsel of the priesthood of God.
