Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Keeping the Sabbath Day Holy

Few, if any, subjects in the great, eternal gospel plan of the Lord have been spoken of more frequently than that of the Sabbath. Ancient prophets of God have proclaimed it, Presidents of the Church and other General Authorities have repeatedly emphasized it, lay Christians and men of good will throughout Christendom have spoken approvingly of its place and value in the lives of men, women, and children of all races and climes.

In the Church, it has been the subject of much preaching and writing. A call to the Church Historian's office for a few items on the Sabbath brought to my office 132 specific references and the generous comment, "If you need more, please let us know." I assure you, I didn't.

The period allotted for this discussion could be filled and more—and quite profitably—by simply quoting from my beloved brethren, past and present. I am grateful for their counsel and admonition on the important subject of the Sabbath. And I am also thankful that I find myself in full harmony, insofar as I can tell, with what they have said and written. I am also pleased that the record is clear and full. No Latter-day Saint need stumble or be in doubt as to his duty in reference to this divine law.

I believe in honoring the Sabbath day. I love a sacred Sabbath. I am grateful that as a boy I had a constant example and sound parental counsel as to the importance of keeping the Sabbath day a holy day. I am also grateful that my beloved wife and children and grandchildren have been true to the direction of the priesthood of God in regard to the Sabbath day. My memories of the Sabbath from infancy have been joyful, uplifting, and spiritually profitable, for which I am deeply grateful.

Men from time immemorial have recognized the need for blessed rest—time for physical and spiritual refreshment. The human body and the spirit of man require it for happy, purposeful living.

Over sixty years ago an item from the Daily News appeared in the Liahona, the Elders' Journal under the caption "The Day of Rest."

One of the facts upon which all men are agreed, whatever may be their view of life, is the need of a frequently recurring season of spiritual and physical refreshment. The life which was an unending vista of dusty days in the city would be a life from which we should all turn in despair. The hum of the wheels would drive the world mad. The soul would perish under the strain of material things and the body would perish with it. There is, therefore, no question of can't in the desire to keep our Sunday: it is a supreme necessity, and never more supreme than in these days, when the pace of life is always being quickened and men are becoming more and more like the parts of a giant machine whose operations they do not understand and whose roar dulls the mind. (January 1, 1910, vol. 7, p. 445.)

Well over fifty years ago, Joseph L. Townsend penned these lovely lines about the Sabbath for the Improvement Era.

O, blessed day of peace and rest, Thou art the day I love the best! Through precious hours thy gifts are sown With blessings from the Savior's throne. With songs of joy attune my lyre, And feed my soul's celestial fire; Let love with love its pleasures meet, And happiness be mine complete. I know the joy of rest and peace That from my toil brings sweet release; And when the evening hours have passed Yet shall thy precepts ever last. And so repeated days replace Thy happy hours of love and grace; And Heaven, each departed year, In vision thou hast made more clear! —July 1920, p. 833

Henry Ward Beecher said: "A world without a Sabbath would be like a man without a smile, like a summer without flowers, and like a homestead without a garden. It is the joyous day of the whole week."

Samuel Taylor Coleridge: "I feel as if God had, by giving the Sabbath, given fifty-two springs in every year."

Ralph Waldo Emerson: "The Sunday is the core of our civilization, dedicated to thought and reverence. It invites to the noblest solitude and to the noblest society."

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: "Sunday is the golden clasp that binds together the volume of the week."

Yes, Sunday is wonderful, but how much more wonderful it might be if honored as a sacred Sabbath. Man has tried on several occasions to change God's law of the Sabbath. Each attempt has resulted in failure.

After the War of 1870, England and France decided to observe the Sabbath only every twenty-one days in order that they might have time to build up the war-torn countries. After a period of trial, however, a careful check showed that they had accomplished less total work than when they rested every seventh day as the Lord prescribed.

In the hope that it may be of some little help, I have chosen to discuss the subject of the Sabbath briefly under the following seven important subtopics:

The Sabbath was prefigured if not definitely specified in the record of the creation, wherein we read, following the account of the six days or periods of creative effort: "And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made." (Gen. 2:3.)

In the early stages of Exodus the Israelites were commanded to lay in a double portion of manna on the sixth day, for the seventh was consecrated as a day of holy rest; and this was signalized by the Lord's withholding manna on the Sabbath day. (See Ex. 16:23-30.) There is no proof that Sabbath observance by Israel at this early date was an innovation; and it may be reasonably regarded as a recognition of an established order by re-enactment in the new dispensation. Later, when the Decalog was codified and promulgated on Sinai, the Sabbath law was made particularly explicit, and the Lord's rest was cited as its foundation (in these well-known words):

"Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work: But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it." (Ex. 20:8-11.) ("Remember the Sabbath Day, a Law Unto Man from the Beginning," Improvement Era, December 1917, p. 114.)

Holy prophets of God throughout Israelite history admonished and rebuked the people regarding this divine law of the Sabbath. The affliction of the nation was due to Sabbath violation, according to Nehemiah. (Neh. 13:15-22.) To Isaiah (Isaiah 58:13-14) and Ezekiel (Ezekiel 20:12-24) and the Book of Mormon branch in America (Jarom 5; Mosiah 18:23), Sabbath observance was an imperative requirement.

Apostate Israel, long before the birth of Christ, had departed from the purpose and spirit of Sabbath observance.

This condition was strongly denounced by our Lord in reply to the many criticisms heaped upon him because of the healings and other good works wrought by him on the Sabbath. "The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath," said he, and then continued with the profound affirmation: "The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath." (Mark 2:27-28.)

Christ came not to destroy the Law of Moses but to fulfill it; and through him the law was superseded by the gospel. The Savior rose from the tomb on the first day of the week; and that particular Sunday, as also the next, was rendered forever memorable by the bodily visitation of the resurrected Lord to the assembled apostles and others. To the believers in the crucified and risen Savior Sunday became the Lord's Day (Rev. 1:10), and in time took the place of Saturday as the weekly Sabbath in the Christian churches. (Talmage, op. cit., p. 115.)

We admit without argument that under the Mosaic Law the seventh day of the week, Saturday, was designated and observed as the holy day, and that the change from Saturday to Sunday was a feature of the apostolic administration following the personal ministry of Jesus Christ. Greater to us than the question of this day or that in the week, is the actuality of the weekly Sabbath, to be observed as a day of special and particular devotion to the service of the Lord. (Ibid., p. 114.)

By direct revelation authority, the Church teaches that Sunday is the acceptable day for Sabbath observance as the Lord's day.

In this, a new dispensation, and verily the last—the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times—the law of the Sabbath has been reaffirmed unto the Church. It is to be noted that the revelation, part of which follows, was given to the Church on a Sunday (August 7, 1831).

"And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day. For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High. Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times. But remember that on this the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full." (D&C 59:9-13.) (Ibid., pp. 115-16.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith, commenting on the Lord's day, said: "The Lord's day was, of course, Sunday, and on this day the Latter-day Saints have been commanded to observe the weekly Sabbath. So far as the Latter-day Saints are concerned, the Lord has spoken. This settles the question." (Answers to Gospel Questions, Deseret Book, 1958, vol. 2, p. 59.)

"We believe that a weekly day of rest is no less truly a necessity for the physical well-being of man than for his spiritual growth but, primarily and essentially, we regard the Sabbath as divinely established, and its observance a commandment of him who was and is and ever shall be, Lord of the Sabbath." (Talmage, op. cit., p. 116.)

On Sunday, April 11, 1830, five days after the Church was organized in the Whitmer home, the Prophet called together his followers and held the first sacramental service in the Church in this dispensation. The first Sunday on the plains, April 18, 1847, moving westward from Winter Quarters, Howard Egan wrote: "Today, being a day set apart by the Almighty God for His people to rest, we do not intend to travel." The day following the arrival of the Mormon pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley, Sunday was strictly observed, and at two o'clock, the worshipers met in their first sacramental service in their new home.

the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth;

Yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for vineyards;

Yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart;

Yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul.

And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion.

And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments. (D&C 59:16-21.)

These, then, are the promises if we keep a sacred sabbath "in righteousness," with glad hearts, "and a contrite spirit." (D&C 59:8.)

The purpose of the Sabbath is for spiritual uplift, for a renewal of our covenants, for worship, for rest, for prayer. It is for the purpose of feeding the spirit, that we may keep ourselves unspotted from the world by obeying God's command.

"The Lord's plan is perfect," said Elder Orson F. Whitney.

. . . his commandments have in view the salvation of the body as well as the spirit, for it is the soul that will be redeemed from the grave and glorified. God has commanded us to care for the spirit, as well as for the body, and give it food in due season, and He set aside the Sabbath day that man might rest from his temporal labors and go to the house of the Lord and be fed with that holy influence which nourishes the spirit of man. That is why we meet together on the Sabbath day. Our spirits need their food, the same as do our bodies and if we neglect them, they will starve and dwindle and die upon the same principle that the body will die when deprived of its proper nourishment. (Liahona, the Elders Journal, February 5, 1910, vol. 7, p. 530.)

As President Joseph Fielding Smith has pointed out, "The Lord has never given a commandment to the members of the Church, or to the world, except it has been given for the everlasting welfare and blessing for all who obey it." (Answers to Gospel Questions, Deseret Book, 1957, vol. 1, p. 101.)

a. Activities that contribute to greater spirituality.

b. Essential Church meetings in the house of prayer.

c. Acquisition of spiritual knowledge—reading the scriptures, Church history and biographies, and the inspired words of the Brethren.

d. Resting physically, getting acquainted with family, relating scriptural stories to children, bearing testimony, building family unity.

e. Visiting the sick and aged shut-ins.

f. Singing the songs of Zion and listening to inspiring music.

g. Paying devotions to the Most High—prayer, personal and family; fasting, administrations, father's blessings.

h. Preparing food with singleness of heart—simple meals prepared largely on Saturday.

Remember, Sunday is the Lord's day—a day to do his work.

The May 1902 issue of the Improvement Era carried an excellent article by Colonel R. M. Bryce Thomas entitled "How Shall We Find the Sabbath of Profit?" which closed with these words:

Thus, by an honest and conscientious observance of the Sabbath day, the spiritual life is strengthened and built up, and the blessings and favors of God our Father are vouchsafed to us. But let us remember that we are not entitled to devote the Sabbath to any secular purpose, and that if we do so, we do it at our peril.

a. Overworking and staying up late Saturday, resulting in exhaustion on Sunday.

b. Filling the Sabbath so full of extra meetings that there is no time for prayer, meditation, family fellowship, and counseling.

c. Doing gardening and odd jobs around the house.

d. Taking trips to canyons and resorts; visits to friends, amusements, joy riding, loafing, etc.

e. Children playing vigorously and seeing picture shows.

f. Sports, golf, fishing, and hunting "wild animals," which God made for the use of man only "in times of famine and excess of hunger." (D&C 89:15.) "Let the boys have their exercise. Let them have amusements at the proper time, but let them be taught better things on the Sabbath day," said President Joseph F. Smith. ("What Shall We Do on the Sabbath Day?" Improvement Era, August 1916, p. 864.)

g. Reading Sunday papers—the largest edition of the week. Why? Because it is diverting and time-consuming on a day we need to build the spirit.

h. Shopping or supporting with our patronage Sunday business—grocery stores, supermarkets, restaurants, gas stations, etc. (First Presidency's statement, June 19, 1959; Neh. 10:31.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith made it a practice not to turn on radio or TV on Sunday except for Church-sponsored programs.

This is from a statement of the First Presidency on the Sabbath, dated June 19, 1959:

The Sabbath is not just another day on which we merely rest from work, free to spend it as our light-mindedness may suggest. It is a holy day, the Lord's Day, to be spent as a day of worship and reverence. All matters extraneous thereto should be shunned. . . . Latter-day Saints, with a testimony of the Gospel and a knowledge of the spiritual blessings that come from keeping the Sabbath, will never permit themselves to make it a shopping day, an activity that has no place in a proper observance of the Holy Day of the Lord, on which we are commanded to pour out our souls in gratitude for the many blessings of health, strength, physical comfort, and spiritual joy which come from the Lord's bounteous hand. (Church News, July 11, 1959, p. 3.)

a. Houseclean, straighten up, refuel car, and prepare clothing and food in advance, on Saturday.

b. Provide for recreation and amusements during the week and provide for a half holiday during the week. "We stand for a sacred sabbath and a weekly half holiday" is a good slogan for families especially. (Heber J. Grant, in Latter-day Prophets Speak, p. 363.)

c. Students should study their school subjects during the week and keep a sacred Sabbath—it pays.

d. Get a good rest on Saturday night.

Business that close on Sunday can succeed. There are many examples. Here is one example from the owner of a restaurant in Salt Lake City, excerpted from his letter of January 13, 1971:

You will note a number of reasons why I have closed my place of business on Sunday. . . .

I have a firm conviction that the greatest guarantee for success in business for a Latter-day Saint is to honor the Sabbath day as the Lord has commanded. I would be glad to bear this testimony to anyone any time. (W. A. Sorensen.)

What are the consequences of obedience to this divine law? Spiritually it will help to "keep ourselves unspotted from the world." Temporally, "the fulness of the earth" will be ours—all this through cheerfully keeping this divine law.

Yes, it is verily true that:

A Sabbath well spent, brings a day of content, And strength for the trials of tomorrow, But a Sabbath profaned, whatever be gained, Is a sure forerunner of sorrow.
