Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

The Power of Prayer

Rearing eleven vigorous children to honorable manhood and womanhood on a small farm is no easy accomplishment. Yet, as my father and mother devoted themselves to this task, they never seemed to have any fear of the future. The reason was their faith—their confidence that they could always go to the Lord and he would see them through.

"Remember that whatever you do or wherever you are, you are never alone," was my father's familiar counsel. "Our Heavenly Father is always near. You can reach out and receive his aid through prayer."

All through my life the counsel to depend on prayer has been prized above any other advice I have ever received. It has become an integral part of me, an anchor, a constant source of strength.

Prayer came to my aid during a terrifying experience of my early life. I was a missionary in England for the Church. My companion, William Harris, and I were standing back to back, facing a hostile crowd that was swelled by a rowdy element from the pubs, men who were always eager for excitement and not averse to violence. What had started out to be a customary missionary street meeting soon took on the proportions of an angry, unmanageable mob. Many false, malicious rumors had been spread about our church activities.

The crowd started swaying. Someone from the rear called out, "What's the excitement?" Several voices shouted, "It's them bloody Mormons!" This touched off a clamorous demonstration: "Let's get 'em under our feet!" "Throw 'em in the river!"

The mob surged forward and tried to force us to the ground so they might trample us.

In my anxiety, I silently prayed for the Lord's guidance and protection. When it seemed that I could hold out no longer, a husky young stranger pushed through to my side and said, in a strong, clear voice, "I believe every word you said tonight. I am your friend."

As he spoke, a little circle cleared around me. This, to me, was a direct answer to my fervent prayer. The next thing I knew, a sturdy English bobby was convoying us safely through the crowd and back to our lodgings.

Resorting to prayer in such a time of crisis was not born of desperation. It was merely the outgrowth of the cherished custom of family prayer with which I had been surrounded since earliest childhood. How well I remember that while the family was small we frequently knelt together in the kitchen. As we grew in numbers and size we moved into the dining room, which had been added. As children we all took our turns in offering simple, heartfelt prayers. How grateful I am that we have continued that practice in my own home, and that my devoted wife and children look upon it as a never-failing source of strength and contentment.

With the ending of World War II in Europe, I was sent to London to direct relief activities for our Latter-day Saint membership in fourteen nations of Europe and the Near East. Since our staff was specifically and efficiently organized to furnish and distribute supplies, we were anxious to handle the work ourselves. But in Germany and Austria, where the need was most acute, permission was not forthcoming. The military authorities were determined to avoid even the appearance of making special concessions.

I sought an audience with the general in charge. It was flatly refused. Having seen the desperate plight of many of these people, I resolved to seek divine guidance through fasting and prayer.

Before long a spirit of assurance replaced my troubled anxiety. "The Lord," I thought, "is sharing his strength with me." An impelling force urged me to seek another audience with the general.

I approached the general's adjutant with a surge of confidence. Minutes later I was granted an audience. The general heard me through and graciously acceded to our request.

Several scattered groups of people in Poland were in critical condition. Yet, after six weeks of negotiation, our visas were not forthcoming. Again I retired to my room for prayer and meditation. And again I received assurance that the Lord would go before us and prepare the way. As I entered my companion's room, I said simply, "Pack your bags. We're leaving for Poland."

The events that followed would seem incredible to many. That Unseen Power removed every barrier. The very same official who had refused us permission now sent us on our way in less than ten minutes.

In Warsaw we explained our mission to a fellow American. "Mr. Benson," he remarked, "if you think you can do all that traveling in one week, you're crazy. I've been here over a month now and haven't been able to get so much as a jeep to take me beyond the city limits."

We saw him again a week later, while waiting for the plane that would fly us out of Poland. When we recounted the successful completion of our mission, he exclaimed incredulously, "I don't believe it!"

It is soul-satisfying to know that God is mindful of us and ready to respond when we place our trust in him and do that which is right. There is no place for fear among men and women who place their trust in the Almighty, who do not hesitate to humble themselves in seeking divine guidance through prayer. Though persecutions arise, though reverses come, in prayer we can find reassurance, for God will speak peace to the soul. That peace, that spirit of serenity, is a great blessing.

If I could wish for anyone a priceless gift, it would not be wealth, profound wisdom, or the honors of men. I would rather pass on the key to inner strength and security that my father gave to me when he advised, "Receive His aid through prayer."
