Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

How to Improve Prayers, Public and Private

I know not by what method rare, But this I know, God answers prayer. I know that He has given His word That tells me prayer is always heard, And will be answered, soon or late, And so I pray and calmly wait. I know not if the blessing sought Will come just in the way I thought, But leave my prayers with Him alone, Whose ways are wiser than my own, Assured that He will grant my quest Or send some answer far more blessed. —Author Unknown

There is no unanswered prayer. What is prayer?

Prayer is the soul's sincere desire, Uttered or unexpressed; The motion of a hidden fire, That trembles in the breast. —Hymns, no. 220

Prayer is man's means of communicating with his Heavenly Father, the Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth. Only the deceived and the fool refuse to pray. An urgent need today is for more prayer—secret, individual prayer, family prayer, prayer in organizations, associations, and meetings generally, in schools, and in government bodies. People of all nations need more prayer. We need to be on our knees. While in the act of prayer, the greatest single event since the resurrection of Christ occurred—the appearance of God the Father and his Beloved Son to Joseph Smith.

A few years ago in the lobby of the old Savoy Hilton Hotel, which stood where the new General Motors Building now stands at 59th Street and Fifth Avenue in New York City, there was an impressive picture and prayer: The picture was of Uncle Sam on his knees in prayer. The caption read, "America on Its Knees." Then followed these words:

. . . not beaten there by the hammer and sickle, but freely, intelligently, responsibly, confidently, powerfully. America now knows it can destroy Communism and win the battle for peace. We need fear nothing or no one . . . except God.

And then this prayer:

Now darkness gathers around us, and we are confused in all our counsels. Losing faith in Thee, we lose faith in ourselves.

Inspire us with wisdom, all of us of every color, race and creed, to use our wealth, our strength to help our brother, instead of destroying him.

Help us to do Thy will as it is done in heaven and be worthy of Thy promise of peace on earth.

Fill us with new faith, new strength and new courage, that we may win the Battle for Peace.

Be swift to save us, dear God, before the darkness falls.

I have carried a miniature of this poster in my wallet for many years and have had occasion to discuss its message with the author, Conrad Hilton of worldwide hotel fame, and others.

America as a nation has been built on prayer. It has a spiritual foundation, a prophetic history. When the God-fearing Pilgrims arrived in the Western Hemisphere, Governor William Bradford recorded these words: "Being thus arrived in good harbor and brought safe to land, they fell upon their knees and blessed the God of Heaven."

America's Declaration of Independence opened and closed with a firm recognition of God: Men are "endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights . . . with a firm reliance on Divine Providence we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor."

Abraham Lincoln soberly declared: "God rules this world. It is the duty of nations as well as men to owe their dependence upon the over-ruling power of God, to confess their sins and transgressions in humble sorrow . . . and to recognize the sublime truth that those nations only are blessed whose God is the Lord."

Thank God for the Church and its emphasis on the all-important matter of prayer, from the cradle to the grave. What an influence in our childhood came from the frequently sung reminder:

Ere you left your room this morning, Did you think to pray? In the name of Christ, our Savior, Did you sue for loving favor As a shield today? When your heart was filled with anger, Did you think to pray? Did you plead for grace, my brother, That you might forgive another Who had crossed your way? When sore trials came upon you, Did you think to pray? When your soul was full of sorrow, Balm of Gilead did you borrow At the gates of day? (Chorus) O how praying rests the weary! Prayer will change the night to day; So when life gets dark and dreary, Don't forget to pray. —Hymns, no. 31

Family prayer night and morning and special prayers in between are a unifying, strengthening anchor in Latter-day Saint homes. Just before mealtime in the morning and the evening is usually the best time for getting all of the family together for family prayers. This practice, so very important, was once widely practiced. The journals of the early pioneers, not only in the West but in the Midwest and East also, reveal the widespread practice of daily devotion in the home. The scriptures were read and a hymn was often sung.

The practice of daily family devotion has almost left much of the world, and in our busy lives of getting and spending, Latter-day Saints also are often neglectful of this important matter.

We need daily devotion in the home. We need to return to the practice of family prayer, secret prayer, the old-fashioned practice of devotion in the home, daily, night and morning, the singing of hymns, the reading of the scriptures. How much more happiness there would be, how many fewer divorces, how much less delinquency there would be if these simple practices were followed as was the custom in the pioneer home.

The holy scriptures are replete with convincing admonitions regarding the importance of prayer, impressive examples of prayer; the power of prayer. Even prophets of God have been chastised for failing to call on the Lord. Consider the hours-long interview of the brother of Jared with the Lord and the serious warning given as recorded in Ether 2:14-15:

And it came to pass at the end of four years that the Lord came again unto the brother of Jared, and stood in a cloud and talked with him. And for the space of three hours did the Lord talk with the brother of Jared, and chastened him because he remembered not to call upon the name of the Lord.

And the brother of Jared repented of the evil which he had done, and did call upon the name of the Lord for his brethren who were with him. And the Lord said unto him: I will forgive thee and thy brethren of their sins; but thou shalt not sin any more, for ye shall remember that my Spirit will not always strive with man; wherefore, if ye will sin until ye are fully ripe ye shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord. And these are my thoughts upon the land which I shall give you for your inheritance; for it shall be a land choice above all other lands.

Through Joseph Smith the warning came: "And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments." (D&C 59:21.)

Isaiah counseled, "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near." (Isa. 55:6.)

During his early ministry Jesus said, ". . . men ought always to pray, and not to faint." (Luke 18:1.) In this dispensation he said, ". . . pray always lest that wicked one have power over you, and remove you out of your place." (D&C 93:49.) And again, "Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation." (Matt. 26:41.)

To the early inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere the Lord, through his prophets, gave much counsel. Often quoted is the timely practical counsel of Alma's companion Amulek:

Therefore may God grant unto you, my brethren, that ye may begin to exercise your faith unto repentance, that ye begin to call upon his holy name, that he would have mercy upon you;

Yea, cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save;

Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him;

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks;

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening:

Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies;

Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness;

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. (Alma 34:17-27.)

And also this passage from Nephi:

But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul. (2 Ne. 32:9.)

Most inspiring of all is the example and counsel of the risen Lord as he ministered among the Nephite people:

So they brought their little children and sat them down upon the ground round about him, and Jesus stood in the midst; and the multitude gave way till they had all been brought unto him.

And it came to pass that when they had all been brought, and Jesus stood in the midst, he commanded the multitude that they should kneel down upon the ground.

And it came to pass that when they had knelt upon the ground, Jesus groaned within himself, and saith, Father, I am troubled because of the wickedness of the people of the house of Israel.

And when he had said these words, he himself also knelt upon the earth; and behold he prayed unto the Father, and the things which he prayed cannot be written, and the multitude did bear record who heard him.

And after this manner do they bear record: The eye hath never seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Father. . . . (3 Ne. 17:12-16).

And then the resurrected Christ gave this inspiring counsel:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always, lest ye be tempted by the devil, and ye are led away captive by him.

And as I have prayed among you even so shall ye pray in my church, among my people who do repent and are baptized in my name. Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you.

And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words unto his disciples, he turned again unto the multitude and said unto them;

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desireth to have you that he may sift you as wheat.

Therefore ye must always pray unto the Father in my name;

And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you.

Pray in your families unto the Father, always in my name, that your wives and your children may be blessed.

And behold, ye shall meet together oft: and ye shall not forbid any man form coming unto you when ye shall meet together, but suffer them that they may come unto you, and forbid them not. (3 Ne. 18:15-22).

Prayer can be combined with other gospel principles to accomplish marvelous things. Combined with fasting, it can cast out devils. (See Matt. 17:21.) Combined with faith, the brother of Jared saw Christ. (See Ether 3.)

Turning now to the more practical details of the subject under consideration, we note quotations from two modern revelations. To Martin Harris the Lord said: "And again, I command thee that thou shalt pray vocally as well as in thy heart; yea, before the world as well as in secret, in public as well as in private." (D&C 19:28.)

And the Lord told Joseph Knight, Jr.: ". . . you must take up your cross, in the which you must pray vocally before the world as well as in secret, and in your family, and among your friends, and in all places." (D&C 23:6.)

Now, as a practical matter, I present in topical outline form only, with scriptural references, items that may help to improve our prayers, public and private. These items are presented in three parts:

I. How to Improve Our Communications with Our Heavenly Father

A. We should pray frequently.

B. We should find an appropriate place where we can meditate and pray.

C. We should prepare ourselves for prayer. If we don't feel like praying, then we should pray until we do feel like praying.

D. We should develop a feeling that we are talking directly with our Father in heaven.

E. Our prayers should be meaningful and pertinent.

F. After making a request through prayer, we have a responsibility to assist in its being granted.

II. How to Become More Effective in Praying in Behalf of a Group

A. For whom do we speak?

B. The language of prayer.

C. Of whom should we think when we pray?

D. Our public prayers need not be everlasting to be immortal.

E. We should assist others in preparing for public prayer.

III. How People Will Be Blessed by Praying More Meaningfully

A. Meaningful private and public prayers provide necessary prerequisites so we can lead our people back to our Heavenly Father.

B. Challenge each person present:

Never before in this gospel dispensation has there been a greater need for prayer, and never in history has there been a greater threat to our God-given right to pray when, how, or where we wish. How timely and appropriate for the true Church of Christ to emphasize this basic right and all-important need!

William Penn stated: "Those people who will not be governed by God, must be ruled by Tyrants." Government without God is tyranny.

A prophet of God, Brigham Young, said, "Prayer keeps a man from sin, and sin keeps a man from prayer."

Called upon unexpectedly to offer a prayer in the preinauguration Cabinet meeting of the Eisenhower Administration, I was later blessed to have a major part in establishing a policy of prayer in weekly Cabinet meetings. For both terms (eight years) of the Eisenhower presidency, Cabinet meetings were opened with prayer. Rich blessings resulted. Ofttimes a humble suggestion will cause meetings to be opened with prayer—even non-church meetings, such as service clubs, school meetings, professional, business, agricultural, and scientific groups. In the U.S. Department of Agriculture from 1953 to 1961, all staff meetings began with prayer, with the staff members leading in rotation. Priceless blessings resulted.

As I left the Administration Building of the USDA to fill a particularly difficult visit in areas critical of some policies I was advocating, entailing press conferences, public meetings, radio, TV, etc., I was handed a sealed envelope by Assistant Secretary Earl Butz, a non-Mormon, who is now U.S. Secretary of Agriculture. Safely on the plane, I opened the envelope and read:

Ezra: As you enter into a very difficult weekend, we want you to know that a lot of us are hoping and praying for you.

Remember always that many of your friends feel that a great source of your personal strength is that you walk beside God, whereas most of the rest of us only report to Him.

Keep in full step with your Senior Partner, and you surely will emerge the victor from this test.

We're counting on you.

/s/ Earl Butz

In the little book Long and Short Range Arrows, a compilation of short talks given by Dr. George H. Brimhall when he was president emeritus of Brigham Young University, is a talk that touched my heart as a student. It is entitled: "Keep Up Your Correspondence with Your Heavenly Father."

That we may do so effectively—publicly and privately—in spirit and in truth, is my humble prayer.
