Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

How to Delegate Wisely

The term delegation is widely used and generally understood. But the delegation we speak of is so different—so much more important—so far reaching. It is Church delegation through and by the authority of the holy priesthood of God. And as the Church grows in total membership and regional distribution, wise delegation becomes more and more important—in fact, imperative for continued success. The character of our Church membership distribution is changing and will continue to change. This emphasizes the increasing need for leadership training and the wise delegation of responsibility.

We are engaged in the greatest work in all the world—yes, the greatest in the whole universe: the saving and exaltation of our Father's children, our brothers and sisters. We are the custodians of the truth, the saving principles which, where applied, will build, save, and exalt men.

The Lord has given us the broad organization outline, the purposes, and the objectives. But he leaves to us much of the working out of the methods. And this is where correlation and leadership training come in and why various segments of the program, such as wise delegation of responsibility, are under study. And as time passes we will come to appreciate and realize more fully the place and magnitude of this training and of the correlation program.

The Apostle Paul said:

And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;

For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:

Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. (Eph. 4:11-13.)

This is our task—our responsibility. It is to be done through and under the direction of the priesthood. No men anywhere have a greater love for our Father's children than those who hold and honor the priesthood. We are all in it together—yes, on both sides of the veil, because I feel sure there is organization and wise delegation of authority over there, and most important decisions also.

This is the Lord's organization through which we operate. We are dealing with voluntary workers—our Father's children whom he loves, regardless of their mistakes and weaknesses. There must be no force, coercion, or intimidation in our delegation. To be effective, we must seek and obtain the Spirit if we are to delegate wisely. Without the Spirit we flounder, unsure of our decisions and counsel. Wise delegation requires the same Spirit required to preach the gospel, of which the Lord said this:

Wherefore, I the Lord ask you this question—unto what were ye ordained?

To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth to teach the truth. . . .

Therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand and know, that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth?

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together. . . .

That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter until the perfect day. (D&C 50:13-14, 21-22, 24.)

Wise delegation requires prayerful preparation, as does effective teaching or preaching. The Lord makes this clear in these words from the Doctrine and Covenants: "And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach." (D&C 42:14.) And we might add, ye shall not delegate without the Spirit.

In this same spirit—serving him with all our "heart, might, mind and strength" (D&C 4:2)—we may seek help from the good and wise men of the earth. There has been much done in this field of managing the services of men, delegation of responsibility, outside Church organization that may be helpful—tried and tested procedures, approaches, and principles. Many of these when used in company with the Spirit can be helpful. Here are a few examples:

Failing to delegate enough,

Delegating by formula,

Failing to keep communication lines open,

Failing to define the assignment,

Failing to make the assignment stick,

Failing to delegate enough authority to do the job,

Being too narrow in your delegation,

Failing to allow for mistakes.

These are but a few guidelines from American business and industry. More and more, experience proves that the spirit of the Golden Rule—the spirit of the gospel—pays off in wise delegating, in the Church and outside. Fear is a powerful motivating force. It is in constant use under dictatorship. It usually gets quick action. The trouble is that fear is also upsetting and distracting and reduces efficiency of performance.

In the Church especially, asking produces better results than ordering—better feeling, too. Remember to tell why. Follow up to see how things are going. Show appreciation when people carry out instructions well. Express confidence when it can be done honestly. When an order gets fouled up, it is well to check back and find out where you slipped up—and don't be afraid to admit that you did. Remember, our people are voluntary, free-will workers. They also love the Lord and his work. Love them. Appreciate them. When you're tempted to reprimand a fellow worker, don't. Try an interesting challenge and a pat on the back instead. Our Father's children throughout the world are essentially good. He loves them. We should also.

Why do some people fail to delegate? There are a number of reasons. Here are a few of the main ones:

At the time of delegation there is usually excellent opportunity to get close to people, to build them up and give them needed counsel and direction.

My son Mark, who has had some responsibility as sales manager for the direction of 4,000 salesmen doing direct selling, sent me this list of six main principles for delegating responsibility:

Theodore Roosevelt said, "The best executive is the one who has sense enough to pick good men to do what he wants done, and self-restraint enough to keep from meddling with them while they do it."

But more important than all worldly knowledge, helpful though it be, is the example and direction found in holy writ—in the great plan of a loving Father for us, his children. What beautiful and impressive examples speak out to us! Here are just a few—there are many.

The very foundations of the world were laid by delegated authority. Many times Jesus reminded people that his mission on earth was one through delegated authority. The restoration of his church had its very beginning with delegated authority.

In speaking to the Jews in the synagogue, Jesus told them that he had been delegated by his Father: "For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." (John 6:38.)

In the opening lines of his gospel book, the apostle John noted that, at the very beginning of the foundations of the earth, Jesus acted as a divine Son delegated by the Father: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." (John 1:1-3.) Christ's impressive delegation to his apostles is set forth in John, chapters 14, 15, and 16.

Think of the impressive example of the conversion of Saul, persecutor of the saints, who became the great missionary apostle to whom the Lord directed Ananias, his humble servant.

Christ also revealed that judgment had been committed to him by the Father: "For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son: That all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him." (John 5:22-23.)

On four momentous occasions the Father introduced Jesus as one who was delegated and as "my beloved Son":

In each instance, through the introduction the Father indicated that Jesus had been delegated. The Father said no more. He merely introduced. The Son had been delegated to not only preside over the world but also to redeem it.

Three years after the first vision under the direction of the Beloved Son, Moroni came to Joseph Smith. Later other important messengers came with essential keys. Then came Peter, James, and John, ancient apostles, and under them John the Baptist, to restore the Aaronic Priesthood, all delegated appropriately for their important work.

Jesus, who was delegated by the Father to come to the earth, gives us the master example of good administration through proper delegating. His leadership was perfect. Rugged, able men whom he called to be his apostles gave up prosperous business careers to follow him. Many of his delegated missionaries traveled without purse or scrip. Men suffered great hardships in carrying out his instructions. Some of them died cruel deaths in his service. But his delegated disciples went forth into the world bold as lions through his charge. They accomplished things they had never dreamed of. No leader ever motivated men and women as did he.

There are at least eight lessons in wise and effective delegating that Jesus has given those who are called to positions of leadership in his service today. Let us now consider them.

First, the organization Jesus established (the Church) was structured in a framework of delegated authority.

This was true of the church when he was on the earth: it is true in his restored church today. The Church of Jesus Christ builds leaders through involving people delegated through authority. When he was on earth, he called twelve apostles to assist him in administering the church. He also called the seventy. He delegated others. There were to be no spectators in his church. All were to be involved in helping build the kingdom. And as they built the kingdom, they built themselves.

Jesus aimed to exalt the individual. In that momentous meeting with Moses on the Mount, the Lord declared: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Jesus aimed to make of every man a king, to build him in leadership into eternity. On that memorable night after the last supper, he said to the eleven (after Judas had slunk out into the night to go about his dark mission), "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth in me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father." (John 14:12.) Through delegating, Jesus desired to lift, rather than suppress, the individual. And all through the Church today, men and women are growing in stature through positions delegated to them.

Second, in delegating, Jesus did not make the assignment sound easy but he made it sound exciting and challenging.

Peter was a prosperous fisherman. When Jesus called him to his service, he did not ask him to give up his business and become a preacher or missionary. Jesus made the call much more interesting. Mark's account describes the call this way: "Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers. And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men. And straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him." (Mark 1:16-18.)

Similarly, in delegating the seventy to go forth as missionaries, Jesus made the assignment sound interesting: "Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth labourers into his harvest." (Luke 10:2.)

Yet Jesus did not make his assignment sound easy. At the outset he was realistic. He added: "Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way." (Luke 10:3-4.)

Third, in delegating responsibility, Jesus let those called know fully their duties.

He helped prepare them for their assignments. Elder James E. Talmage, in Jesus the Christ (p. 228), comments: "For a season following their ordination the apostles remained with Jesus, being specially trained and instructed by Him for the work then before them; afterward they were specifically charged and sent forth to preach and to administer in the authority of their priesthood. . . ."

In the great revelation on priesthood, Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 107, the Lord gives us an inspiring direction, our responsibility to learn our duty. Hear his words:

"Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence. He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to stand. Even so. Amen." (D&C 107:99-100.)

Fourth, Jesus gave those delegated his confidence as had his Father given him.

It is significant that on at least three occasions in speaking of Jesus, the Father said: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." Jesus likewise sent his delegated servants forth with the feeling of confidence. For example, to the seventy he said: "He that heareth you heareth me. . . ." (Luke 10:16.)

A wise administrator in the Church today will not try to do the job himself, giving the impression that no one else is quite qualified. And as he delegates, he will give an assurance that he who has been delegated has his full backing.

Jethro taught Moses a great lesson in not trying to do everything himself. Jethro gave wise counsel to an otherwise great leader regarding the wise delegation of authority—the spreading of responsibility through building men and easing the load on Moses. You can read this great account in chapter 18 of Exodus, verses 14 to 27.

Fifth, to those he called, Jesus gave his loyalty, and he expected their loyalty in return.

Jesus told the eleven of the oneness of him with the Father. He said: "Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father in me. . . ." (John 14:11.) Jesus asked for their loyalty to him as their leader: "If ye love me, keep my commandents." (John 14:15.) Then he reaffirmed his loyalty to them: "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you." (John 14:18.) He added: "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. . . . Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.)

A good leader expects loyalty from those whom he delegates. He in turn gives his loyalty. He backs up those to whom he has given a job. The loyalty extends to matters beyond the call of duty. He is loyal when honors come to those with whom he serves. He takes pride in their successes. He does not overrule unless he first confers with him whose decision he overrules. He does not embarrass an associate before others. He is frank and open with him.

Sixth, Jesus expected much from those to whom he delegated responsibility.

At the time of his ascension, Jesus charged his eleven: "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature." (Mark 16:15.)

In the Church today a leader generally gets in performance what he truly expects. He needs to think tall when he delegates. He should assure those to whom he gives assignments that in the service of the Lord they have even greater powers than in ordinary responsibilities. There can be no failure in the work of the Lord when men do their best. We are but instruments; this is the Lord's work. This is his church, his gospel plan. These are his children we are working with. He will not permit us to fail if we do our part. He will magnify us even beyond our own talents and abilities when necessary. This I know. I'm sure many of you have experienced it as I have. It is one of the sweetest experiences that can come to a human being.

In the last solemn interview with the eleven before his ascension, Jesus said: "But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Acts 1:8.)

President John Taylor said: "If a thing is well done, no one will ask how long it took to do it, but who did it." There is no room for shoddy performance in the Church. An able leader will expect quality, and he will let those whom he assigns know that he expects quality.

Seventh, Jesus seemed to invite feedback from those to whom he gave assignments.

This is shown in Mark's account: "And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught. And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place and rest awhile. . . ." (Mark 6:30-31.) Jesus not only received feedback; he was also considerate. While he expected much, he was no "slave driver." He invited the apostles, after a strenuous period, to come "into a desert place, and rest awhile. . . ."

No wise leader believes that all good ideas originate with himself. He invites suggestions from those he leads. He lets them feel that they are an important part of decision making. He lets them feel that they are carrying out their policies, not just his.

The home teaching program of the Church offers a most excellent system for feedback. Home teachers will invite feedback from their families; priesthood leaders, from the home teachers; the bishop, from the priesthood leaders; and the stake president, from the bishops. In this way the leader will not only receive many helpful ideas; he will also keep his finger on the pulse of those whom he leads.

Eighth, Jesus taught that he who leads should follow the progress of those to whom responsibility has been delegated, giving praise and reproof in a spirit of love.

In his parable of the talent, the Master said: "Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of the Lord." (Matt. 25:23.)

When responsibility has been given, the leader does not forget the person assigned nor his assignment. He follows with interest but does not "look over the shoulder." He gives specific praise when it is deserved. He gives helpful encouragement when needed. When he feels that the job is not being done and a change is needed, he acts with courage and firmness but with kindness. When the tenure of an office has been completed, he gives recognition and thanks.

Even harder to bear than criticism, oftentimes, is no word from our leader on the work to which we have been assigned. Little comments or notes, which are sincere and specific, are great boosters along the way.

I close by returning to the all-important matter of delegating by the Spirit, for there is no satisfactory substitute for the Spirit. In this regard I know of no more impressive scripture than the inspiring words of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph in Liberty Jail, recorded in D&C 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants, verses 34 to 44. Read them today. Sublime in spirit, ever timely for instruction, and ever profound in deep meaning for the priesthood of God are these words, which every leader in the Church should follow.

May we ever heed this counsel and all other scriptural direction as we strive earnestly and prayerfully to delegate wisely.
