Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Suggestions on Making Decisions

Our decisions have made us what we are. Our eternal destiny will be determined by the decisions we yet will make.

Wise decisions are the stepping stones of progress. They are the building blocks of life. Decisions are the ingredients of success. For individuals and institutions, they mark the way of progress. The mind of an individual or the collective mind of the council, committee, or board of directors decides what the present state and the future direction of the individual or institution will be.

Wise decisions will show the way to progress.

We live in a wicked world. Never in our memory has the adversary been so well organized and never had he had so many emissaries working for him. As a people we face difficult days—days of pressing decisions, for young and old.

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints we face momentous decisions. Our people—heads of families, parents, children—must make important decisions. Help is needed and help is available.

As a church we hold the saving truths and ordinances which will bring salvation and exaltation to members of the human race. It is therefore most important that church leaders make the right decisions and guide those under them in the paths of truth and righteousness toward the accomplishment of our goals, but also our families, wards, stakes, missions, the Church, and the world.

If we are to make proper, Christ-like decisions, we must first of all live so we can reach out and tap that unseen power without which no man can do his best in decision making.

One of the greatest decisions of this age was when the boy Joseph Smith decided that he would follow the admonition in James: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed." (James 1:5-6.)

The very salvation of millions of men and women in the dispensation of the fulness of times depends upon that decision! We must keep in mind that individuals do matter and that decisions they make may greatly affect the lives of others.

In addition to heavenly sources, it is important also that we realize that individual effort and resourcefulness are necessary not only in solving the day-to-day problems of the Church, but also in bringing growth and development to those required to make decisions.

There are some guiding principles that will assist church leaders in making decisions both in their own personal lives and in their important responsibility of leading others to their eventual goal of exaltation in the kingdom of God.

The biggest business of any life is making decisions. While one of the greatest gifts of God to man is free agency or the right of choice, he has also given man responsibility for these choices. We may choose between good and evil. We put our own lives in the direction of success or failure. We may not only choose our ultimate goals, but we may also determine and decide for ourselves, in many cases, the means by which we will arrive at those goals, and by our industry or lack of it determine the speed by which they may be reached. This takes individual effort and energy and will not be without opposition or conflict.

Making decisions is probably the most important thing people ever do. Nothing happens until someone makes a decision. Even the world itself circled into being as the result of God's decisions. God said, ". . . In the beginning I created the heaven, and the earth," "Let there be light; and there was light," "Let there be a firmament in the midst of the water, and it was so. . . ." (Moses 2:1, 3, 6.)

Fortunately the ability and judgment necessary to make decisions can be acquired. Certain methods and practices can bring to us all greater skill in every-day, every-week, every-month opportunities to make decisions.

There are some basic principles recommended and used by specialists in the field. It is generally recognized that there are five fundamental steps in decision making:

a. What kind of problem is it?

b. What is its critical factor?

c. When do we have to solve it?

d. Why solve it?

e. What will it take to solve it?

f. What is the value or gain in solving it?

Decisions should be based on correct principles and facts. A thorough knowledge of the principles and facts surrounding any particular problem usually leads to an easy and correct decision. A thorough knowledge of the facts surrounding a welfare problem, for example, will, when considered in connection with fundamental welfare principles, bring the bishop to the right answer in that particular case. One of the most basic elements of decision making, therefore, is to have possession of the facts and to understand and be familiar with the basic and underlying principles.

For another example, a bishop may feel that his ward should be doing better in temple work. How does he make a decision on this problem? He would first want to determine the facts by asking and finding the answers to several questions. How many temple recommends do my ward members hold? How is this number divided between the high priests, seventies, elders, and sisters? How many endowments have been performed this year compared with last? this month compared with last? How does my ward record compare with other wards in the stake? Even if it compares favorably, is it good enough? How important is this work anyway? (See Mal. 4:5-6.) Why would the whole earth be smitten with a curse had not Elijah come with the keys of sealing which he held?

After discussing the problem and its solution with his counselors and the high priests group leader and perhaps the entire ward executive committee, the bishop would then decide on a course of action. He would write down the various steps to implement the course of action decided upon, activate the program by making assignments and delegation of responsibility, and then remember to follow up.

On a personal basis, a decision to turn down a proffered cigarette or a drink of liquor will be easy to make if one has the facts, understands the underlying principles and concepts of the Word of Wisdom, and has already determined in his mind that he will uphold and sustain this divinely revealed principle.

Again, if one understands the principle, he will already know the right decision when he is faced with a problem involving morality. All he will need under the pressure of the moment will be the fortitude to make the decision he already knows is the right one.

One of the best ways for leaders to understand correct principles is to have a thorough knowledge and understanding of the scriptures and the appropriate handbook. Most situations have already arisen before, perhaps many times, and policy and procedure have already been determined to handle the problem. It is always wise, therefore, to refer to and be familiar with existing written instructions and church policy on questions as they arise.

Decisions should be timely. Sometimes a lack of decision on a point is actually a decision in the opposite direction. We need to make up our minds. Elijah said to ancient Israel: "How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a word." (1 Kgs. 18:21.)

Joshua advocated this principle when he gathered all the elders and judges of the tribes of Israel to Shechem and told them, in effect, to make up their minds today. He said: "And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Josh. 24:15.)

Some people intend to make a decision and then never get around to it. They intend to paint the barn, to fix the fence, to haul away that old machinery or remove that old shed, but the time of decision just never arrives.

Some of us face a similar situation in our personal lives. We intend to pay a full tithing, to begin keeping the Word of Wisdom, to make our initial home teaching visits early in the month. However, without actual decision followed by implementation, the weeks and months go by and nothing is accomplished. We could drift into eternity on these kinds of good intentions. Thus lack of decision becomes our decision not to do those good things for which we had the best of intentions. The Lord apparently sensed this weakness in his children, for he said: "Wherefore, if ye believe me, ye will labor while it is called today." (D&C 64:25.)

Get the facts—then decide promptly. As an excuse for postponing decisions, do not rely on the old clichés some people use, such as "I want to sleep on it." We don't make decisions in our sleep. However, don't jump to conclusions or make snap judgments. Get the facts, be sure of the basic principles, and weigh the consequences. Then decide!

The prophet Joel recognized the principle of timeliness as priesthood leaders should today, for now, as then, wickedness is almost everywhere. Sound decisions are needed. Joel said: "Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, . . . for their wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision." (Joel 3:13-14.)

The decisions of which Joel spoke are the decisions that lead to eternal exaltation. May we help in showing the way.

Wise decisions are usually arrived at following work, struggle, and prayerful effort. The Lord's response to Oliver Cowdery's ineffective effort makes this clear: "But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right." (D&C 9:8.)

Let us begin, therefore, by saying that earnestly seeking our Father in heaven, having faith that he will answer our prayers, is a comforting base on which to begin. Joseph Smith also said the Lord will not take water from a dry well, so we must do our part. Sometimes attempting to find a correct decision takes great amounts of energy, study, and long-suffering.

Here are some effective suggestions our leaders can use to assist them in correctly deciding what actions should be taken.

Our fellow workers will make better decisions in their callings if they will follow these nine steps. But remember, while the Lord will give us help in making decisions, he expects us to do our homework.

What are the tests that might well be applied to a proposed course of action—a pending decision? Here are six:

May I, in conclusion, offer the following ten points for the consideration of leaders as helps in making wise decisions:

We are engaged in a work in which we cannot fail—be it decision making or other—if we do our part. The Lord will not permit us to fail. This is his work. These are his children we are called to labor with, and he loves them. This is his program through which we work, his authority, and he will magnify us—yes, when necessary, even beyond our natural abilities. This I know, and I thank God for this priceless knowledge and blessing.
