Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

The Family—A Sacred Institution

Our most basic institution is the home, because, after all, it is still our greatest and most primary educational institution. It is, in very deed, the center of our economic, social, and cultural interest. The home is the bulwark of the nation and our most fundamental and basic institution.

Marriage, the home, and family are sacred institutions. They are not man-made. Thank God for that. They are divine. The first marriage performed was the marriage of two immortal beings. Following the consummation of that marriage, the Lord gave important scriptures and instruction to us regarding the home and the family.

The Lord made it clear that it is not good for man to be alone. Woman was created as a helpmeet for man, and the two united in the sacred bonds of eternal marriage become one flesh.

"What therefore God hath joined together," said he, "let not man put asunder." (Mark 10:9.) And later, he said, "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." (D&C 42:22.) How we need that counsel today in America! What heartaches could be avoided if men would only heed that counsel wholeheartedly. How much less unfaithfulness and infidelity there would be if we could live by that admonition.

Then, as though to strengthen further the marriage bond in the home, the Lord gave instructions to children through his prophets. The apostle Paul, echoing the admonition of Moses on Sinai, said:

"Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.

"Honour thy father and mother; (which is the first commandment with promise;)

"That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth." (Eph. 6:1-3.)

And in modern revelation, the Lord has made it very clear that parents have great and serious responsibilities. Listen to these words as the Lord speaks to the parents of the Church: "And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D&C 68:28.)

"And again, inasmuch as parents . . . teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the parents." (D&C 68:25.)

That is a serious responsibility, and I believe that the early history of this church clearly indicates that our grandparents, the pioneers—in fact, the Pilgrims who came and settled the great American continent—honored these obligations and were blessed in their homes for so doing.

I realize that many changes have come about in the past century. Our industrialization, specialization, concentration of populations in great cities, the reduction in the number of people living on farms, changes in agriculture—all these have had their effects. Great emphasis upon material things and the seeking after money, after pleasure and personal gratification, and the insidious inroads of liquor, tobacco, and gambling—all these have had a pulling-away influence on this most sacred institution, the American home.

It is difficult to realize that some fifty years ago there was only one divorce in sixteen marriages in America. Now it is reported in some cities that there are actually more divorces each year than marriages. Our best authorities indicate that most of the delinquency in America is the result of broken, bad, and neglected homes. As J. Edgar Hoover, the late head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and one of the best authorities, indicated, referring to delinquents, "The actions of the majority of them were, and are, directly related to the conduct of their parents." Yes, crime begins at home.

Now, as Latter-day Saints, what can we do? What can be done? I am sure that we all agree no nation ever rises above its homes. This church will never rise above its homes. We are no better as a people than are our firesides, our homes. The school, the church, and even the nation, I feel confident, stand helpless before weakened and degraded homes. The good home is the rock foundation, the cornerstone of civilization. It must be preserved. It must be strengthened.

There has never been and there never will be a satisfactory substitute for the home established by the God of heaven. If this nation is to endure, then the home must be safeguarded, strengthened, and restored to its rightful importance.

May I suggest five simple things that I believe we might well give attention to, as some of the needs of our homes today.

First of all, I am convinced—and this is no reflection on our devoted mothers, who spend day after day, week after week, obediently serving their families—but I feel sure that one of our greatest needs is more time of parents in the home. Youth of the Church and of the nation need more than physical comforts. We will need to leave them more than lands and stocks. They need more than a modern automobile and a lovely modern building to live in. There is no satisfactory substitute for mother, and no one can take care of her children as she can. No so-called social obligations, social enticements, or outside interests should impel any mother to neglect the sacred charge that is hers of caring for her own flesh and blood. Her first loyalty in the eyes of God is to her church and her family. I feel confident that while civic and social activities may return much good, she will serve her community and her nation best if she first devotes herself to the needs of her own children.

Second, we need daily devotion in the home. We need to return to the practice of family prayer, secret prayer, the old-fashioned practice of devotion in the home, daily, night and morning; the singing of hymns; the reading of scriptures. How much more happiness there would be, how many fewer divorces there would be, if these simple practices were followed as was the custom in the pioneer home, as well as in the early days of this country, according to the diaries of our early founders.

Third, I think one of the great needs is more parental instruction in life's problems. I know there is a tendency for parents to shrink from this responsibility, the instructing of their own children in the problems of sex, the relationship with other young people, the problems of dating, and all of the many temptations that confront a growing boy and girl. These instructions should not be left to the school or to a class in sociology. The safest place, the best place, to give this vital counsel, these sacred instructions in matters of moral purity, should be in the home on a basis of confidence between parent and child. As parents, we should instruct our children. The sacred books of the ancient Persians say: "If you would be holy, instruct your children, because all the good acts they perform will be imputed unto you."

Fourth, I believe there is a great need for family recreation and cultural activities together. We should do things together as a family. It may mean a reduction in participation in women's clubs, in men's clubs, but if families could only seek their recreation and cultural activities more as a family unit, I am sure that untold benefits and blessings would accrue. A little boy was asked, after he said he was going to a summer camp, "What is a summer camp?" And he answered, "Those places where little boys go for mother's vacation." Let us take more of our vacations together as families. Can we have a weekly evening at home, as has been admonished and counseled for years by the First Presidency of the Church? Having more wholesome activities is a great need of the families of America.

And fifth, we need a closer parent-child relationship. This is closely related to the other four needs. One of the greatest needs of our young people is a closer, more frequent companionship with father and mother. There is no satisfactory substitute. I was thrilled some time ago, as I picked up a paper in the East and read an account of a letter that a rich industrialist had sent to his son, his sixteen-year-old boy, as a Christmas present. This man could have given his son anything that money could buy—an automobile, a yacht, I guess, if he wished. But when the boy came down from his room on Christmas morning and went over to the mantel where he usually found his present, there was a plain envelope with his name on it, and he opened it and read:

To my dear son:

I give to you one hour each weekday and two hours of my Sundays to be yours as you want, without interference of any kind whatsoever.

Lovingly,

Dad

As I read that, I thought, what a wise father, and what a fortunate son! Yes, that is what they need.

God bless us that we may give personal attention now to these vital matters:

May we be faithful to this great obligation of parenthood, this sacred obligation, that we may build our homes solidly upon eternal principles, that we may have no regrets. May we never be recreant to the great trust that has been imposed in us. May we always keep in mind that these spirits that have entered our homes are choice spirits. Many of them have been born under the covenant. As we look into their faces and contemplate their needs, we might well consider that some of them were probably choicer spirits up there than we were. It is a grave responsibility. May we not shirk it.
