Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Putting Father at the Head of the Family

Recently I received in the mail a note from a missionary to whom I am somewhat close, and he was talking about how to reach people with the gospel. "The golden questions are fine," he said, "but I think we have some approaches that are better."

Then he continued: "You can approach people with many types of conversations. They don't have to be `golden contacts.' First, ask them, `What is the most important thing in the world to you?' They will almost always answer, `My family.' If they say something else, you say, `And what else?' and they will say, `My family.'

"Then ask them, `What do you want most for you and your family in this life and the life hereafter?' They will answer, `To be happy,' or some similar answer. Third, ask, `Can you imagine being happy without your family?' They answer, `No.' You respond, `You can have your family and have complete happiness throughout eternity. Would you like to know more about the plan whereby this is made possible for you?' "

I think this appeal of home and family for our prospective elders and our inactive elders is one of the great appeals we have today, because the thrust of the adversary seems to be at the home and family and at our young people. Parents are concerned—even inactive fathers are concerned—and our concern, of course, is to get these brethren into activity, get them to the point where they can take their families to the temple of God and have them sealed for time and all eternity.

I received a telephone call from a bishop in Ogden during the time of the construction of the Ogden Temple. He said, "Brother Benson, do you think you could spend one night for our good ward?"

"Well," I said, "Bishop, I would like to, if I can. There are only about five thousand wards in the Church, but I am sure yours is one of the best."

"Oh," he said, "there's no question about that."

I said, "What do you wish me to do?"

He replied, "We have five wonderful men who have been taken from the ranks of the prospective elders and inactive elders. We've been working with them now for about a year, or a little more. They have all been given the Melchizedek Priesthood, ordained elders, and they are now ready to go to the temple of the Lord. We'd like you to meet us in a sealing room in the Salt Lake Temple and perform the sealings of wives to husbands and children to families. You name the night."

I have often thought it is very hard to say no when they say, "You name the night." So I named the night, and I spent one of the happiest evenings of my life in the sealing room in the Salt Lake Temple. All these families had children. One pair of parents had nine children under eighteen years of age. I think I shall never forget that wonderful mother. She sat in the far corner of the sealing room, so filled with emotion she could hardly control herself. She wiped away the tears and they kept coming back. Finally, when the work was all done and they were leaving the room, she came up to me and began to apologize. She said, "Brother Benson, you'll just have to forgive me for the way I have acted tonight, but I've waited nineteen years for this moment, and all during that nineteen years I've prayed to God night and morning that the time would come when my husband would be considered worthy to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood and could bring me and the children here to the house of God, and tonight my prayers have been answered." I don't suppose it is possible for us to realize what that meant to that wonderful woman, wonderful mother and wife.

I often think, as I visit the stakes, that there are probably many such mothers and wives who are praying nightly and every morning that the time will come when their husbands will be considered worthy. So there is really a lot at stake in dealing with these inactive fathers, these prospective elders, men who should stand as the patriarchs of their families.

We are engaged in the greatest work in all the world, and that is the building of men and women of character, men and women of strength and courage, and men and women of deep spirituality—Godlike men and women; and I have a feeling that in this work we cannot fail. These men are sons of our Heavenly Father. He loves them as we love our own sons, yes, even with a deeper love, and I am thrilled when I see the progress that is being made.

I think one of the greatest thrills I have received at a stake conference was in Tokyo, where Brother Gordon B. Hinckley and I had organized a stake. I had the privilege of going back two years later to visit that stake, and in the general session on Sunday morning, they called the names of forty-one men to stand. They had been approved to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood and be ordained to the office of elder. Thirty-one of the forty-one were from the ranks of the prospective elders. I thought, "What a blessing." I said to the stake president, "Brother Tanaka, more important than anything I say or anything you'll do here today is this item of business transacted in the morning session—forty-one men who can now take their families to the house of the Lord."

This has a great appeal, I think, to our inactive brethren, particularly because fathers today are worried and concerned about their families. They are having difficulty at home. They hear a lot about the generation gap, which is another tool of the adversary to try to drive parents and children apart. They need all the help they can get, and I think now, more than any other time in the past, we have an opportunity to draw close to them and to help them to get their lives in order so they can go to the temple of the Lord, take their families with them, and be strengthened in their priesthood duties.

The Lord has given us the broad outline of organization. He has set forth the objectives and the purposes, but he leaves to us pretty much the working out of the methods.

Here are some of the basic principles to guide us in this program:

I wish we could have more family reunions. It seems to me they used to be more common than they are today. It's a great opportunity to warm up inactive members of the Church, inactive heads of families, to get them into a reunion. It is also a good thing to get them to funerals when you can. A funeral is a great time to reach people because of the surroundings and the spirit generally.

I was at a reunion some two or three years ago, and after the reunion, someone sent me a definition of family, headed "What Is a Family?" This is what it said: A family is the greatest security and the dearest possession. A family is living together and praying together; understanding one another; sharing tears, toothpaste, and small change; swapping sweaters, chores, jokes; borrowing records, talents, wisdom; keeping snapshots, letters, homemade gifts and memories; giving first aid, parties, and lots of advice; and taking part in everything and in every member of the family. A family is living together and loving one another, and being loyal to each other.

I make it a practice, whenever I perform a marriage, to suggest to the young couple that they return to the temple as soon as they can and go through the temple again as husband and wife. It isn't possible for them to understand fully the meaning of the holy endowment or the sealings with one trip through the temple, but as they repeat their visits to the temple, the beauty, the significance, and the importance of it all will be emphasized upon them. I have later had letters from some of these young couples expressing appreciation because that item was emphasized particularly. As they repeat their visits to the temple, their love for each other tends to increase and their marriage tends to be strengthened.

A young man came to my office a short time ago for a blessing. He had problems—not moral problems, but he was neurotic; he was confused; he was concerned and worried. And so we talked for a few minutes and I said to him, "Have you ever asked your father for a blessing?" "Oh," he said, "I don't know that Dad would do a thing like that. He is not very active." I said, "But he's your father." "Yes." "Does he hold the priesthood?" "Yes, he is an inactive elder." I said, "Do you love him?" And he said, "Yes, I love him. He is a good man, he's good to the family, good to the children." I said, "Do you ever have family prayer?" He said, "It has been a long time since we had family prayer." I said, "All right, would you be willing to go home and watch for an opportunity, and ask your father if he will give you a blessing? And if it doesn't work out, you come back, and I will be glad to help you."

So he left, and in about three days he came back. "Brother Benson, this has been the sweetest thing that's happened in our home," he said. "Mother and the children sat there, my younger brothers and sisters, with my mother wiping the tears from her eyes. She expressed her gratitude later. Father gave me a lovely blessing." He added, "I could tell it came from his heart."

There are a lot of fathers who would enjoy giving their own children blessings, if they had a little encouragement. As patriarchs of their families, that is one of their obligations and duties, responsibilities, and, of course, opportunities.

—loving God and looking to him for daily counsel and direction. That means family prayer as well as personal prayer. I often wish there were some way to measure accurately the value of family prayer. What it would mean to little Mary, who is giving her first talk in Sunday School or perhaps her first little talk in Primary, to have the family go onto their knees that morning and make special mention of her that she will do her best and not be too frightened. What it would mean to a special teenage son who is facing a stiff examination in high school, to have him specially mentioned in family prayer. Family prayer can greatly increase the unity and solidarity in the family.

—loving his wife and being one with her. One of the greatest things a man can do for his children is to love his wife and let them know he loves her.

—desiring to have children and loving them.

—letting virtue garnish his thoughts unceasingly. This is one of the great needs today, particularly. We have so much sin, so many men attracted by a pretty face and untrue to their companions.

—being an example of all he wants to teach.

—teaching and training his children in the word of the Lord, in light and truth.

—teaching them repentance, faith in Christ, baptism, the gift of the Holy Ghost, enduring to the end, praying vocally and in secret.

—governing, commanding, correcting, nurturing, and blessing them in meekness, tenderness, and love, and upon the principles of righteousness.

—provoking not so that the family or the child is discouraged.

—creating an environment in the home conducive to order, prayer, worshiping, learning, fasting, growth, happiness, and the Spirit of the Lord.

—dedicating his home to the Lord.

As heads of families, we have four major responsibilities. Certainly the first is the home and the family. I have in my office two great statements in one frame. One is by President Harold B. Lee: "The most important of the Lord's work that you will ever do will be the work that you do within the walls of your own home." The other is that great statement by President David O. McKay: "No other success can compensate for failure in the home." I wish that every father in Israel could have those emphasized to him.

The second responsibility is a man's Church responsibility: exercising his priesthood in righteousness, responding to calls, paying tithing and fast offerings; supporting the missionary program, the welfare program, the building program, the entire program of the Church.

Third, a father has responsibility to his job, to his occupation, to his employment, so that he can support those dependent upon him, for the scriptures indicate that he who will not provide for his own is worse than an infidel.

And fourth, he has a citizenship responsibility and a special responsibility to the Lord's government for free men. We must realize that the gospel can prosper only in an atmosphere of freedom.

The family is under attack today, I think, as never before, at least in my memory, and it is very real. Yet the family is the rock foundation, the cornerstone of civilization. The Church will never be stronger than its families, and this nation will never rise above its homes and its families.

Home teachers, quorum leaders, all of us, including stake missionaries, need to get the father to recognize his great responsibility to perform his duty as a father and as a patriarch to his own children.

I give you one experience in closing. At a stake presidency's meeting in Boise, Idaho, years ago, we were trying to select a president for the weakest and smallest elders quorum in the stake. Our clerk had brought a list of all the elders of that quorum, and on the list was the name of a man whom I had known for some years. He came from a strong Latter-day Saint family, but he wasn't doing much in the Church. If the bishop made a call to do some work on the chapel, he'd usually respond, and if the elders wanted to play softball, you would sometimes find him out playing with them. He did have leadership ability; he was president of one of the service clubs and was doing a fine job.

I said to the stake president, "Would you authorize me to go out and meet this man and challenge him to square his life with the standards of the Church and take the leadership of his quorum? I know there is some hazard in it, but he has the ability."

The stake president said, "You go ahead, and the Lord bless you."

After Sunday School I went to this man's home. I'll never forget the look on his face as he opened the door and saw a member of his stake presidency standing there. He hesitantly invited me in; his wife was preparing dinner, and I could smell the aroma of coffee coming from the kitchen. I asked him to have his wife join us, and when we were seated, I told him why I had come. "I'm not going to ask you for your answer today," I told him. "All I want you to do is to promise me that you will think about it, pray about, think about it in terms of what it will mean to your family, and then I'll be back to see you next week. If you decide not to accept, we'll go on loving you," I added.

The next Sunday, as soon as he opened the door I saw there had been a change. He was glad to see me, and he quickly invited me in and called to his wife to join us. He said, "Brother Benson, we have done as you said. We've thought about it and we've prayed about it, and we've decided to accept the call. If you brethren have that much confidence in me, I'm willing to square my life with the standards of the Church, a thing I should have done long ago." He also said, "I haven't had any coffee since you were here last week, and I'm not going to have any more."

He was set apart as elders quorum president, and attendance in his quorum began going up—and it kept going up. He went out, put his arm around the inactive elders, and brought them in. A few months later I moved from the stake.

Years passed, and one day on Temple Square in Salt Lake City, a man came up to me, extended his hand, and said, "Brother Benson, you don't remember me, do you?"

"Yes, I do," I said, "but I don't remember your name."

He said, "Do you remember coming to the home of a delinquent elder in Boise seven years ago?" And then, of course, it all came back to me. Then he said, "Brother Benson, I'll never live long enough to thank you for coming to my home that Sunday afternoon. I am now a bishop. I used to think I was happy, but I didn't know what real happiness was."

So, when we bring the fathers back into activity, we bring them happiness in this life, to say nothing about the eternal blessings that are opened up to them. My heart goes out to these men, heads of families, who are inactive, prospective elders. I don't believe we have a greater challenge in the Church today than to activate these men and bring them to the point where they can take their families to the house of the Lord and have opened to them the richest blessings known to men and women in this world, and closely related to the blessings in the world to come.
