Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

A Challenge to Youth

I'm very anxious that the young people of the Church measure up in every way to that which the Lord expects of them. They are a choice group. They are a peculiar group also. Peter, in writing to the Saints anciently, said, ". . . ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people." (1 Pet. 2:9.) And our young people today are peculiar in many ways. Certainly they are peculiar in their standards if they are living the gospel.

Many predictions have been made by the enemies of the Church regarding this work. I remember as a boy it was not uncommon to read predictions by some who professed to have made a study of Mormonism. They predicted that Mormonism would not endure beyond the third and fourth generation. I remember reading books written by critics of that time to this effect, and as a young boy before I got a burning testimony, I used to wonder about it. There has never been any real doubt—just a little wonder during my early years. How wrong they have been! I'm now the fourth generation; I have sons and daughters who are the fifth generation, and grandchildren who are the sixth generation, and I'm sure their faith is just as strong as their parents' was at their age—possibly stronger. No, Mormonism is not going to peter out.

Even in recent years there have been sociologists and others who have made similar predictions or who have at least raised questions regarding the faith of the youth of the Church. I remember one such case that came to my attention through the kindness of President David O. McKay. It was during World War II. There came into the office of Brother McKay in Salt Lake City a very distinguished educator from the East. The two men visited together for some time, and during the course of the conversation this distinguished educator said to President McKay, in substance, "I presume that the young people of the Church today are not like their fathers and grandfathers were. No doubt they're more realistic—they don't accept the miraculous as their fathers did—you know, the story of the early pioneers, of visions, and things of that sort."

Well, of course, this was a great shock to President McKay. He had just been opening some of his mail, so he drew from the stack of letters one letter which he handed to his guest, saying, "I think this will probably answer your question." The letter was from a Mormon boy stationed with the U.S. Navy in Farragut, Idaho. He started out by saying this was the first time he had been far from home on his own. He told how he missed his home and how he had come to appreciate more fully his parents and their teachings regarding the standards of the Church. Then he went on enumerating his blessings. As he concluded his letter, he bore a fervent testimony concerning the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith and thanked the Lord through his letter for that testimony, for that faith.

The distinguished visitor handed the letter back to President McKay and asked, "Is this somewhat typical?" President McKay answered, "Every mail delivery brings many such letters from our boys in the service. Of course, they don't all have that faith, but the great majority of them do." Then the distinguished visitor exclaimed, "I would to God that every young man in America had such an anchor!"

If we are living the gospel, we do have such an anchor. What does the Lord expect of young men and women in his church? Someone has said, I think a bit facetiously, that the younger generation isn't so bad—it's just that they have more critics than models. That may be true in the world. We do hear a lot about juvenile delinquency.

But certainly in the church and kingdom of God the young people have plenty of models. I don't mean by that that our parents are all perfect. There are parents who are not living the gospel, few proportionately, but certainly we do come in contact, all of us, with many, many models—men and women who are living the gospel, who have translated into their lives the beauty and the fruits of Mormonism. We have no valid excuse.

Of course, it's easier where every member of the Church has come from a good Latter-day Saint home. There are some, however, who haven't been so fortunate. Some have probably come from homes where there has been a lack of spirituality, a lack of devotion, a lack of unity, a lack of the real spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ. But the Lord has a way of compensating those of his children who are not privileged to enjoy some of these valuable blessings. Sometimes he makes up to them in his own way those things of which they seem to have been deprived. We do have many models, many examples, confirming the value of living the good life, of adhering to the standards of the Church.

So I ask, What does the Lord expect of our young men and women?

First, I believe they are expected to be happy. "Men are, that they might have joy." The purpose of life, of course, is manyfold, and through it all I'm sure the Lord expects our young people to live a full life—a joyous life, not a frivolous life. Certainly he expects them to be happy. He expects their living to be purposeful. He expects them to know where they are going and to get on their way, but to be happy in so doing—to live a full, wholesome, joyful life.

In order to do that, a young person must have a testimony of the gospel. You can't live the full life without the anchor that comes from a testimony. Oh, it's glorious to have a testimony of the truth! I have seen so much evidence of the strength of testimony under the most adverse economic and social conditions that I've reached this conclusion in my own mind: a man and woman can endure anything and keep their spirits sweet and wholesome provided they have a testimony of the divinity of this work. One must seek for it, pray for it, live for it. Assuredly it will come, because the God of heaven wants every one of his children to know that he lives, that Jesus is the Christ, and that Joseph Smith is a prophet. Each person may know that as he lives for it.

Furthermore, I believe that he expects of every young man, if he is going to be fully happy, that he enjoy the blessings of the priesthood. I can't conceive of a young man in this church being fully happy without the Melchizedek Priesthood. I don't believe that the Lord blesses his children with full happiness, if they're members of the Church, unless they receive the priesthood, a priceless possession. So much of the joy of this life and of eternity is tied up in priesthood.

If we are going to be fully happy, we need to be married in the temple of God. Marriage can never mean the same outside the temple as it does inside. It is God's way. We can afford to sacrifice almost anything for that blessing, in order to complete our plans and realize our dreams of being married right—in the house of the Lord. Ofttimes feeble excuses are given. Temples may be far away. Yet it's no farther, in point of time, from New York to Salt Lake City today than it was from Salt Lake to St. George when President Heber J. Grant was married. President Grant made it in a wagon. Young people should devote at least as much planning to marriage as they do to their vacation plans. Marriage in the temple is absolutely essential if we would be truly happy.

For the ultimate in happiness, we need to experience the glorious blessings of honorable parenthood—at least we need to be worthy of it. I realize that some of the choicest spirits of our Heavenly Father go through mortality without that glorious privilege, but in the Lord's own due time they'll realize that blessing, if not in this life, then in the life to come.

No girl or boy can afford to lower his or her standards just to get married to someone. The Lord expects all of us who have accepted membership in his church and kingdom to live worthy of experiencing the glorious and honorable blessings of marriage in his holy house and of honorable parenthood.

Further, the Lord also wants us to be successful. Oh, I know he doesn't worry too much about material things. All material things are but a means to an end. The end is spiritual, yet if we'll read the revelations, we will discover that many of them have to do with material things.

I'm sure the Lord wants each young man and woman of his church to excel in his or her chosen field, whatever it may be, whether it be in business, in the professions, teaching, medicine, dentistry, government, or agriculture. I'm sure it is pleasing to the Lord to see his sons and daughters who have taken upon themselves the covenants of membership in his church—and particularly young men who bear the priesthood—to be more than just average. He wants them to succeed, to be outstanding. He'll open the way before them if they will just live worthy of it.

By that I don't mean that all a person has to do is go to church in order to succeed in his chosen field, but I do mean that if we put forth an effort equal to our associates outside the Church, and live the gospel at the same time, the Lord will bless us with added success. If we keep the Sabbath day holy and devote ourselves to spiritual things, in the long run I'm convinced the Lord will add his blessings. He will bless us with hidden treasures of knowledge, as the Word of Wisdom so clearly indicates. He will give us the power to tap that Unseen Source of knowledge and strength that is beyond the knowledge of the men of the world. He will make us pillars of strength and power among our associates.

The world is seeking for the services of young men and women who are trained according to Mormon standards, who have the technical training, plus that training in character, in spirituality, and in faith, that gives them confidence, assurance, a feeling of security, and makes them a safe risk for the employer.

I think the Lord wants us to be good citizens of this country. I believe he wants us to keep our economic and social thinking straight and not be influenced by policies and programs that strike at the very foundation of all that we hold dear in this country.

We have a measuring rod that no other group has. We have the revelations of the Almighty to indicate to us whether a thing is right or wrong. The Lord has spoken. He has placed a responsibility upon us to see that our form of government is preserved and that good men and honest men are elected for public office. His counsel is found in the 98th and 101st sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. We're not left to move in the dark.

No Latter-day Saint—no true Latter-day Saint—will be a communist or a socialist or a proponent of the welfare state. If we are true Latter-day Saints, we will be real Americans, devoted to our American way of life and willing always to uphold the Constitution of this land. We will oppose any program or any policy or any legislation that would weaken that Constitution or that way of life.

The God of heaven expects his children to stand on their own feet and not depend on any over-paternalistic government. I care not what political leaders say! I know what the God of heaven has said, and he expects us to ask for nothing of the government that we can provide ourselves, because you can't help people permanently by doing for them what they should do and could do for themselves.

I think it was one of the members of the First Presidency who said: "An uncorrupted citizenry builds a great state. No state ever built an uncorrupted citizenry." We've got to adhere to those old-fashioned virtues of our parents and grandparents if we are going to be true Americans in the eyes of God. Through revelation he has approved of the Constitution of this land. The founders of this nation were inspired. They were raised up for this very purpose. So if we're going to measure up in the eyes of our Heavenly Father, we must be good citizens of this great land and measure every policy, every proposal by those eternal principles which the God of heaven has been kind enough to reveal to us.

I think also that our Heavenly Father expects the youth of our church to become exalted in the celestial kingdom. We're not striving for the lower kingdoms. We're not candidates for the telestial or terrestrial kingdom. The young people of this church are candidates for the celestial kingdom and the highest degree of glory in that kingdom. That requires a great deal that has to do with our day-to-day standards. This means not just being married in the temple; not just being a good citizen; not just being happy, as measured by the world. It means living every standard of the Church fully.

To our young people it means keeping themselves clean in body and in mind. It means that they go to the marriage altar pure and clean. It means that they will reserve for the marriage relationship those sweet and intimate associations which the God of heaven intended should be a part of marriage, and not be indulged in outside the marriage covenant. The curse of this age is unchastity—next to murder in the category of crimes.

No, we cannot let down our standards. We cannot indulge in promiscuous relations outside the marriage covenant without suffering ill effects from it. Any time we break a law of God, we pay the penalty in heartache, in sadness, in remorse, in lack of self-respect.

Now, I would not have anyone believe that there is no hope if there are some who have made such a grievous mistake, because repentance and forgiveness are also a part of the gospel. Thank God for that! But it must be real repentance. Such repentance is a deep, heartfelt sorrow for sin that produces a reformation of life. It is not just a confession of guilt. Sometimes we regard all too lightly the principle of repentance, thinking that it only means confession, that it only means feeling sorry for ourselves. But it is more than that. It is a deep, burning, and heartfelt sorrow for sin that will drive us to our knees in humility and tears—a deep, heartfelt sorrow for sin that produces a reformation of life. That is the right test: a reformation of life. Only then may the God of heaven in his mercy and his goodness see fit to forgive us. He—not the priesthood on the earth—is the judge. Priesthood holders can only carry out certain requirements. They can require certain things set forth in the revelations, but forgiveness comes from above.

Sin and evil are so rampant in the world today—especially the loose relationships between young men and women—that it is well for us to see them in their proper perspective. We can't build a happy home, we can't build a happy married life on the foundation of immorality. It can't be done. So I would beseech our young people to reserve for the marriage relationship those sweet and lovely and intimate associations. Not only that, but when those associations come, let them be primarily for the purpose of procreation, for the having of a family, because it is not pleasing in the sight of God to enjoy the pleasures of those associations and refuse to accept the responsibility of parenthood. I care not what the world says; these are the standards of the kingdom of God.

The undue postponement of parenthood is bound to bring disappointment and is not pleasing in the sight of God. Yes, of course, one can always find excuses. The young husband is going through school. His wife needs to work for a few years. I know how difficult it is. I remember our first year of married life on seventy dollars a month for both of us. I thank the Lord for my noble companion and her fervent determination to put first things first.

Generally speaking, unless it's an unusual emergency, the place for the wife is in the home as the homemaker, as the planner, and she will save dollars upon dollars. She'll make her husband stand on his own feet as the provider. As a married couple they'll be drawn closer together through the years if she fulfills her responsibilities of motherhood and homemaker than if she attempts to share the responsibility of economic provider.

Now I don't say this critically. Each person must make his own decisions, of course. I am, however, giving the best counsel I know on the subject. Don't postpone unduly the blessings of honorable parenthood following proper marriage.

It thrills me to witness young couples where the husband is struggling through medical school or dental school or some other school and they have the courage and strength and the faith to know that in some way the God of heaven will assist them if they do their duty and have their families.

When the God of heaven said it was our responsibility to multiply and replenish the earth, that marriage was primarily for that purpose, he didn't insert any provisos.

So, I would ask our young people to think seriously about these things, pray about them, fast about them. The Lord will give them the answers, because he wants them to succeed. He wants them to be happy. He wants them to have the blessings of a righteous posterity. Sometimes marriage may be postponed to the point where, for physical and other reasons, parenthood is denied. Oh, what a loss when the time comes! Children are jewels. Blessed is the man or the woman who has a family of children. The deepest joys and blessings in life are associated with family, parenthood, sacrifice. It's worth practically any sacrifice to have those sweet spirits come into the home and to have them come early, that the parents might enjoy them for a longer period; that they might enjoy their parents for a longer period; and that the children might enjoy their grandparents for a longer period.

May I again assure our youth that the Lord wants them to be happy. He wants them to be successful. He wants them to be good citizens. But above all, he wants them to live so that they will be exalted in the celestial kingdom of God. The door is open. The plan is here. The authority and the power are here. It's up to us. If we live according to that plan, we'll be happy, we'll be successful, we'll love this country and be good citizens of it, and we will be exalted in the celestial kingdom.
