Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Receive All Things with Thankfulness

Each year as we approach the Thanksgiving season, our thoughts turn to our blessings. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read: "And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more." (D&C 78:19.) "Thou shalt thank the Lord thy God in all things. Thou shalt offer a sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in righteousness, even that of a broken heart and a contrite spirit." (D&C 59:7-8.)

The Prophet Joseph said at one time that one of the greatest sins of which the Latter-day Saints would be guilty is the sin of ingratitude. I presume most of us have not thought of that as a great sin. There is a great tendency for us in our prayers and in our pleadings with the Lord to ask for additional blessings. But sometimes I feel we need to devote more of our prayers to expressions of gratitude and thanksgiving for blessings already received. We enjoy so much. Of course we need the daily blessings of the Lord, but if we sin in the matter of prayer, I think it is in the lack of our expressions of thanksgiving, for blessings that we receive daily.

This was driven home to me as a young man when I heard my grandfather, who had been bishop of a little country ward in Whitney, Franklin County, Idaho, for some twenty-odd years. In those days it was not uncommon to have stake conferences run for three days, and it was not uncommon for the visiting General Authority to take advantage of the opportunity to visit in the homes, not only of the stake presidency but also of some of the bishops.

President Joseph F. Smith was visiting the old Oneida Stake, and, due to this custom, he had arranged to honor my grandfather and to take a meal at his home. Grandfather said that they were seated in the big combination living-dining room of their farm home. The table was laden with good things to eat, and the family was gathered around. (There were thirteen children in that wonderful family, and I assume some of them were there that day.) Just before they were ready to start the meal, President Smith turned to my grandfather, stretched forth his long arms, and said, "Bishop Benson, all this and the gospel, too." What did he mean, "All this and the gospel too"? The food represented the good things of life, the material blessings. This family represented home, family, loved ones. Thus, here was all that the world has—and the gospel too.

We are so inclined to take our blessings for granted. Most of us haven't known anything else. I haven't. I was born into the Church under the covenant. I received the priesthood as a boy twelve years of age. It came so easy to me. I don't know if I fully appreciated it. We live in this wonderful land where we have enjoyed freedom and a standard of living unequaled anywhere in the world. Most of us have never lived out in the world and seen the suffering and the shortages of things we consider necessary for civilized living. Sometimes I wish that every American could in some way be required to live abroad for three or four years as other people live in order that we might come back to these shores with a deeper appreciation for all that we have. We are a very blessed people.

At the end of the last war, I was seated in my office in Salt Lake City when I received a telephone call from a man in New York, a multimillionaire and one of our great industrialists. He had a son in a camp just outside Salt Lake City who had been expecting to be shipped overseas, and then the war had ended and so the servicemen were crowded into that camp. This boy was discouraged and his father was worried about him, so he called and said, "Would you please call him on the telephone and see if you can cheer him up a bit." I said, "Of course, I would be happy to." And so I called him and said, "Wouldn't you like to come into the office for a little visit?" He said, "I surely would."

He was a bit delayed coming in and I was just ready to leave for home when he arrived. I said, "Wouldn't you like to go out to the house with me and take pot luck with the family? My wife doesn't know you are coming, but you will be welcome." He said, "I can't imagine anything I'd rather do tonight than that." So he went with me and we had our dinner and we had our prayer. Then we gathered around the piano afterward and enjoyed ourselves in some singing. After we visited for a while, I drove him down to the bus. In a few days, I got a letter from his father. And you know, you would have thought I had saved the boy's life! In the letter, the father quoted a letter from his son in which the son had said, "Father, I didn't know there were any people in this world who lived like that."

Yes, we take it all for granted. Here was a man worth millions of dollars, who could buy his son anything that dollars could buy and never miss the dollars, and yet this simple thing of prayer and devotion in the home had passed him by. We need to be more grateful. I think there is no true character without gratitude. It is one of the marks of a real strong character to have a feeling of thanksgiving and gratitude for blessings. We need more of that spirit in our homes, in our daily association, in the Church, every-where. It doesn't cost anything, and it is so easy to cultivate. It is so easy also to be dissatisfied and to be envious of other people.

I learned a lesson once while I was visiting in Pocatello, Idaho, on a Sunday. I was thinking about my family, who were 350 miles away, in northern Idaho, and I thought, "I'll run down to Whitney and see if I can attend the sacrament services and renew acquaintances with some of the wonderful people there." So I drove down and arrived just as the meeting was about to start. The bishop was going into the church and invited me in with him. He liked to be on the stand ten minutes before the meeting started so he could see who came in. And as we sat there, I watched the people come in—family groups, father, mother, children—and I knew practically all of them. I thought again of my family 350 miles away and was wishing I was with them.

After the meeting started, the counselor who was conducting called on me to say a few words, and in the introduction he said, "Brothers and sisters, wouldn't it be wonderful if we all had a job like Brother Benson's. He's traveling this great state of Idaho all the time. He is always on a trip." I thought, "Yes, how true to life. Distant pastures usually do look greener." I hope we can be happy where we are and be grateful for our blessings now, here; accept the challenge that is ours and make the most of it; and not be envious of others. God help us to be grateful.

Someone has said that an ungrateful man is like a hog under a tree eating apples and never looking up to see where they come from. Do we look up to see where our blessings are coming from?

I well remember a young couple who started farming a few years ago. Though they had only modest means, they made a down payment on forty acres of raw land. They were going to raise fruit—peaches particularly. They had leveled the land, brought out the laterals, planted the trees, and then they waited and watched for the time to come when they would have a harvest. That particular spring the orchard was a sea of blossoms, and it looked as though they were going to have a bounteous harvest. Then one night without warning there came a frost, which practically wiped out the entire crop overnight. Well, young John didn't go to church the next Sunday, nor the next Sunday, nor the next. Finally his bishop went out to see what was wrong. He found John out in the field and said, "John, we haven't seen you at church for several weeks. What is the matter? Anything wrong?" John said, "No, Bishop, I'm not coming anymore. Do you think I can worship a God who would permit this to happen to me?" And then he explained to the bishop what had happened.

At first the bishop felt sorrowful too, and he expressed it to John. Then, as he looked down at the ground for a moment, he said, "John, I'm sure the Lord knows that you can't produce the best of peaches with frost, but I'm sure also he knows that you can't produce the best man without frost. John, the Lord is interested in producing men, not peaches." Well, John went to church the next Sunday, and another year of harvest came. He later became a bishop in the Church.

We do have our reverses in life. "Whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth." It is in the depths that men and women learn the lessons that help to build strong men and women—not at the pinnacles of success, but in the hour of a man's greatest success is his greatest danger. It takes reverses sometimes to make us appreciate our blessings and to develop strong, courageous characters. When reverses come, we need the Church and the gospel all the more. I am satisfied that it is possible for any person who has a testimony of the divinity of this work to meet any possible reverse and still keep his spirit sweet and his faith strong.

I saw members of the Church in Europe right after World War II, after the worst war, as far as we know, in the history of modern nations. I saw persons who were the only remaining members of once happy and prosperous families with their homes destroyed, every other family member killed in the war. I saw them and I heard them stand on their feet and bear testimony to the divinity of this work and thank God for their blessings—the blessings of the eternal nature of the marriage covenant, the conviction that the family continues beyond the veil, that there is life after death, that there will be a happy reunion for those who live worthily.

Yes, we can meet any reverse that can possibly come with the help of the Lord and the blessings of the gospel. And every reverse can be turned to our benefit and blessing. It will make us stronger, more courageous, more Godlike.

Many people have had reverses in this latter day. I often think of the Prophet Joseph, to me the greatest prophet who has ever lived upon the face of the earth, save Jesus only, whom he represented and served. I think of his trials and tribulations. I thought of them as I stood in Liberty Jail, where he had been, surrounded by vile men, not for a period of days or weeks, but for months. And finally when it seemed as though he could stand it no longer, he cried out in these words:

O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?

How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries?

Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them?

Remember thy suffering saints, O our God; and thy servants will rejoice in thy name forever. (D&C 121:1-3, 6.)

And then came the answer in a revelation to the Prophet:

My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment;

And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes.

Thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again with warm hearts and friendly hands. (D&C 121:7-9.)

See the promise? And then the Lord gave this mild chastisement:

Thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job.

And they who do charge thee with transgression, their hope shall be blasted, and their prospects shall melt away as the hoar frost melteth before the burning rays of the rising sun. (D&C 121:10-11.)

Another time the Lord indicated to the Prophet that "the ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee; While the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand." (D&C 122:1-2.) Then the Lord uttered this significant statement:

And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he? (D&C 122:7-8.)

God help us to be grateful for our blessings and to never be guilty of the sin of ingratitude. "And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more."
