Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Scouting—Builder of Men

We love the youth of America. Our boys and girls, young men and women—these are our greatest assets. We have confidence in them. We know that they need the understanding, wisdom, and counsel of age. They are the trustees of posterity; the future of our country will soon rest in their hands. Our common purpose is to help prepare them to be worthy trustees, to help them fit themselves for the responsibilities of the future.

I am grateful for the privilege that has been mine to work with boys and young men in one of America's greatest character-building programs—Scouting.

Some fifty years ago I became an assistant Scoutmaster in a little country town in southern Idaho. What a challenge it was to work with and to lead twenty-four boys in the first Scout troop in this little rural community. Talk about rewards for effort! Every day of my life has been enriched by that association and service. I have been rewarded ten-fold.

Such satisfaction cannot be purchased at any price; it must be earned through service and devotion. What a glorious thing it is to have even a small part in helping to build boys into men, real men. And that is the purpose of Scouting—to build men.

I would to God that every boy of Scout age in America could have the benefits and the blessings of the great Scout program. It is truly a noble program; it is a builder of character, not only in the boys, but also in the men who provide the leadership. And character, after all, is the priceless thing we build in this life and take with us into the next. Scouting is essentially a spiritual program; it is established, as is our government and its Constitution, upon a deeply spiritual foundation.

In the first part of the Scout Oath we declare, "On my honor, I will do my best to do my duty to God and my country and to obey the Scout Law." Scouting emphasizes duty to God, reverence for sacred things, observance of the Sabbath, maintenance of the standards of the church with which the boy is affiliated. As each boy repeats that pledge, usually at every Scout meeting or function, and he says aloud in the presence of those whose friendship he values most highly, "On my honor, I will do my best to do my duty to God," it cannot help but make a deep and lasting impression upon him. It becomes the foundation upon which a noble character is built. The oath also pledges duty to country, and that too is basically spiritual.

How grateful we should be to God and our country that we have been born in a land that is free, a land of plenty, a land of freedom. Some two hundred thousand persons were given life in the world during the past twenty-four hours. Only about one in twenty was born in the United States; a far larger portion were born behind the iron curtain. Many of those born in Asia or Africa have only about one chance in four of living more than a year; and if they survive babyhood, they may have only about a fifty-fifty chance of becoming young adults. Most of them may be sick much or all of their lives from disease. They may suffer from constant hunger and sometimes from horrible famine. How fortunate we are to live in this land, choice above all others. How grateful we should be, and how determined to keep our country free and strong! We must teach our boys these essential truths.

Scouting stresses service to others, and again this has a spiritual base. The Scout pledges to help other people at all times. Was it not the Master who said, "Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant"? (Matt. 20:27.) The slogan "Do a Good Turn Daily" has become emblazoned upon American living beyond its place of origin in the Scout movement. Scouting emphasizes duty to self. How charged with spiritual meaning are the words, "to keep myself physically strong, mentally awake, and morally straight"!

There is a tendency to think of fitness solely in terms of physical strength. But to be truly fit, truly equal to the demands of life, requires much more than bodily strength. It involves the mind and the training of the mind, the emotions, and their use and control. Yes, and it involves the soul and the spiritual growth too. And that is why Scouting challenges our youth to be physically strong, mentally awake, and morally straight.

It seems to me that the most successful program of complete youth fitness ever known to man was described in fourteen words. They are the words of the beloved disciple Luke in the New Testament. He uses just one sentence to cover a period of eighteen years—the eighteen years in which the Savior of the world, after returning to Nazareth from Jerusalem, prepared himself for his public life: "And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." (Luke 2:52.) There is the ideal of any program of youth fitness, to help our youth increase in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and man. It covers everything: physical fitness, mental fitness, social fitness, emotional fitness, spiritual fitness.

The Scout Law is fundamentally spiritual. The points of the law are expressions of virtues, of ideals; they are the basis of sound character; they are the attributes from which the greatness of America has been derived; they are the characteristics that will determine the future of this nation. If they are adhered to, America will surely fulfill its destiny. If these virtues, these ideals and attributes, are lost, America too will be lost. These virtues of trustworthiness, loyalty, bravery, helpfulness, kindness, obedience, cleanliness, reverence, and all the rest are what the past progress of America and the world is built upon.

Sometimes, in the hurly-burly of living, we forget this great truth. If we ourselves forget, how can we impress it upon our youth? Let us recall a few historic instances showing the importance of the virtues exemplified in the Scout Law.

In 1492 Christopher Columbus set sail from Spain in three small ships with eighty-seven men. For seventy days they sailed across the uncharted sea. As early as the seventeenth day the men began to murmur in fear. From the twentieth day on, Columbus was hard put to restrain them from mutiny, but when we read the log that he kept, we are struck by the force of three words appearing again and again at the end of the day's events: "We sailed on." What courage, what trustworthiness, what faith these words reveal!

Some four and a half centuries after Columbus, Admiral Richard Byrd displayed these same qualities in the exploration of the North and South Poles. In March 1934, Byrd isolated himself in the wastes of Antarctica in a little nine-by-thirteen-foot hut buried in the snow. There he planned to remain during the six-month-long night making weather observations. He took this task on himself. He would not order any of his men to do it. On May 28, fumes from the stove nearly killed him. Though he was critically ill, he refused to send an SOS to the main camp at Little America, 123 miles away. He preferred to die rather than call any of the men to make the dangerous journey during that treacherous season of constant night.

But this was not his closest call with death. That came one day when he went outside to check the instruments in the midst of a raging blizzard. When he sought to get back inside the hut, he found the trap door frozen. He pulled and yanked, exerting all of his strength. It was like trying to pull open a locked bank vault. The door was frozen solid. He tried to scrape off some of the snow around the edges. He threw himself on the door, trying to break the ice by the pressure of his body. He pulled, tugged, pushed, pounded, yanked, until he was worn out. Now he was terribly cold, even through his heavy clothing. His fingers were numb, losing feeling. He was alone in the vast Antarctica, the frozen wild wastelands.

The wind tore at him, screaming like ten thousand triumphant devils. He was about to panic. Ten minutes more in the cold and it would be too late! With the mighty effort of his will, he resisted panic; he prayed. Suddenly he remembered—a shovel! The other day when he was checking the instruments, he had left a shovel outside. He crawled around. It had showed a great deal in the past two days. Where was the shovel? He slipped and fell, and as he crashed, he struck something hard. He seized it; it was the shovel.

Now, back to the trap door of the hut! Somehow he got back. Somehow he wedged the handle of the shovel under the handle of the trap door. His hands were almost useless now. He threw his body across the handle of the shovel and, God be praised, the ice cracked and the door opened. With the last of his dwindling strength he forced it open enough for him to tumble through the opening and down inside the hut. This was the bravery, the trustworthiness, the faith of the explorer.

That same bravery, trustworthiness, and faith will be needed in our time by those who will explore the space age.

Scouting teaches these virtues. "A Scout is kind. A Scout is helpful." Do we ourselves sometimes forget what these virtues have meant to all mankind?

There was born in France in 1822 a boy described by his teacher as "the meekest, smallest, and least promising pupil in my class." But he gave to mankind some of its greatest boons because he was helpful. He became a chemist. When a mysterious disease attacked the silkworms of France and threatened the silk business with ruin, he was invited to investigate.

Meantime, tragedy struck at the family. One of his children died; then another; then a third. Working eighteen hours a day, he drained his strength and suffered a stroke. His powers of speech were paralyzed, but even as he lay there paralyzed in body, he was active in mind, and the solution to the silkworm disease suddenly came to him.

He fought his way back. He regained his power to speak, learning to talk all over again. Eventually his research saved the silk industry, not only of France, but also of all the silk-producing countries. He saved another industry by discovering that heat would kill bacteria without spoiling the product. Thus pasteurization was born, a process in daily use all over this country, particularly in the dairy industry.

Louis Pasteur's primary objective in life was helping man to serve God through serving mankind. His name is great in agriculture. He developed a vaccine for anthrax, a fatal cattle disease, and also for chicken cholera. His germ theory revolutionized medicine to understand surgery, which in those days was practically signing one's own death warrant. Pasteur discovered that this was because of microbes getting into open wounds. Some doctors scoffed, "What does this chemist know about medicine?" But in two years, in the first hospital where the germ theory was applied, post-surgery fatalities dropped from ninety percent to fifteen percent. He conquered hydrophobia. Once, in order to get his material for his experiment, it was necessary for him to suck saliva through a tube from the threatening jaws of a mad dog. Calmly he faced a possible horrible death. Then he said, "Well, gentlemen, we can now proceed with the experiment." What a noble soul and what a truly great example to hold not only before our boys, but also before ourselves!

Here is another example from recent times and daily lives. In a southern community a baby fell into a well. The hole was sixty feet deep and only thirteen inches across. A boy could go down, a man could not. Elbert Gray volunteered. He was let down on the end of a rope. Sharp rocks cut his face and his bare feet. He reached the baby and managed to grab its shirt, but the cramped position kept him from getting a good hold. The men above the well pulled him up, and he volunteered to go down again, this time head first so he could take hold of the child with both hands. Shaking with cold, blood pouring from his numerous cuts, he brought the baby back. He was awarded a bronze medal, symbol for heroism, by the Carnegie Fund Hero Commission.

There are many examples in the great program of Scouting of boys who have exhibited the same spirit of helpfulness, of service.

Our youth need to develop qualities of leadership. They need to learn the value of staying power—stick-to-it-iveness. They need to learn devotion to duty—the devotion to duty that keeps a good doctor on the job right around the clock in an emergency; the devotion to duty that leads a scientist or a teacher to persevere in a low-paying position in public service because that is where his maximum contribution can be made.

They need to learn to be tolerant of people but intolerant of untruth, of laziness, of immorality. There is a type of broadmindedness prevalent today that tolerates just about anything short of outright murder. It isn't broadmindedness at all—it's moral apathy, or maybe moral cowardice.

Yes, what examples we have to follow; what models to imitate! Whether one studies the Scout Oath, the Scout Law, the Scout Motto, or the Scout Slogan, they all add up to America's finest character-building program.

How fortunate are those who may participate in it and have their lives enriched thereby—boys and men alike. They with whom Scouting is concerned are made of eternal stuff; theirs is a divine destiny. Godlike men, men of character, men of truth, men of courage, men of goodwill—there, then, is our challenge.

Ours is not a boy problem; it is a man problem. Our boys want Scouting; we want them to have it. Our problem is in leadership. Our great need is to provide the leadership to meet the demands of the boys. Through Scouting we can help them develop real character; we can teach them cooperation; we can help them develop qualities of leadership; we can teach them the value of staying power.

It is not for us to moan about juvenile delinquency and other problems of our youth. Let us rather use all possible time and energy in trying to help youth—through Scouting, 4-H Clubs, the Future Farmers of America, church, school, and community organizations. Youth need inspired leaders to help them to be honest with themselves; to guide youth safely along life's pathway is the noblest work of all.

We need to give them something wholesome to do. Only a warm heart can kindle warmth in another. Young people ask for a fair chance to succeed. Let us help provide wholesome challenges and opportunities, and they will complete the job of becoming well-adjusted, useful citizens. To awaken the youth of this land and to rekindle in the hearts of its leaders the high ideals of Scouting is to render one of the greatest of all services to our country. To guide right the millions of eager, yearning, active youth who are enrolled in Scouting and the many more who might be added is the mightiest of obligations.

To win their confidence is one of the greatest responsibilities and privileges of life.

Let's mobilize men, hundreds of them, who love boys; who believe in them; who not only have the technical skills, but who will inspire them, because boys need inspiration even more than they need information. Boys are hero-worshipers; they are great idealists; they love to follow one whom they regard as their ideal, their pal, their champion.

Let's get men who are boys' men; who can appeal to them and inspire them to want to live right; who believe that it is best to be good—not goody-good, but happy, full of life, full of vigor; who want them to play and have a clean, wholesome time in life. It pays to live a good life. Scouting can help to emphasize and impress this fact upon the boys of today, the men of tomorrow, and us as men. Can we ignore such a challenge? Are we so busy and self-centered that we cannot take time out to help build a bridge for that boy? Scouting offers us that challenge. It is a tremendous test of leadership, devotion, and courage. Is that nobility within us going to rise up in majesty and answer to the call?

I have faith in the manhood of America; we will not let our boys down. Upon the character of our boys depends America's future. They are our hope. Scouting, as a great spiritual character-building program, needs to grow as never before. America must be kept strong and free. May God bless us in this task of building men, real men.
