Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Fitness—A Total Concept

It has been said that our young people are becoming soft, that they are demanding harder and harder butter on softer and softer bread. I for one do not believe it. The youth of this land, choice above all other lands, are the trustees of posterity. A century and a half ago the German poet Goethe said: "The destiny of any nation, at any given time, depends on the opinions of its young men [and women] under five-and-twenty."

Our common purpose is to help our young men and women fit themselves for the responsibilities of the future.

Physical well-being is not only a priceless asset to one's self—it is a heritage to be passed on. With good health, all other activities of life are greatly enhanced. A clean mind in a healthy body enables one to render far more effective service to others. It helps one provide more vigorous leadership. It gives our every experience in life more zest and more meaning. Robust health is a noble and worthwhile attainment.

For much of his youth, Theodore Roosevelt was frail and sickly, so much so that he was privately tutored and could not take part in the rough and tumble games of boys his own age. But Teddy Roosevelt was a resolute character. He deliberately set out to build up his body, and he stuck to it. In a sense he made himself over. He made himself fit. And he went down into the annals of history as a great exponent of the strenuous life—the youngest of all our Presidents and certainly one of the most vigorous, robust, energetic men ever to occupy the White House.

Times have changed greatly since Theodore Roosevelt was President, but the need for fitness is no less urgent.

I am grateful that many elements in my own background have particularly stressed youth fitness. My boyhood was spent in an area where family and church play leading roles in the cultural, recreational, and spiritual development of young people. Most of us were reared on farms or in small villages. Work and physical activity were the accepted and commonplace daily routine. We all realize that these conditions are not universal and normal today for many youth, especially those growing up in large cities.

There is a tendency to think of fitness solely in terms of the physical, in terms of bodily strength. It involves the mind and the training of the mind, the emotions and their use and control—yes, and it involves the soul and spiritual growth, too.

The ideal of any program of youth fitness is to help our youth increase in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and man. (See Luke 2:52.) This covers everything—physical fitness, mental fitness, social fitness, emotional fitness, spiritual fitness.

I like to think of youth as a kind of savings bank. We put in our experiences of all kinds, the things we see and learn, the things we do in the home, in church, in school, at work, at recreation; and all the rest of our lives we keep drawing on that savings bank of experience and knowledge. The wonderful fact is that the more we draw on the account, the larger it seems to grow.

There are some savings that all of our youth ought to have in their accounts. They ought to have some basic knowledge, some basic principles, to fit them for life.

They must realize, first, that they have a duty to God. This includes reverence for sacred things, the observance of the Sabbath, the maintenance of the standards of the church with which they are affiliated, faith that they can reach out and tap that Unseen Power.

General Omar N. Bradley, who once served as the U.S. Army's Chief of Staff, on one occasion said:

With the monstrous weapons man already has, humanity is in danger of being trapped in this world by its moral adolescence. Our knowledge of science has clearly outstripped our capacity to control it.

We have too many men of science; too few men of God. We have grasped the mystery of the atom and rejected the Sermon on the Mount. Man is stumbling blindly through a spiritual darkness while toying with the precarious secrets of life and death.

The world has achieved brilliance without wisdom, power without conscience. Ours is a world of nuclear giants and ethical infants. We know more about war than we know about peace, more about killing than we know about living.

Those are startling, shocking words from a great military leader.

Second to their duty to God, youth should realize their duty to our country. They should love and honor the Constitution of the United States, the basic concepts and principles upon which this nation has been established. Yes, they need to develop a love for our free institutions.

Third, they should realize their duty to serve others. To serve others willingly and unselfishly is one of the greatest virtues. They should learn cooperation. Not everybody can lead, but everybody can cooperate. More perhaps than anything else, that's what we need in the world today—the ability to work together and serve one another in peace and harmony.

Fourth, they have a duty to themselves. They need to develop in themselves the finest characteristics of mankind: inward peace, faith, humility, integrity, charity, courage, thrift, cooperation, and an ability for good hard work—all ingredients of a sterling character.

Fitness demands our recognizing that the individual is responsible for his deeds and misdeeds. Fitness demands our understanding that you can't build a worthwhile life without principles and convictions that you are willing to fight for. Fitness demands our knowing that "nothing worth building was ever founded on quicksand; no State ever carved from putty; no enduring society or satisfactory life built on laziness, selfishness, and irresponsibility." (Elizabeth M. Hill, "Don't Call Me Broadminded," Reader's Digest, January 1951.)

Fitness, then, is a total concept. It involves the whole person—body, mind, and spirit.

We need to focus attention on, and lend full support to, all worthy youth programs. Those which are nongovernment-sponsored are especially worthy of our help and leadership. Scouting activities are a fine example of such programs. I particularly appreciate what Scouting has meant to my own family, my two sons being Eagle Scouts. Let us use all possible time and energy in trying to help youth through church, school, and community recreation, and other constructive programs. Youth needs hope, not despair; visions, not clouds; models, not critics; inspired leaders to help them to be honest with themselves. To help guide youth safely along life's pathway is the noblest work of all.

Many years ago a good friend, William H. Danforth, wrote a little book that has since inspired thousands of Americans. This small book, I Dare You, was in our library at home and it influenced me—as it has influenced our sons and daughters—in a way that is wholly good. This is what it said:

I Dare You, young man, you who come from a home of poverty—I dare you to have the qualities of a Lincoln.

I Dare You, heir of wealth and proud ancestry, with your generations of worthy stock, your traditions of leadership—I dare you to achieve something that will make the future point to you with even more pride than the present is pointing to those who have gone before you.

I Dare You, young mother, to make your life a masterpiece upon which that little family of yours can build. Strong women bring forth strong men.

I Dare You, young executive, to shoulder more responsibility joyously, to launch out into the deep, to build magnificently.

I Dare You, young author, to win the Nobel prize.

I Dare You, young researcher, to become a Microbe Hunter.

I Dare You, barefoot boy on the farm, to become a Master Farmer—A Hunger Fighter.

I Dare You, whoever you are, to share with others the fruits of your daring. Catch a passion for helping others and a richer life will come back to you!

That is the challenge we need to present to our youth.

Let us seek to inspire them to fit themselves for service—to emulate in their own fields, and even to surpass, the achievements of other young people who have dared to pioneer.

Cyrus McCormick, for example, invented the reaper at the age of twenty-two.

Isaac Newton worked out the laws of motion and gravitation by the time he was twenty-four.

John Keats wrote some of the most magnificent poetry in the English language before he was twenty-five.

Charles Lindbergh flew across the Atlantic Ocean, solo, in a single engine plane, and he too was only twenty-five.

Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin as a youngster of twenty-eight.

Thomas Edison applied for his patent on the phonograph when he was thirty and for the incandescent lamp when he was thirty-two.

Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence at thirty-three.

And Mozart, acclaimed by some as the greatest musical composer of all time, wrote all of his immortal works before he was thirty-five.

What youth need and ask today falls into eight categories:

Yes, the future of our nation rests with our youth and with those who, by their devotion to the problems of youth, serve them and all mankind. God bless and speed us in this good work.
