Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country: Our Three Great Loyalties ( 1974)

Be Not Deceived

Years ago my great-grandfather, while an investigator, attended a Mormon meeting during which a member had a quarrel with the branch president. When the service was over, Mrs. Benson turned to Ezra T. and asked him what he thought of the Mormons now. I'll always be grateful for his answer. He said he thought the actions of its members in no way altered the truth of Mormonism. That conviction saved him from many a tragedy. Before joining the Church Grandfather was moved by a marvelous prayer of Elder John E. Page of the Council of the Twelve. But later the young convert was greatly shocked by the same young man whose actions reflected his gradual apostasy. Ironically, when Elder Page eventually was excommunicated, Brigham Young selected the young convert, Ezra T. Benson, to fill Elder Page's place in the Council.

Six of the original twelve apostles selected by Joseph Smith were excommunicated. The three witnesses to the Book of Mormon left the Church. Three of Joseph Smith's counselors fell—one even helped plot the Prophet's death.

A natural question that might arise would be, if the Lord knew in advance that these men would fall, as he undoubtedly did, why did he have his prophet call them to such high office? The answer is, to fill the Lord's purposes. For even the Master followed the will of the Father by selecting Judas. President George Q. Cannon suggested an explanation, too, when he stated, "Perhaps it is His own design that faults and weaknesses should appear in high places in order that His Saints may learn to trust in Him and not in any man or men." (Gospel Truth, Deseret Book Co., 1974, vol. 1, p. 319.)

And this would parallel Lehi's warning: put not your "trust in the arm of flesh. . . ." (2 Ne. 4:35.)

"The Church," said President David O. McKay, "is little, if at all, injured by persecution and calumnies from ignorant, misinformed, or malicious enemies." (Treasures of Life, 1962, p. 385.)

It is from within the Church that the greatest hindrance comes. And so, it seems, it has been. Now the question arises, will we stick with the kingdom and can we avoid being deceived? Certainly this is an important question, for the Lord has said that in the last days the devil will "rage in the hearts of . . . men" (2 Ne. 28:20), and if it were possible he shall "deceive the very elect." (See Joseph Smith 1:5-37.)

Brigham Young said:

The adversary presents his principles and arguments in the most approved style, and in the most winning tone, attended with the most graceful attitudes; and he is very careful to ingratiate himself into the favour of the powerful and influential of mankind, uniting himself with popular parties, floating into offices of trust and emolument by pandering to popular feeling, though it should seriously wrong and oppress the innocent. Such characters put on the manners of an angel, appearing as nigh like angels of light as they possibly can, to deceive the innocent and the unwary. The good which they do, they do it to bring to pass an evil purpose upon the good and honest followers of Jesus Christ. (Journal of Discourses, vol. 11, pp. 238-39.)

Those of us who think "all is well in Zion" (2 Nephi 28:21) in spite of Book of Mormon warnings might ponder the words of Heber C. Kimball, who said:

Yes, we think we are secure here in the chambers of these everlasting hills . . . but I want to say to you, my brethren, the time is coming when we will be mixed up in these now peaceful valleys to that extent that it will be difficult to tell the face of a Saint from the face of an enemy against the people of God. Then is the time to look out for the great sieve, for there will be a great sifting time, and many will fall. For I say unto you there is a test, a Test, a TEST coming. (Orson F. Whitney, The Life of Heber C. Kimball, 1888 ed., p. 456-57.)

One of the greatest discourses that I have ever heard or read on how to avoid being deceived was given during the priesthood session of the October 1960 semiannual conference by President Marion G. Romney. I commend it to you for your close study. During the talk Elder Romney stated that there was no guarantee that the devil will not deceive a lot of men who hold the priesthood. Then, after referring to a talk on free agency by President David O. McKay, President Romney stated, "Free agency is the principle against which Satan waged his war in heaven. It is still the front on which he makes his most furious, devious, and persistent attacks. That this would be the case was foreshadowed by the Lord. . . ."

And then, after quoting the scripture from the Pearl of Great Price regarding the war in heaven over free agency (Moses 4:1-4), President Romney continued:

You see, at the time he was cast out of heaven, his objective was (and still is) "to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will." This he effectively does to as many as will not hearken unto the voice of God. His main attack is still on free agency. When he can get men to yield their agency, he has them well on the way to captivity.

We who hold the priesthood must beware concerning ourselves, that we do not fall into the traps he lays to rob us of our freedom. We must be careful that we are not led to accept or support in any way any organization, cause or measure which, in its remotest effect, would jeopardize free agency, whether it be in politics, government, religion, employment, education, or any other field. It is not enough for us to be sincere in what we support. We must be right! (Look to God and Live, Deseret Book Co., 1971, pp. 57-58.)

President Romney then outlined some tests to distinguish the true from the counterfeit. Now this is crucial for us to know, for as President John Taylor said, "Besides the preaching of the Gospel, we have another mission, namely, the perpetuation of the free agency of man and the maintenance of liberty, freedom, and the rights of man." (JD, vol. 28, p. 63.)

It was the struggle over free agency that divided us before we came here; it may well be the struggle over the same principle that will deceive and divide us again.

May I suggest three short tests to avoid being deceived, pertaining to both this freedom struggle and all other matters.

We must diligently study the scriptures. Of special importance to us are the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Book of Mormon, Brigham Young said, was written on the tablets of his heart and no doubt helped save him from being deceived. The Book of Mormon has a lot to say about America, freedom, and secret combinations.

The Doctrine and Covenants is important because it contains the revelations which helped lay the foundation of this great latter-day work. It speaks of many things. D&C 134, verse 2, states that government should hold inviolate the rights and control of property. This makes important reading in a day when government controls are increasing and people are losing the right to control their own property.

Brother Brigham took the stand, and he took the Bible and laid it down; he took the Book of Mormon, and laid it down; and he took the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and laid it down before him, and he said, "There is the written word of God to us, concerning the work of God from the beginning of the world, almost, to our day." "And now," said he, "when compared with the living oracles, those books are nothing to me; those books do not convey the word of God direct to us now, as do the words of a Prophet or a man bearing the Holy Priesthood in our day and generation. I would rather have the living oracles than all the writing in the books." That was the course he pursued. When he was through, Brother Joseph said to the congregation: "Brother Brigham has told you the word of the Lord, and he has told you the truth." (Conference Report, October 1897, pp. 18-19.)

There is only one man on the earth today who speaks for the Church. That man is the President of the Church. (See D&C 132:7, 21:4.) Because he gives the word of the Lord for us today, his words have an even more immediate importance than those of the dead prophets. When speaking under the influence of the Holy Ghost, his words are scripture. (D&C 68:4.)

The President can speak on any subject he feels is needful for the Saints. As Brigham Young stated: "I defy any man on earth to point out the path a prophet of God should walk in, or point out his duty, and just how far he must go, in dictating temporal or spiritual things. Temporal and spiritual things are inseparably connected, and ever will be." (JD, vol. 10, p. 364.) Other officers in the kingdom have fallen, but never the presidents. The words of a living prophet must and ever will take precedence.

President David O. McKay said a lot about our tragic trends toward socialism and communism and the responsibilities of liberty-loving people in defending and preserving our Constitution. Have we read his words and pondered on them?

You may know whether you are led by right or wrong, as well as you know the way home; for every principle God has revealed carries its own convictions of its truth to the human mind. . . .

What a pity it would be if we were led by one man to utter destruction! Are you afraid of this? I am more afraid that this people have so much confidence in their leaders that they will not inquire of themselves of God whether they are led by Him. I am fearful they settle down in a state of blind self-security, trusting their eternal destiny in the hands of their leaders with a reckless confidence that in itself would thwart the purposes of God in their salvation, and weaken that influence they could give to their leaders, did they know for themselves, by the revelations of Jesus, that they are led in the right way. Let every man and woman know, by the whispering of the Spirit of God to themselves, whether their leaders are walking in the path that the Lord dictates, or not. This has been my exhortation continually. (JD, vol. 9, pp. 149-50.)

Elder Heber C. Kimball stated, "The time will come when no man or woman will be able to endure on borrowed light." (Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 1888 edition, p. 461.)

How, then can we know if a man is speaking by the Spirit? The Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants give us the key. (See D&C 50:17-23; 100:5; 2 Ne. 33:1; 1 Cor. 2:10-11.) President Clark summarized this well when he said:

We can tell when the speakers are moved upon by the Holy Ghost only when we, ourselves, are moved upon by the Holy Ghost. In a way, this completely shifts the responsibility from them to us to determine when they so speak. . . . The Church will know by the testimony of the Holy Ghost in the body of the members, whether the brethren in voicing their views are moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and in due time that knowledge will be made manifest. (Church News, July 31, 1954.)

Will this Spirit be needed to check actions in other situations? Yes, and it could be used as a guide and a protector for the faithful in a situation described by President Harold B. Lee:

In the history of the Church there have been times or instances where Counselors in the First Presidency and others in high station have sought to overturn the decision or to persuade the President contrary to his inspired judgment, and always, if you will read carefully the history of the Church, such oppositions brought not only disastrous results to those who resisted the decision of the President, but almost always such temporary persuasions were called back for reconsideration, or a reversal of hasty action not in accordance with the feelings, the inspired feelings, of the President of the Church. And that, I submit, is one of the fundamental things that we must never lose sight of in the building up of the kingdom of God. (Conference Report, April 1963, p. 81.

These, then, are the three tests: the standard works, the inspired words of the Presidents of the Church (particularly the living presidents), and the promptings of the Holy Ghost.

Now, in this great struggle for free agency, just think what a power for good we could be in this world if we were united. President McKay reiterated this thought again and again:

Next to being one in worshiping God, there is nothing in this world upon which this Church should be more united than in upholding and defending the Constitution of the United States!

May the appeal of our Lord in his intercessory prayer for unity be realized in our homes, our wards, our stakes, and in our support of the basic principles of our Republic. (Treasures of Life, p. 387.)

To that I say Amen and Amen.

President Clark said:

I wish to say with all the earnestness I possess that when you youth and maidens see any curtailment of these liberties I have named, when you see government invading any of these realms of freedom which you have under our Constitution, you will know that they are putting shackles on your liberty, and that tyranny is creeping upon you, no matter who curtails these liberties or who invades these realms, and no matter what the reason and excuse therefore may be. (Stand Fast by Our Constitution, pp. 189-90.)

Now, inasmuch as all these warnings have come through the mouthpieces of the Lord on earth today, there is one major question we should ask ourselves. Assuming we are living a life so we can know, then what does the Holy Ghost have to say about it? We are under obligation to answer this question. God will hold us responsible.

Let us not be deceived in the sifting days ahead. Let us rally together on principle behind the prophet as guided by the promptings of the Spirit. We should continue to speak out for freedom and against socialism and communism. We should continue to come to the aid of patriots, programs, and organizations that are trying to save our Constitution through every legal and moral means possible.

God has not left us in darkness regarding these matters. We have the scriptures ancient and modern. We have a living prophet, and we may obtain the Spirit.

Joseph Smith did see the Father and the Son. The kingdom established through the Prophet's instrumentality will roll forth. We can move forward with it. That we may all do so and be not deceived is my humble prayer.
