Richard Dilworth Rust, Feasting on the Word: The Literary Testimony of the Book of Mormon ( 1997)

Chapter 1

"To Come Forth in Due Time"

Introduction

My love of great literature and my testimony of the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ converge in seeing the Book of Mormon assacred literature. To take a literary approach enhanced by spiritual sensitivity is to engage our full capacities in understanding and feeling. It is to delight in how something is said in a way that reveals its essence. This approach is appropriate and helpful in respect to the Book of Mormon. In this work of literature, God-directed prophets speak to us in the most powerful and effective ways possible by interconnecting truth, goodness, and beauty.

By literature I mean belles lettres in its literal sense, "beautiful letters." In the words of Ralph Waldo Emerson, literature is "the record of the best thoughts." [^1] Wordsworth called poetic literature "the breath and finer spirit of all knowledge." [^2] Poetry, Robert Frost wrote, is saying "matter in terms of spirit and spirit in terms of matter," or "saying one thing in terms of another." [^3] Orson F. Whitney considered the essence of poetry to be "in thought, sentiment, and the power of suggestion. It is the music of ideas, as well as the music of language." It is, he said, "the power by which we appreciate and sympathize with all that is good, pure, true, beautiful and sublime." [^4] Literature engages all our senses; it involves not only thinking but also feeling. Through literature we imaginatively touch, taste, hear, and see.

Many parts of the Book of Mormon havea literary appeal. They bid us to taste and hear, to experience spirit in terms of matter. In the book we are often put in the situation of the Nephites visited by the resurrected Savior: they "did see with their eyes and did feel with their hands" ( 3 Ne. 11:15 ). We are encouraged to "receive the pleasing word of God, and feast upon his love" ( Jacob 3:2 ).

As an example of "feasting upon the pleasing word of God" ( Jacob 2:9 ), Jacob poeticallyadapts Isaiah toencourage us to

Hearken diligently unto me, and remember the words which I have spoken; and come unto the Holy One of Israel, and feast upon that which perisheth not, neither can be corrupted, and let your soul delight in fatness. ( 2 Ne. 9:51 ; cf. Isa. 55:2 ) [^5]

This poignant appeal and other poetic segments like it are woven into the fabric of the Book of Mormon. These materials were selected and designed by inspired writers "to come forth in due time," as Moroni putsit in the title page, for people living in a later age. When I say "designed," I mean not only planned with a purpose but shaped artistically so that form and content are totally integrated, as they are in Milton'sParadise Lost, Handel'sMessiah, or Michelangelo's paintings in the Sistine Chapel. With respect toParadise Lost, for example, the majesty of Milton's theme to "justify the ways of God to men" requires the magnitude of the epic form and the stateliness of unrhymed English heroic verse. With Handel'sMessiah, the exalted oratorio form carries the profound scriptural messages.

The purpose of the chapters that follow is to set forth a literary testimony of the Book of Mormon, to show how the impact ofwhat the Book of Mormon saysoften is created throughhow it is said. The interconnection of beauty with truth and goodness invites us to Christ. That is, literary elements such as form, imagery, poetry, and narrative help teach and motivate us in ways that touch our hearts and souls as well as our minds. [^6] We "see feelingly," as Gloucester puts it in another context in Shakespeare'sKing Lear; we gain what Nathaniel Hawthorne calls "heart-knowledge." [^7]

Nephi understoodthe heart-knowledge that comes through pondering with our heart scriptural truths and delighting with our soul in the beautiful ways in which those truths are presented. In what has been called a psalm, Nephi says

For my soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children. Behold, my soul delighteth in the things of the Lord; and my heart pondereth continually upon the things which I have seen and heard. ( 2 Ne. 4:15-16 )

This engagement of heart and soul is part of the Creator's plan to appeal to all our senses. For example, he has given us fruit, such as strawberries and apples, for the "benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart; . . . for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul" ( D&C 59:18-19 ). His works are both useful and beautiful; they have both "strength and beauty" ( Ps. 96:6 ). Indeed, as with the strawberries, their beauty often attracts us to their use. Author of the beautiful, the Lord "hath made every thing beautiful in his time" ( Eccl. 3:11 ). Zion is "the perfection of beauty" ( Ps. 50:2 ).

This beauty extends to God's words. "How sweet are thy words unto my taste!" says the Psalmist, "yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!" (Psalm 119:103That is the experience of Lehi and Nephi inthe dream vision of the tree of life: the beauty of the tree was "far beyond, yea, exceeding of all beauty; and the whiteness thereof did exceed the whiteness of the driven snow" ( 1 Ne. 11:8 ). To partake of this beautiful fruit is a soul-filling experience: "I beheld that it was most sweet, above all that I ever before tasted. Yea, and I beheld that the fruit thereof was white, to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever seen. And as I partook of the fruit thereof it filled my soul with exceedingly great joy" ( 1 Ne. 8:11-12 ). Symbolically the love of God, the tree with its fruit is also the word of God, as Alma understands:"But if ye will nourish the word, yea, nourish the tree as it beginneth to grow, by your faith with great diligence, and with patience, looking forward to the fruit thereof, it shall take root; and behold it shall be a tree springing up unto everlasting life" ( Alma 32:41 ).

The Book of Mormon isitself a tree of life—a work of beauty and purity, with its words to be feasted upon. A literary approach helps reveal that beauty. In reading of another's experience, we often understand it better through comparison or a figure of speech. Thus when Alma says"ye have tasted this light" ( Alma 32:35 ), we come closer to sensing what it means to experience the "light of truth" ( D&C 93:29 ). The book allows us to share the experience of Mormon, who for his part "tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus" ( Morm. 1:15 ). For those who seek after anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report, the book combines the qualities of the good, the beautiful, and the true. Just as Zion is challenged by Isaiah to"put on [her]beautiful garments" ( 2 Ne. 8:24 ), so we might consider that the Book of Mormon hasbeautiful garments in the way it is presented.

Beauty in the Book of Mormon takesmany forms. In Nephi's psalm, the repeated words and phrases appeal to our auditory delight in rhythm and repetition. Through imagination, the reader responds to Nephi's metaphors, his saying one thing in terms of another. "My soul will rejoice in thee," he says, "my God, and the rock of my salvation" ( 2 Ne. 4:30 ). He continues with a series of metaphors that present concrete images relating to such experiences as being delivered, shaking, having one set of gates closed and another set open, and walking in a narrow path. These make it more possible for us to identify with him:

O Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul? Wilt thou deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies? Wilt thou make me that I may shake at the appearance of sin? May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, because that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite! O Lord, wilt thou not shut the gates of thy righteousness before me, that I may walk in the path of the low valley, that I may be strict in the plain road! O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness! O Lord, wilt thou make a way for mine escape before mine enemies! Wilt thou make my path straight before me! Wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way— but that thou wouldst clear my way before me, and hedge not up my way, but the ways of mine enemy. ( 2 Ne. 4:31-33 )

The power of Nephi's words is most apparent when the passage is read aloud and also when it is recognized as poetry with its primary appeal to feeling. [^8] I discovered this quality through my own experience: when my family and I read the Book of Mormon togethereach morning, I recognized the intense nature of passages such as Nephi's psalm. Later, when I searched the Book of Mormon forits poetry, I better understood why I was responding with my feelings to these passages. I also experienced this intensity vicariously through the response of a certain friend, who was a graduate student in public health and a Blackfoot Indian. I had wanted to see how a Native American would respond to hearing the Book of Mormon, and as I read Nephi's psalm tomy friend, I could see how he was visibly moved. Afterwards he told me he felt a stirring of emotions related to how he felt as a boy hearing chants and drum beats. Especially, he said, he could feel and identify with Nephi's joy and sorrow.

Read aloud, Nephi's words convey emotionally his depth of feeling. They become music that stirs the spirit more directly than would words simply read with the eyes.

Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss; therefore I will lift up my voice unto thee; yea, I will cry unto thee, my God, the rock of my righteousness. Behold, my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee, my rock and mine everlasting God. ( 2 Ne. 4:35 )

Though we have the Book of Mormon inprinted form, a number of evidences suggest that much of its content was originally transmitted orally. A "voice" from the dust, the book re- cords what various prophets heard and taught. Alma rememberedword for word what Abinadi taught and then related it to his followers; likewise, the chosen disciples of the Savior remembered the sermon he gave the people at the temple and then repeated it from memory the next day. The parting testimony of Nephi is"the voice of one crying from the dust" ( 2 Ne. 33:13 ). Alma theYounger asks the people if they can imagine to themselves that they "hear the voice of the Lord" speaking to them at judgment day ( Alma 5:16 ). "The good shepherd doth call you," he goes on to say ( Alma 5:38 ). Many of the direct words of Christ are contained in the Book of Mormon—words we are intended to hear with our ears as well as see with our eyes. There is much merit in listening to the Book of Mormon aswell as reading it.

When we read or listen to the Book of Mormon asa whole, we discover more readily those elements we might well call literary—poetry, chiasms, repetitions, word choice, imagery, and the like—and feel the character of the book. Thus, while my Book of Mormon referenceswill be to the current edition, [^9] occasionally I will group sentences together in the spirit of the first printed edition (1830).In that edition, the Book of Mormon ismade up of many fewer chapters than are in the current edition. For example, the First Book of Nephi containsseven chapters in the 1830 edition; it has twenty-two in the 1981 edition. Para- graphs in the 1830 edition are longer, sometimes a couple of pages in length. It was not until the 1879 edition that Orson Pratt divided the Book of Mormon intoour present-day chapters and verses. Although this division makes it easier to cite specific passages, the earlier arrangement better allows us to experience the narrative flow of the book.

Indeed, through a variety of means, the Lord has made the Book of Mormon asmemorable as possible for us. In this richly varied work we learn the value of freedom through the compelling story of Captain Moroni andhis title of liberty. We learn of the dangers of secret combinations through the chilling accounts of Kishkumen and Gadianton and then through the frightening details of the story of Akish in the book of Ether. The nature of deception is exposed in the dramatic encounters between Jacob andSherem, Alma andNehor, and Alma andKorihor. Further, we are shown—not simply told—how covenanted people can avoid being deceived. Rhetorical and poetic power are behind Mormon's great sermon on faith, hope, and charity. And the destruction of the world (meaningthe wicked) and the glory of Christ's second coming are set forth figuratively in the events of Third Nephi, just as the Millennium is prefigured in the first part of Fourth Nephi. [^10]

Made up of diverse books, the Book of Mormon asa complete whole is a single "voice"—that of Jesus Christ who inspired Mormon andothers regarding what should be included in the book and how they should present it. This primary author of the Book of Mormon knewthat it would come forth just before his second coming. Fulfilling specific purposes, the Book of Mormon wasdesigned for our day.

Designed for Our Day

"The Book of Mormon .. . was written for our day," President Ezra TaftBenson asserted. "Under the inspiration of God, who sees all things from the beginning," he said, Mormon "abridgedcenturies of records, choosing the stories, speeches, and events that would be most helpful to us." [^11] Hugh Nibley has similarly said that "the matter in the Book of Mormon wasselected, as we are often reminded, with scrupulous care and with particular readers in mind. For some reason there has been chosen for our attention a story of how and why two previous civilizations on this continent were utterly destroyed." [^12] Our own world at the end of the twentieth century, Nibley believes, "is the world with which the Book of Mormon isprimarily concerned." [^13]

In its teachings and concerns the book is clearly relevant to our own times, but it is more than that: coming out of one age, the Book of Mormon materialshave been shaped and selected by inspired prophet-artists for people living in another age. The Book of Mormon islike a lovely modern home made of bricks from older structures. The bricks may have interest in themselves, but they are now a part of new buildings with new form and function. In other words, the Book of Mormon containscarefully selected and integrated "bricks" of history, sermons, letters, and prophecies, shaped specifically and intentionally into a beautiful "house" designed for the latter days. Though its doctrines are timeless and appropriate for various periods, the Book of Mormon isjust coming into its own. "In its descriptions of the problems of today's society, it is as current as the morning newspaper, and much more definitive, inspired, and inspiring concerning the solutions of those problems," said President Gordon B. Hinckley. [^14]

Of course Mormon and Moroni werewriting for a future time. They had to be. Mormon didmost of his writing during the long lull before what he knew would be an exterminating battle, and Moroni's writings are those of the lone wanderer destined to bury his precious work in the earth. From title page to parting words, father and son make clear that what they are inspired to include is first to the latter-day Lamanites and then to latter-day Gentiles and Jews. They speak as though "from the dead" to an audience living many generations hence ( Morm. 9:30 ). In prophetic collapsed time, Moroni speaksto this audience "as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing" ( Morm. 8:35 ).

Writers such as Moroni andhis father are, however, actually secondary authors of the Book of Mormon; the primary author is Jesus Christ. As Mormon affirms"I . . . do write the things which have been commanded me of the Lord" ( 3 Ne. 26:12 ). Again, the premortal Savior told Joseph of Egypt, the great patriarch, that Joseph Smith would write "the words which are expedient in my wisdom should go forth unto the fruit of thy loins" ( 2 Ne. 3:19 ).

The Book of Mormon isa time capsule, written in ancient America but designed for a latter-day audience. Considered in its entirety, the book is neither an abridgment in the common meaning of "condensation" nor is it a history as such. Rather, it emphasizes doctrinal teachings and examples, with most of the book devoted to the 150 years before Christ's coming. More than half the thousand-year span of Nephite history is covered in less than four pages—which would be a poor balance if the book claimed to be simply history. But it does not. It has come forth "that these things [elementslisted as preparatory to the second coming of Christ] might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth" ( D&C 133:36 ) itheralds the fulfillment of the covenant of restoration so that "ye need not say that the Lord delays his coming unto the children of Israel" ( 3 Ne. 29:2 ) andit prepares us for the Millennium, being written so "that evil may be done away, and that the time may come that Satan may have no power upon the hearts of the children of men" ( Ether 8:26 ).

Designedfor Our Day

Not only is the Book of Mormon intendedfor our day but it is also shaped artistically through ancient literary forms that appeal to us today. In the Book of Mormon, as in other great works of literature, effective presentation is essential to convey purpose. This point is well made by President Boyd K. Packer. He tells how as a mission president he wanted to teach his missionaries the importance of presentation. He showed the assembled missionaries a beautifully decorated cake representing the gospel, but then he served the cake by grabbing a fistful of it and throwing it at an elder. There were no takers for a second piece until he produced a crystal dish, silver fork, linen napkin, and silver serving knife and then cut a piece carefully and put it neatly on the crystal plate before serving it. His lesson was that for the message to be received, the messenger must take care to serve it well. [^15]

Through inspiration, those who wrote and compiled the Book of Mormon paidattention to how it is served. The Lord's "keystone of our religion" is beautifully prepared for us, with its narratives, rhythms, and imagery helping engage all our senses (especiallyour spiritual sense) in gaining its truths. Language directed to the intellect alone is not enough. Particularly in its poetry, the Book of Mormon, in the words of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, "brings the whole soul of man into activity." [^16] With content often determining form and form revealing content, profound concerns are presented in ways that reach us deeply.

As literature, or belles lettres, the Book of Mormon hasthat medium's advantages, which include memorability, ability to capture a reader's attention, power to influence feelings or emotions, and capacity to do justice to the complexity of life. [^17] The Book of Mormon isa work of immediacy that, as significant literature does,shows as well astells.

Narrations, sermons, letters, prophecies, and dialogues are presented as living voices. Nephi involvesme in his world and allows me to identify with him when he begins his narration with "I, Nephi." Mormon callson me to recognize the point of his narrations with expressions such as "and thuswe see." And as though time has collapsed, Moroni forthrightlydeclares, "I speak unto you as if ye were present, . . . and I knowyour doing" ( Morm. 8:35 ). [^18]

Because so many discourses and dialogues are presented directly in the Book of Mormon, distances break down and time dissolves. I become an implied participant with Ammon in the court of Lamoni; I join the crowd listening to Alma respondto Korihor with pure testimony and the power of God; and, especially, I am there when the Savior descends to the gathered Nephites and Lamanites at Bountiful. With much direct quotation, Jesus Christ speaks to me in his own voice. "Another Testament of Jesus Christ" is not onlyabout Christ butby him.

Some might think that because Nephi affirmsthe plainness of his writing (see,for example, 2 Ne. 25:7 ;33:6), it is unliterary. Quite the contrary. Nephi usespoetic and rhetorical rhythms and structures with powerful effectiveness. By the word "plain" he means "easy to understand" ( 1 Ne. 14:23 ;16:29)—and, indeed, impossible to be misunderstood ( 2 Ne. 25:7 ,28). Perhaps it is Nephi's claim to such a style, however, that has kept many from thinking about the book in literary terms. As Nibley has commented, it contains none of the "fantastic imagery, the romantic descriptions, and the unfailing exaggerations that everyone expected in the literature of [Joseph Smith's]time." [^19]

The Book of Mormon hasa power of effectiveness that paradoxically is hidden because it is so obvious—much as Edgar Allan Poe's purloined letter was hidden in plain sight and thus overlooked. The expressions and rhythms of the Book of Mormon areall intended—if not always consciously by writers such as Nephi andMoroni, at least by the primary author of the book. Indeed, I become more and more convinced that every sentence counts in the Book of Mormon.

Style and Tone

The writers of the Book of Mormon showan intense concern for style and tone—for the way they communicate and for their relationship to the matter communicated and to their audience. Like the prophet Alma, each writer desires to be able to "speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth," yet realizes that "I am a man, and do sin in my wish. . . . I do not glory of myself, but I glory in that which the Lord hath commanded me" ( Alma 29:1 ,3 , Alma'stone is one of humility. Other writers also are humble and feel inadequate in writing. That is especially true of the last writer, Moroni: "If there are faults they are the mistakes of men," Moroni writesin the title page; "wherefore, condemn not the things of God." [^20] He thus appeals directly to his reader to be accepting of his imperfections. In a prayer he laments: "Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our weakness in writing. . . . Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words" ( Ether 12:23 ,25). The Lord responds, "My grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness" ( Ether 12:26 ).

Moroni's words to a future audience, however, are the opposite of what we might consider weak: In cadences of ascending power he boldly declares that

the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled. . . . O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ? . . . And now, behold, who can stand against the works of the Lord? Who can deny his sayings? Who will rise up against the almighty power of the Lord? Who will despise the works of the Lord? Who will despise the children of Christ? Behold, all ye who are despisers of the works of the Lord, for ye shall wonder and perish. ( Morm. 8:22 ,38;9:26)

Although Moroni earlierhas lamented his limitations in writing, in his last words he beautifully integrates expressions of Isaiah:

And awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled. Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God. And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot. ( Moro. 10:31-33 ; compare Isa. 52:1 ;54:2)

A model for communication is Jesus, who, Moroni reports"told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth another in mine own language, concerning these things; and only a few have I written, because of my weakness in writing" ( Ether 12:39-40 ). Two concepts in this report are repeated throughout the Book of Mormon: plain speech and inability to write about some things. "I have spoken plainly unto you," Nephi says"that ye cannot misunderstand"; "my soul delighteth in plainness," he continues, "for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men" ( 2 Ne. 25:28 ;31:3). Yet Nephi alsodelights in the words of Isaiah, which "are not plain unto you," although "they are plain unto all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy" ( 2 Ne. 25:4 ). In the Book of Mormon wehave both the plain and the veiled language, and we learn about each from the other.

Mormon's inability to write about certain things often has to do with confinement of space; in other instances, though, Mormon iseither forbidden to write or the words are so exalted that man cannot speak or write them. As an example of the latter, in a scene in which a mob is intent on killing two prophets named Nephi andLehi, the piercing voice of God twice calls on the people to repent. The third time, the voice "did speak unto them marvelous words which cannot be uttered by man" ( Hel. 5:33 ).

This event prefigures the scene not long afterward in which a multitude visited by the resurrected Jesus twice hear a voice from heaven but do not understand it; nevertheless, "notwithstanding it being a small voice it did pierce them that did hear to the center, insomuch that there was no part of their frame that it did not cause to quake; yea, it did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn" ( 3 Ne. 11:3 ). The third time they hear the voice, it says simply yet profoundly, "Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him" ( 3 Ne. 11:7 ). Here at the meeting point between the mortal and divine we feel the intense power both of the word and of divine communication beyond speech. The people do hear Jesus, and later in responding to his prayers, they have an experience that transcends mortal language: "And their hearts were open and they did understand in their hearts the words which he prayed. Nevertheless, so great and marvelous were the words which he prayed that they cannot be written, neither can they be uttered by man" ( 3 Ne. 19:33-34 ).

The experiences of the Nephites with the resurrected Savior show the extreme possibilities and limitations of communication. Christ expounded unto the multitude all things, "both great and small," and "even babes did open their mouths and utter marvelous things" ( 3 Ne. 26:1 ,16). Yet the things the babes said "were forbidden that there should not any man write them" ( 3 Ne. 26:16 ) thosepeople who were filled with the Holy Ghost "saw and heard unspeakable things, which are not lawful to be written" ( 3 Ne. 26:18 ) andas he has been commanded, Mormon recordsonly "a lesser part of the things which [theSavior] taught the people" ( 3 Ne. 26:8 ).

The styles Mormon andother narrators employ range widely, from the simple and unadorned to the lofty and poetic. [^21] The tones range from humblest pleading to denunciation: "Behold, mine arm of mercy is extended towards you, and whosoever will come, him will I receive," Jesus says; "O ye wicked and perverse and stiffnecked people," Moroni declares"why have ye built up churches unto yourselves to get gain?" ( 3 Ne. 9:14 ; Morm. 8:33 ). These styles and tones will be of interest in the chapters that follow as we read and analyze the integrated form and content of such pieces as the epigrammatic poetry of Lehi, the intricate psalm ofNephi, the rhetorically persuasive sermons of Jacob, the chiastic speech of King Benjamin, the dramatic encounter between Alma andKorihor, the lament of Mormon, and the parting testimony of Moroni.

Purposes of the Book of Mormon

Literary elements in the Book of Mormon suchas form, word choice, imagery, poetry, and narrative are part of the God-designed nature of the book to develop the primary purposes set out in the title page. The first of these purposes is to show the Lamanites, identified as a remnant of the house of Israel, the "great things the Lord hath done for their fathers" (especially Nephi andLehi) and to help them "know the covenants of the Lord," which assure them "that they are not cast off forever." Second, the book is designed to convince "the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations." Of course, what is true for one of the three audiences of the Book of Mormon canbe applied to another.

The title page can be considered a table of contents for the Book of Mormon. Its major ideas are repeated elsewhere in Nephi's writings as well as in those of Mormon andMoroni, and those ideas give force to the major concerns of the book. For example, in extended comments about himself and his role, Mormon saysthat his work helps fulfill the prayers of the holy ones that the gospel would come in the latter days to the Lamanites. Mormon acknowledgesthe great thing the Lord has done in delivering Lehi and his family ("hebrought our fathers out of the land of Jerusalem") and connects it with the deliverance of souls ("hehath given me and my people so much knowledge unto the salvation of our souls" [3 Ne. 5:20]God shall "bring a remnant of the seed of Joseph [present-day Lamanites] to the knowledge of the Lord their God"; he shall restore to them "the knowledge of the covenant that he hath covenanted with them" ( 3 Ne. 5:23 ,25). And all the house of Jacob shall"know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God" ( 3 Ne. 5:26 ).

In the chapters that follow, we will discover ways in which the purposes of the Book of Mormon asgenerally stated in the title page are shown forth by various literary elements. [^22] They correspond with the main genres literary critic Leland Ryken finds in the Bible: "narrative or story, poetry (especiallylyric poetry), proverb, and visionary writing (includingboth prophecy and apocalypse). . . . The letters of the New Testament frequently become literary because of their artistic and poetic style." [^23]

Although several aspects of literature are involved in each purpose set forth in the title page, I will emphasize one or two per chapter. Thus, in Chapter 2 the focus is on narrators of the book and on selected narratives. These narratives "show unto the remnant of the House of Israel" the great things done for their fathers—heroic persons such as Nephi, Jacob, Ammon, and Alma.

The next chapter connects epic elements in the Book of Mormon thatshow "what great things the Lord hath done." The major thousand-year story of the origin, development, and eventual destruction of the Nephite civilization is in its very nature an epic. Contained within this Nephite epic is the story of the Jaredites, which, Nibley persuasively argues, comes right out of an epic milieu. [^24] In the largest sense, the Book of Mormon mayalso be considered as having the timelessness, sweep of significance, and scope of meaning of cosmic drama.

Chapter 4, "By the Spirit of Prophecy," emphasizes the many instances of Hebraic-like poetry in the Book of Mormon. In it I will point out how a claim David Noel Freedman makes for the Bible often holds for the Book of Mormon aswell. Freedman says that "the speeches of angels and other inspired persons are in the form of poetry." [^25] The beautiful and sometimes complex poetry of the Book of Mormon isconcealed by the English translation's prose format. In passages that I have placed in verse form to reveal their poetry, the manner in which something is said often contains, suggests, and develops its meaning.

The following chapter, "Know the Covenants of the Lord," dwells on sermons. These sermons can be considered belles lettres if they reveal that careful and artistic attention has been paid to form as well as content. Several of the ten sermons we will look at, which often contain poetry and word-play, lend themselves well to rhetorical analysis of the type classics professor George Kennedy applies to the Bible inNew Testament Interpretation through Rhetorical Criticism. [^26] In comparing sermons, we will find that strikingly different approaches are taken with different audiences.

Chapter 6 treats the "fathers" mentioned in the title page of the Book of Mormon asthey present themselves in letters and autobiography. We will examine eight letters for contrasting tones and personalities. As with the sermons, I analyze letters for the nature and effectiveness of the message they send. With the Moroni-Ammoron and Moroni-Pahoran correspondence, we will have particular interest in the way the writers respond to each other. Autobiography is connected with letters in revealing personalities. It figures prominently in the book, with Nephi, Enos, Mormon, and others speaking directly about their own experiences.

Chapter 7 picks up on the phrase "not cast off forever" to develop the implications of imagery in the Book of Mormon. A literary approach considers the kinds of images in the Book of Mormon andtheir relationships and takes the view that the book's truths are approached vitally and vibrantlythrough the imagery. Of principal interest is the polarity in images illustrating the prophet Lehi's understanding that "it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" ( 2 Ne. 2:11 ). Our study of imagery includes direct imagery as well as figurative devices such as simile and metaphor, and it expands to consider such matters as symbolism and archetypal imagery.

Chapter 8, "That Jesus Is the Christ," deals mainly with typology. As with the Old Testament, the Book of Mormon isfilled with types and shadows. Moreover, Book of Mormon prophetsmake conscious and overt reference to them—especially Abinadi in teaching that all the performances and ordinances of the law of Moses "weretypes of things to come" ( Mosiah 13:31 ). This chapter considers persons, categories of persons, objects or events, and the Book of Mormon itselfas types.

The concluding chapter, "At the Judgment-Seat of Christ," develops the largest implications of a literary approach to the Book of Mormon. Here we will look at the whole book in terms of liminal (threshold)persons, places, and actions, and will review the Book of Mormon asprophecy. Designed for our day, the book points through time to timelessness, through this world to the next, culminating in the last judgment.

Notes-Chapter 1

---
Notas:
[^1] For a fruitful lead for further exploration of Book of Mormon narrativessee Edgar C. Snow Jr., "Narrative Criticism and the Book of Mormon,"Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 4, no. 2 (1995): 93-106.
[^2] Grant R. Hardy, "Mormon as Editor," inRediscovering the Book of Mormon, ed. John L.Sorenson and Melvin J. Thorne (SaltLake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 22.
[^3] Repetition is also an important characteristic of certain biblical narratives. For example, James S.Ackerman comments on "the unusual amount of doubling in the Joseph story: three sets of dreams occur in pairs-by Joseph, by his fellow prisoners, and by Pharaoh. Joseph is twice confined-in the pit and in prison. The brothers make two trips to Egypt for grain, have two audiences with Joseph on each occasion, twice find money in their grain bags, make two attempts to gain Jacob's permission to send Benjamin to Egypt, and finally receive two invitations to settle in Egypt." And so on. "Joseph, Judah, and Jacob," inLiterary Interpretations of Biblical Narratives, ed. Kenneth R. R. Gros Louis (Nashville:Abingdon Press, 1982), 2:85.
[^4] The apostle John taughtthis law in the Old World when he said: "For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one" ( 1 Jn. 5:7-8 ).
[^5] Robert Alter,The Art of Biblical Narrative ((NewYork: Basic Books, 1981), 181.
[^6] Ibid., 180-81.
[^7] Ibid., 181.
[^8] Ibid., 47-62, 181.
[^9] Susan Taber analyzes this comparison in her essay, "Mormon's Literary Technique," finding that the "structure of the book of Mosiah, and to some extent the first half of Alma, is parallelism, contrasting and reinforcing" ( Mormon LettersAnnual [[SaltLake City: Association for Mormon Letters1983], 118). In "Mosiah: The Complex Symbolism and the Symbolic Complex of Kingship in the Book of Mormon" (Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 2, no. 1 [1993]), Gordon C. Thomasson also makes the point that the Book of Mosiah isa study in contrasts between good and bad kings.
[^10] Leland Ryken,How to Read the Bible as Literature ((GrandRapids, Mich.: Academie Books, 1984), 14.
[^11] Hugh Nibley,Since Cumorah ((SaltLake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1988), 380.
[^12] Chauncey C. Riddle, "Korihor," inThe Book of Mormon: It Begins with a Family ((SaltLake City: Deseret Book, 1983), 135-37.
[^13] These connections are noted inBook of Mormon CriticalText: A Tool for Scholarly Reference, vol. 2 (Provo, Utah: FARMS, 1986).
[^14] For perceptive and thorough treatments of the Exodus patternin the Book of Mormon, see George S. Tate, "The Typology of the Exodus Patternin the Book of Mormon," inLiterature of Belief: Sacred Scripture and Religious Experience, ed. Neal E. Lambert (Provo,Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1981), 245-62, and S. Kent Brown, "The Exodus Patternin the Book of Mormon,"Brigham Young University Studies 30, no. 3 (1990): 111-42.
[^15] See also 1 Ne. 2:20-21 ; 2 Ne. 1:9-21 ;4:4; Enos 1:10 ; Jarom 1:9-10 ; Omni 1:6-10 ; Alma 9:13-10 ;36:1;37:13;48:25;50:20; 3 Ne. 5:22 ; 4 Ne. 1:18 ; and Ether 2:7-10.
[^16] Samuel TaylorColeridge,Biographia Literaria,inEnglish Romantic Poetry and Prose, 427.
[^17] Leland Ryken finds these characteristics in biblical literature inHow to Read the Bible as Literature ((GrandRapids, Mich.: Academie Books, 1984), 23.
[^18] Here, as with all italicized Book of Mormon wordsand phrases quoted in this book, the italics have been added.
[^19] Nibley,Prophetic Book of Mormon, 68.
[^20] Joseph Smith attributed the writing of the title page to Moroni: "I wish to mention here that the title-page of the Book of Mormon isa literal translation, taken from the very last leaf, on the left hand side of the collection or book of plates, which contained the record which has been translated, the language of the whole running the same as all Hebrew writing in general" (Joseph Smith,History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev. Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1932-51], 1:71).
[^21] Robert K. Thomas examines varying styles in his 1947 Reed College thesis. Glade L. Burgon provides an extensive treatment of style in his 1958 Brigham Young University M.A. thesis, "An Analysis of Style Variations in the Book of Mormon." Regarding the writings of Moroni, he concludes that they are "made beautiful and impressive by the abundance of well formed synthetical and antithetical parallelisms" (43).
[^22] The types, or genres, dealt with in this book are ones more narrowly considered under belletristic literature. A broader list of genres in the Book of Mormon isprovided by Sidney B. Sperry in his pioneering work,Book of Mormon Compendium (SaltLake City: Bookcraft, 1970), which was an expansion of his earlier workOur Book of Mormon (SaltLake City: Bookcraft, 1947). Much ofOur Book of Mormon has been reprinted in a special issue ofJournal of Book of Mormon Studies4, no. 1 (1995). Sperry gives the following literary types: allegory, didactic exposition, editorial reflection or commentary, epistle, exhortation, genealogy, gospel, historical narrative, hortatory discourse, lamentation, memoir, oratory, patriarchal admonition, patriarchal blessing, prayer, prophecy of doom, prophetic dialogue, prophetic discourse, prophetic narrative, prophetic prediction, psalm, religious teaching, revelation, sermon, song of praise, symbolic prophecy, and war epistle. Additional types are aphorism, apocalyptic writing, judgment, and farewell speech.
[^23] Leland Ryken,Words of Delight: A Literary Introduction to the Bible ((GrandRapids, Mich.: Baker, 1987), 16.
[^24] Hugh Nibley,The World and the Prophets ((SaltLake City: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1987), 214.
[^25] David Noel Freedman, "Pottery, Poetry, and Prophecy: An Essay on Biblical Poetry," inThe Bible in Its Literary Milieu, ed. John R.Maier and Vincent L. Tollers (GrandRapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1979), 95.
[^26] George A. Kennedy,New Testament Interpretation through Rhetorical Criticism (ChapelHill: University of North Carolina Press, 1984).
