President Boyd K. Packer

Acting President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

Address to CES Religious Educators

6 February 2004

Salt Lake Tabernacle

World War II stopped as suddenly as it had begun But we are here. I say we, for my wife is with me. five years earlier. All at once, I had something I was We do not know how many years are allotted us. Not a not sure I would have. I had a future. It was a strange great number, I would think. But we have sure feeling. What does one do with a future? testimonies of the Father and the Son and the

I was on Ie Shima, a tiny speck of an island off the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost. northwest coast of Okinawa. A few days earlier the We know also that the being from the unseen world island had been destroyed by a typhoon of such who confronted the boy Joseph in the Sacred Grove is ferocious power that large ships went down and planes always near, for as Peter said, “Be sober, be vigilant; were blown off the island. The storm was passed, and because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, the war was over, and I had a future.

walketh about, seeking whom he may devour” (1 Peter

One calm, clear, moonlit night, I sat alone on a cliff 5:8).Now, by moral and social and political and even high above the beach. Only a few days before, the intellectual standards, we seem to be losing. But ocean, so calm now, sent immense waves crashing mankind also knows that in the final windup scene over the top of that cliff. I sat for hours pondering and Satan cannot win. praying. I decided what to do with my future. I would

be a teacher.

There are over forty thousand of you here in this

I had a high school diploma earned with very meeting. Measured against the need, that really is not a average grades. I had a burning witness of the restored great number. But I remember hearing Sir Winston gospel of Jesus Christ. I had some knowledge of the Churchill say in the darkest hours of World War II, scriptures from hours and days and weeks and months speaking of a handful of Royal Air Force pilots facing of study. I did not know what I would teach. I could almost insurmountable odds, “Never in the field of

human conflict was so much owed by so many to so

learn practical and secular subjects.

I struggled through college. That was shortened by few.”1

a year because of credits in aeronautics granted for In October of 1983, I returned from South America service as an Air Force pilot. I had a college degree in and left almost immediately for London to join Elder education, and of consummate importance, I had a Neal A. Maxwell at the first regional conference as a

substitute for one of the First Presidency. This first

wife and two little boys.

Suddenly I was a seminary teacher hired midyear to conference was something of an experiment. replace John P. Lillywhite, who was called out of the We met in the Hyde Park Chapel for a four-hour classroom to preside over the Netherlands Mission. I priesthood meeting. Elder Maxwell spoke first,

quoting King Benjamin, “Brethren, we did not come

knew what to do with my future.

I had no idea that I would be here now speaking to here to trifle with words” (see Mosiah 2:9). What he said teachers. I was content then, and I would be content next changed my life: “We come to you today in our now, to be a classroom teacher. And my wife would be true identity as Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ.”

Suddenly my body was filled with warmth and

content to join me. Knowing what I know now, I do not expect in the light. The weariness of travel was replaced by field of destiny to be rewarded for my present calling confidence and confirmation. What we were doing above those of you I have known who wore out your was approved of the Lord. lives one day at a time teaching in the classroom. I have never forgotten that moment, much like

moments of inspiration each of you has experienced. Such moments confirm that the restored gospel of knocked down the walls of Jericho?” That opened Jesus Christ is true.

something of a debate.

Finally the stake president said, “Oh, what

Book of Memory

difference does it make who knocked down the walls?

As I prepared to meet you here tonight, I had great Just get them put back up! We’ll pay for it out of stake difficulty in keeping my book of memory closed. funds.”

I remember tall, smiling J. Wiley Sessions, who In England I attended a sacrament meeting. The opened the first institute of religion at Moscow, Idaho. seminary teacher, speaking on the subject of the

Thomas J. Yates, an engineer at a power plant in scriptures, said, “I will now turn to Mosiah chapter 3 the mountains east of Salt Lake City, rode a horse in the Doctrine and Covenants.” No one laughed. I down the canyon each day to teach at the first knew we still had work to do.

released-time seminary, Granite. I did not know When I first taught seminary, we had three

him. Brother Yates, but I remember those who replaced textbooks—one each for Old Testament, New

Testament, and Church history. In Brigham City we

Abel S. Rich, an agriculture teacher, was hired to added a class in the Book of Mormon. go across the street from the high school in Brigham The Old Testament textbook was out of print and City to an adobe home to open the second released- very hard to find. When the monthly faculty group time seminary. He was serving as principal when Elder meeting was held in our building, we hid our A. Theodore Tuttle and I taught there together. textbooks. If we did not, these precious books would

Brother Tuttle had been a lieutenant in the Marines. disappear. At Iwo Jima he returned to the ship to get a large flag. We had a record player that played fourteen-inch On shore he handed it to a runner who took it to the Bible stories. We did not have a projector in the class. top of Mount Sirabachi and on to the pages of history.

Before Brother Tuttle and I were called as General Curriculum

Authorities, we taught together in the same building Now you have course outlines, visual aids, where I had attended seminary and then worked equipment, and buildings. All are superior to anything together as supervisors of seminaries and institutes of before available.

Berrett. religion. They were administered by William E. Your curriculum is the same—the scriptures: the

Old Testament, the New Testament, the Book of

Brother Berrett had opened the seminary in the Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Uintah Basin. During the summer he walked from Great Price. Other sources come from the living town to town recruiting students for his class. Their Prophets and Apostles. We are told in the revelation, first child was born and buried there. Brother and when inspired by the Holy Ghost, their words take on Sister Berrett rode to the cemetery in the backseat of a the stature of scripture (see D&C 1:38).

he had built. car. On his lap was the little wooden, unpainted casket Be on Alert

I knew Elijah Hicken, who was sent to the Big Now, again from my book of memories: Horn Basin in Wyoming to open the seminary. He was In the early 1930s, there grew up in some of the not welcomed by a very rough crowd. A group institutes a so-called superior scholarship. Secular threatened his life. The patriarch came with a blessing approval, they thought, would bring more acceptance and a promise that his life would be protected. On the from those with whom they associated at the strength of that blessing, Brother Hicken took off the universities.

six-shooter he had worn to class each day. This attitude infected a number in the seminaries.

In the 1950s we established stake boards of Some work actually went forward to produce a education. The story was told, quite possibly true, that curriculum focused on contemporary social values one seminary teacher had a little difficulty convincing rather than revealed doctrine and scripture.

the stake leaders of the need to study the scriptures. Several of the teachers went to obtain advanced

He decided to give them a quiz to test their degrees under eminent Bible scholars. They sought scriptural knowledge. The first question was, “Who learning “out of the best books” (see D&C 88:118; 109:7, 14), but with too little faith. They came back having won chicken pox or measles or mumps, the county health their degrees but having lost touch with, and perhaps officer would visit the home and tack on the porch or interest in, the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. put in the window a quarantine sign to warn everyone

This pulling at the moorings by some teachers of to stay away. In a large family such as ours, those religion did not go unnoticed in the councils of the childhood diseases would visit the home by relay, one Church. The Brethren became concerned. In 1938 all child getting it from another, so the sign might stay up seminary and institute personnel were assembled for for many weeks. summer school at Aspen Grove.

When I was in junior high school in a health class,

President J. Reuben Clark Jr., speaking for the First the teacher read an article. A mother learned that the Presidency, delivered a monumental address, “The neighbor children had chicken pox. She faced the Charted Course of the Church in Education.” 2 probability that her children would have it as well, much an anchor today as it was the day that it was It is as perhaps one at a time. She determined to get it all over given. Surely you have read and do reread that charter. with at once. Now tonight as your teacher, I assign you to read it So she sent her children to the neighbor’s to play again. That is your homework.

with their children to let them be exposed, and then be

I knew virtually all of those men who drifted off done with it. Imagine her horror when the doctor course. They found themselves in conflict with the finally came and announced that it was not chicken simple things of the gospel. Some of them left and pox the children had; it was smallpox.

went on to prominent careers in secular education “Teach them the Word of God” where they felt more comfortable. One by one they

found their way outside Church activity and a few of Now, I close the book of memories and come to them outside the Church. With each went a following here and now. of students—a terrible price to pay.

I come to you as did Jacob when he taught in the

Over the years I have watched. Their children and temple, “having first obtained mine errand from the grandchildren and great-grandchildren are not Lord” (Jacob 1:17). Jacob and his brother Joseph had been numbered among the faithful in the Church. consecrated priests and teachers over the people.

That same thing happened again. In 1954 the “And [they] did magnify [their] office unto the seminary and institute teachers were called to a Lord, taking upon [themselves] the responsibility, summer school at Brigham Young University. Elder answering the sins of the people upon [their] own Harold B. Lee of the Quorum of the Twelve was our heads if [they] did not teach them the word of God teacher. For two hours a day, five days a week for five with all diligence” (Jacob 1:19). weeks, Elder Lee and others of the Twelve taught us. The world and the Christian churches have President J. Reuben Clark Jr. spoke to us twice. That discarded the Old Testament, but it is there we find the pulled us back on course.

nuggets of doctrine—such words as Aaronic,

Happily, though, most of those who went away to Melchizedek, priesthood, patriarch, Jehovah, study returned magnified by their experience and ordinance, covenants, and so many more. They form armed with advanced degrees. They returned firm in essential links in our understanding of the plan of their knowledge that a man can be in the world but not redemption. of the world (see John 17:14–19).

From the New Testament the students learn the life

Be careful! Without watch care such things can and and teachings of the Master. have happened again. Each of you must be on alert. If Teach your students of the Apostasy and the you feel drawn to others who regard intellectual Restoration of the priesthood, of Joseph Smith and the achievement to be more important than the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-fundamental doctrines, or who expose their students to day Saints, by the Lord’s own declaration, “the only the so-called realities of life, back away. true and living church upon the face of the whole

earth” (D&C 1:30).

In Harm’s Way When I was a boy, childhood diseases appeared Immerse them in the truths of the Book of regularly in every community. When someone had Mormon. That will lead them to the test and to the promise that is there, and then they will be armed with Surely you can see what the adversary is about. the protective influence of the truth.

The first line of defense, the home, is crumbling.

Each individual can then “ask God, the Eternal The very purpose for the Restoration centers on the Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not sealing authority, the temple ordinances, baptism for true,” as the Book of Mormon invites them to do. the dead, eternal marriage, eternal increase—centers Teach them to ask “with a sincere heart, with real on the family!

intent, having faith in Christ, [and God] will manifest The Lord placed the responsibility upon parents

Ghost. the truth of it unto [them], by the power of the Holy first, saying: “Inasmuch as parents have children in

Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that

“And by the power of the Holy Ghost [they] may teach them not to understand the doctrine of know the truth of all things” (Moroni 10:4–5). repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God,

With an individual testimony, they will be safe in and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the

laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be

the world.

upon the heads of the parents. . . .

Much Depends on You

“And they shall also teach their children to pray,

The world is spiraling downward at an ever- and to walk uprightly before the Lord” (D&C 68:25, 28).

get better. quickening pace. I am sorry to tell you that it will not There is “the shield of faith wherewith” the Lord

said “ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of

It is my purpose to charge each of you as teachers the wicked” (D&C 27:17).

with the responsibility—to put you on alert. These are The Armor Is Fitted at Home days of great spiritual danger for our youth.

This shield of faith is handmade in a cottage

Morally Mixed-up World

industry. What is most worth doing ideally is done at

I know of nothing in the history of the Church or in home. It can be polished in the classroom, but it is the history of the world to compare with our present fabricated and fitted in the home, handcrafted to each circumstances. Nothing happened in Sodom and individual.

Gomorrah which exceeds in wickedness and depravity Many do not have support in the family. When that that which surrounds us now.

shield is not provided at home, we must, and we can,

Words of profanity, vulgarity, and blasphemy are build it. You and the leaders and teachers then become heard everywhere. Unspeakable wickedness and the first line of defense.

perversion were once hidden in dark places; now they The Prophets Have Warned are in the open, even accorded legal protection.

At Sodom and Gomorrah these things were We are now exactly where the prophets warned we localized. Now they are spread across the world, and would be. they are among us.

In preparation for what is coming, the Lord warned,

I need not—I will not—identify each evil that “In consequence of evils and designs which do and threatens our youth. It is difficult for man to get away will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last

days, I have warned you, and forewarn you, by giving

from it.

unto you this word of wisdom by revelation” (D&C 89:4).

The First Line of Defense

Moroni spoke to us: “O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in

You, with the leaders and teachers in the priesthood God that these things should be shown unto you. . . . and auxiliaries, are not the first line of defense. The “Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye family holds that line. Satan uses every intrigue to shall see these things come among you that ye shall disrupt the family.

awake to a sense of your awful situation” (Ether

The sacred relationship between man and woman, 8:23–24).

husband and wife, through which mortal bodies are Paul prophesied, “In the last days perilous times conceived and life is passed to the next generation, is shall come” (2 Timothy 3:1), then word by word and being showered with filth.

phrase by phrase, described exactly what our present

conditions are now. He spoke of:

“Blasphemers, disobedient to parents, . . . unholy, tell you all things what ye should do” (2 Nephi 32:3;

“Without natural affection, . . . incontinent, . . . emphasis added).

despisers of those that are good, Narrow Way

God; . . . “. . . lovers of pleasures more than lovers of It is a very narrow and straight path laid out for you

teachers.

“Ever learning, and never able to come to the “Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which

3:2–4, 7). knowledge of the truth,” and other things (2 Timothy leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it” (Matthew

7:14).

Could he have described our plight more Your path as teachers may be broadened to include accurately? Read the prophecy very carefully. some worthy activities and cultural events. Activities

are like spices and desserts that flavor a balanced meal.

The Power of Scriptures

Paul prophesied, also, that things will not get These must always be of the standard to reflect the better. “Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and gospel. Do not leave out the nourishing nutrients that worse, deceiving, and being deceived” build the spirit; it is not the entertainment that protects

(2 Timothy 3:13). them.

Fortunately, he told us what to do about it: “But The teaching of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ continue thou in the things which thou hast learned must not be regarded as just one among your offerings.

learned them; and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast It is more important than any or all of the activities put

together. You may provide them activities, but you

“And that from a child thou hast known the holy must not leave the teaching undone.

scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto The auxiliaries have been organized and have the salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. responsibility for most of the activities. Teach your

“All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is students to be faithful and active in the wards and profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for branches and stakes, to have a deep regard for the instruction in righteousness” (2 Timothy 3:14–16). priesthood leaders called to preside over them.

In His supernal prayer for the Apostles, the Lord I repeat, the way is straight and narrow. You must said, “I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of not wander from it.

evil. the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the Have Faith—Courage

“They are not of the world, even as I am not of the When our youth feel surrounded and outnumbered,

remember what Elisha told his servant when he saw

world.

“Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth” that “an host compassed the city both with horses and

chariots.” The servant was frightened and said, “Alas,

(John 17:15–17).

my master! how shall we do?

A World Spiritually Diseased “[Elisha] answered, Fear not: for they that be with

Spiritual diseases of epidemic proportion sweep us are more than they that be with them.

over the world. We are not able to curb them. But we “And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, can prevent our youth from being infected by them. open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened

Knowledge and a testimony of the restored gospel the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, of Jesus Christ are like a vaccine. We can inoculate the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire” them.

(2 Kings 6:15–17).

Inoculate: In—“to be within” and oculate You are not responsible to cure the world’s “eye to see.” We place an eye within them—the means environment. You can, with parents and priesthood

and auxiliary leaders and teachers, send young Latter-

unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost.

Nephi told us that “angels speak by the power of day Saints out as leaven into the world, spiritually the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of nourished, immunized to the influences of evil. Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, feast upon the “The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will words, light and truth.

“Light and truth forsake that evil one. . . . We Will Not Fail

“[You are] commanded . . . to bring up your We will not fail!

children in light and truth” (D&C 93:36–37, 40). “How long can rolling waters remain impure?

A Defense and a Refuge What power shall stay the heavens? As well might

“The gathering together upon the land of Zion,” the man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri Lord said, “and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints”

(D&C 121:33).

earth” (D&C 115:6).

It has been fifty-nine years since I sat on that cliff

They need not fear. We need not fear. Fear is the on that tiny speck of an island in the Pacific Ocean and opposite of faith.

decided to be a teacher. I knew then that a teacher

I have been in the councils of the Church and seen would not be rewarded with wealth; the reward is many things. I have seen disappointment and shock more lasting. and concern. Never once have I seen any fear. During those years, whole nations have been born

Our youth can look forward with hope for a happy and died as the evil one has worked his will. I have life. They shall marry and raise families in the Church seen the borders of Zion enlarged to cover the whole and teach their little ones what you have taught them. earth (see D&C 82:14; 107:74). They, in turn, will teach their children and their I do not know now any more surely that Jesus is the grandchildren.

Christ, the Son of God, the Only Begotten of the

Isaiah and Micah prophesied: “It shall come to pass Father, than I did then as a soldier boy sitting on the in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord’s house cliff on that tiny speck of an island. There is one shall be established in the top of the mountains, and difference—now I know the Lord. shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall I bear witness of Him and invoke His blessings flow unto it.

upon you who teach, as fathers and mothers, as

“And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and grandfathers and grandmothers, upon your families, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house upon your classes, upon your work. I bless you that of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, His power and inspiration will follow you in such a and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go way that those who come within your influence will forth the law, and the word of the Lord from have that protective testimony born within them. I

invoke this blessing upon you as a servant of the Lord

Jerusalem” (Isaiah 2:2–3; see also Micah 4:1–2).

In our day the house of the Lord has and in the name of Jesus Christ, amen. been

do established in the tops of the mountains, and nations Notes

flow unto it. The word of the Lord—the Old and 1. Extract from speech by Winston Churchill,

New Testaments—has gone forth from Jerusalem. 20 August 1940 (Churchill Papers). Now the law goes forth from Zion. And you are 2. See The Charted Course of the Church in teachers of the law.

Education, rev. ed. (pamphlet, 1994); item 32709.
