Vaughn J. Featherstone, Commitment ( 1982)

1 The Go-Getter

Commitment is a quality that combines determination with an intelligent goal. It is a great concentration or focus on something that requires labor to acquire or to reach. Of course, there is such a thing as weak commitment. That isn't what I am talking about. In fact, somehow to me, weak and commitment are not compatible words. By its very nature, commitment is a word that exudes strength. But it is not a declaration only: It has to include action. Thus, Joshua made the declaration of commitment to Jehovah in these words:

Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord.

And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. [Actually, the Hebrew text says Jehovah, not the Lord.] (Joshua 24:14-15.)

But when we look for a great commitment to Jehovah, we often turn to the young shepherd David, who went to the battle-frontwith his family's rations for the sons of Jesse who were serving in the army of Saul. To his astonishment he found that the Israelite host was stymied by a lone Philistine, a huge one, true; but, nevertheless, a mortal man. Not only that, but this Goliath was a heathen whose heart had not been broken and encircled by the bands of God's love. And his body did not carry the mark of the covenant. He was outside of the protection that David presumed all Israel enjoyed. In the purity and innocence of youth he had chosen whom he would serve. And it was not the gods of the Amorites nor of the Philistines. It was the Almighty who would never fail though all others may flee. No Goliath was a match for one Israelite and this God to whom David was committed in his youth with all his heart and all his mind.

So David shamed all Israel by marching out alone to face what everyone else presumed was certain death. His armor was the virtue bestowed by grace. His weapon was single-minded commitment. And his strength and skill were the strength and skill of Jehovah, who guided the stone that slew Goliath.

But David had prepared himself. His mind was schooled by the things he believed and refused to deny. His arm was strengthened by wielding the staff and the sling constantly in the protection of the family flocks. And his courage was steeled by facing and conquering the lion and the bear in hand to claw combat. Preparation is a part of commitment, too.

So commitment is a path. The first step is to say or write the commitment. May it be a noble one. The second is to prepare, including, perhaps, listing the obstacles that may turn you aside so that you can avoid them or prepare to climb over them. The third step is the action part, the time when you slay the "Goliath," or the dragon.

It will be hard to live a committed life if we are constantly aware of all the burdens of a lifetime, past and future. Because of the Atonement, we can drop the past and go forward step by step. Someone has said that "life by the inch is a cinch, but by the yard it is hard." It isn't the dramatic leaps that bring us up tothe summit of some Everest. It is the plodding, the forever putting of one foot in front of the other in the right direction that gradually conquers the high mountain. Also, one must not make the mistake of thinking he must be a David or she must be a Joan of Arc. Usually the greater the planning, the smaller the heroics. But we do have to have our minds made up not to shirk work and to face danger if necessary in the fulfillment of out commitments. No matter how well we plan, something unexpected will come along that will test our commitment. In such cases the truly committed will keep going or get going while the uncommitted will sit down and hope to find an easier path.

In 1921 Peter B. Kyne wrote The Go-Getter, a Story That Tells You How to Be One. This book tells how Mr. Ricks, the owner of a lumber and logging company, was having a problem with his Shanghai office. His supervisor's explanation was that he was surrounded by men who were too young for responsibility. In addition, three managers had "gone rotten." The company would be in trouble if things persisted as they were. About this time a crippled veteran by the name of William E. Peck requested an interview for employment.

"Please give me a job. I don't care a hoot what it is, provided I can do it. If I can do it, I will do it better than it has ever beer done before. If I can't do it, I will quit and save you the embarrassment of firing me."

The old man was impressed and, going over the heads of all the executives and supervisors, hired William E. Peck. Bill was warned to produce and not get out of line. "The first time you tip a foul, you'll be warned. The second time, you'll get a month lay-off to think about it. The third time you will be out for keeps."

Peck was given the task of selling a lot of undesirable lumber that the company was stuck with. He was happy. He said, "I can sell anything at a fair price." He hit the ball hard. For two months they saw nothing of him. He sold several boxcar loads of skunk spruce, siding, shingles, Douglas fir, and redwood. He sent orders back to the office almost daily. He sold five newaccounts and increased sales dramatically. So impressed was the owner that he thought Bill might be a good man to head up the Shanghai office. But, before a final decision, Bill would have to go through the "test."

The "test" was to send Bill on an errand to obtain a very expensive blue vase which had been described to him in detail. Bill was told to obtain it and deliver it to a stateroom in car seven on the train for Santa Barbara so that Mr. Ricks could take it to his wife for their anniversary. Bill was told the approximate location of the neighborhood-which street, which store, and the window where it could be seen. It was Sunday and after 3:00 P.M. when Bill went to find the vase. He went to the area where the vase had been seen but he searched in vain, street after street -two blocks of additional searching in all four directions, four more blocks before he finally discovered the object of his search. He kicked the door, making an infernal racket, but no one responded. He backed away and read the sign over the door, B. Cohen's Art Shop.

He limped to a hotel, picked up the phone book, and found nineteen B. Cohens. He searched for the art dealer in vain and then dialed all nineteen numbers. He emerged from the phone booth wringing wet from perspiration. It was 6:00 P.M., and his bad leg was starting to give out on him. Then he had a flash of thought, Could the name have been spelled differently? Was it Cohen, Cohan, Cohn, Kohn, or Coen? He went back to the art shop: It was spelled Cohn's Art Shop. He went back to the phone booth and began calling all the Cohns. On the sixth call he was lucky and got the right B. Cohn. The cook who answered the phone said that Mr. Cohn was dining at the house of a Mr. Simons in Mill Valley. There were three Mr. Simons, and Bill called all of them before connecting with the right one. Yes, Mr. Cohn was there, but who wished to speak to him? Mr. Heck? Mr. Lake? A silence followed, then the maid returned, "Mr. Cohn doesn't know any Mr. Lakes and wants to know the nature of the business."

"Tell him Mr. Peck wants to speak to him regarding a matter of grave importance." After a frustrating dialogue, Mr. Cohn came to the phone. Bill told him that he had to have the vase by 7:45 P.M. that night and he needed Mr. Cohn to come back across the Bay, open his store, and sell him the vase.

Bill was told to contact Mr. Joost. Again, Bill encountered the same kind of runaround as he tried to find Joost at one of several country clubs. He could not find Joost.

He borrowed a hammer then hailed a taxi. He was going back to the art store to break the window. But when he reached the shop, there was a policeman standing in front of the store. He left and came back and noticed the sign over the store read B. Cohen's Art Store. He sat down on a fire hydrant and cursed with rage. His weak leg hurt, the stump on his left arm developed a feeling that his missing hand itched. He took the taxi back to the hotel. Hope springing eternally in his breast, he called Mr. Joost, who then after their conversation had to verify with Mr. Cohn the entire story. If Mr. Kek would just wait at the art store, he would come over if the story was accurate.

At 9:15 P.M. Herman Joost arrived and brought the policeman along with him for protection, just in case. He opened and retrieved lovingly the blue vase; the cost was two thousand dollars. Bill had ten dollars, and Mr. Joost refused a check. Bill called Mr. Skinner from the company and asked to have two thousand dollars sent down. There was a time lock on the safe and no way to get the money. He tried Mr. Ricks's residence to see if he had the money. He had left for Santa Barbara. He tried everything. Finally he went back to his hotel, got his diamond ring with sapphires set in platinum. It was worth about twenty-five hundred dollars. He left it until he could bring the money.

It was too late to catch the train that left at 8:45 P.M. He went to the flying field at Mariner. He got the address of the pilot and awakened him at midnight. They headed south in the moonlight with the vase. An hour and a half later they landed in a field of stubble in the Salinas Valley. He limped to the railroadtrack; and when the train came he made a torch, stood between the tracks, and flagged down the train. The train slid to a halt, and the brakeman railed on Bill Peck violently. Bill climbed on board and said he would purchase a ticket. The brakeman said, "That's right, take advantage of your half-portion arm and abuse me. Are you looking for that little old man with the Henry Clay collar and the white muttonchop whiskers?"

"I certainly am."

"Well, he was looking for you just before we left San Francisco. He asked me if I had seen a one-armed man with a box under his good arm. I'll lead you to him."

A prolonged ringing at Mr. Ricks's stateroom door brought the old gentleman to the entrance in his nightshirt.

"Very sorry to have to disturb you, Mr. Ricks," said Bill, "but the fact is there were so many Cohens and Cohns and Cohans and it was such a job to dig up two thousand dollars that I failed to connect with you at 7:45 last night as ordered. It was absolutely impossible for me to accomplish this task in the time limit set; but I was resolved that you would not be disappointed. Here is the vase. The shop wasn't within four blocks of where you thought it was, sir; but I'm sure I found the right vase. It ought to be. It cost enough and was hard enough to get. So it should be a precious gift for your wife or anyone else."

Mr. Ricks stared at Bill Peck as if he were looking at a spook. "By all that's wonderful!" he murmured. "We changed the sign on you, we stacked the Cohens on you, and we set a policeman to guard the shop to keep you from breaking the window. We made you dig up two thousand dollars on a Sunday night in a town where you are practically unknown; and, while you missed the 8:00 P.M. train, you overtook it at 2:00 A.M. in the morning and delivered the vase. Come in and rest your poor old game leg, Bill. Brakeman, I am much obliged to you."

Bill Peck entered and slumped wearily down on the settee.

"So it was a plan?" he croaked, and his voice trembled with rage. "Well, sir, you're an old man, and you've been good to me; so I do not begrudge you your little joke. But, Mr. Ricks, Ican't stand things like I could before I was crippled in the war. My leg hurts and my stump hurts and my heart hurts."

He paused, choking, and the tears of impotent rage filled his eyes.

"You shouldn't treat me that way, sir," he complained presently. "I've been trained not to question orders, even when they seem utterly foolish to me. I've been trained to obey them-on time, if possible; but, if impossible, to obey them anyhow. I've been taught loyalty to my chief, and I'm sorry my chief found it necessary to make a buffoon of me. I haven't had a very good time the past three years, and you can pa-pa-pass your skunk wood and larch rustic and short, odd-length stock to some slacker."

At this point Mr. Ricks apologized profusely and let Bill know that he had passed a test that only one other out of fifteen had passed and that the reward was a very highly paid position as the manager of the Shanghai office. By the time Mr. Ricks was through with his apology, Bill Peck had forgotten his rage; but the tears of his recent fury still glistened in his bold blue eyes. "Thank you, sir. I forgive you, and I'll make good in Shanghai."

"I know you will, Bill. Now tell me, son, weren't you tempted to quit when you discovered the almost insuperable obstacles I had placed in your way?"

"Yes, sir, I was. I wanted to commit suicide before I had finished telephoning all the Cohens in the world. And when I started on the Cohns, well, it was this way, sir. I just couldn't quit because that would have been disloyal to a man I once knew."

"Who was he?" Cappy Ricks demanded, and there was awe in his voice.

"He was my brigadier, and he had a brigade motto: It shall be done. When the divisional commander called him and told him to move forward with his brigade and occupy certain territory, our brigadier would say: 'Very well, sir. It shall be done.' If any officer in his brigade showed signs of shirking his job becauseit appeared impossible, the brigadier would just look at him once. And then that officer would remember the motto and go and do his job or die trying.

"The brigadier once sent for me and ordered me to go out and get a certain German sniper. I'd been pretty lucky-some days. He opened a map and said to me: 'Here's about where he holes up. Go get him, Private Peck.'

"Well, Mr. Ricks, I snapped to it and gave him a rifle salute and said, 'Sir, it shall be done.' I'll never forget the look that man gave me.

"He came down to the hospital to see me after I'd walked into one of the dustricair 88s. I knew my left wing was a total loss, and I suspected my left leg was about to leave me, and I was downhearted and wanted to die.

"He came and bucked me up. He said, 'Why, Private Peck, you aren't half dead. In civilian life you're going to be worth a half a dozen live ones, aren't you?' But I was pretty far gone, and I told him I didn't believe it; so he gave me a hard look and said, 'Private Peck will do his utmost to recover, and as a starter he will smile.'

"Of course, putting it in the form of an order, I had to give him the usual reply as I grinned and said, 'Sir, it shall be done.'

"He was quite a man, sir, and his brigade had a soul-his Soul."

As William Peck told Mr. Ricks the name of the brigadier, Ricks was visibly startled and said, "The brigadier was a candidate for an important job in my employ, and I gave him the test of the blue vase." Then he explained how the brigadier succeeded in getting the vase.

Go-getters produce go-getters.

I would like to see The Go-Getter, by Peter B. Kyne, resurrected and reprinted. What a dramatic story about commitment! There are a lot of other long-since-forgotten books that extolled self-reliance and were not ashamed of the success ethic. Just imagine what the Lord could do if all the members of the Church when asked to do anything would answer as Bill Peckdid, "It shall be done," and then follow President Spencer W. Kimball's motto and "Do it."

Through the training of his brigadier and because of the stuff he was made of, Bill Peck made up his mind somewhere along the line that he would never remain defeated. From the time he made that decision, that commitment if you will, he was destined to succeed. All he needed was to get his feet on the path. In his case success was making money and overcoming obstacles. But it doesn't have to be money. It can be many things. In the case of a true Latter-day Saint it will be many things. We have a vision of a fully rounded life with success as the ultimate goal in all parts of the circle.

A member of a missionary committee showed us a visual aid that he called something like "A Faith Progression Chart." The first step he called "knowledge in the form of true information." The second step he called "decision to believe." The third he called "active faith or works." The last step he called "knowledge as testimony." The knowledge in this fourth step was the same as the knowledge in the first step. Only now it had a new dimension because it had been tried and proven true.

I would like to add a word each to steps one and two. The word I would add to step one is vision. When we have heard the truth about some righteous principle, whether it be temporal or spiritual, that is not enough. I repeat, just hearing the words is not enough. Even understanding the words in a hypothetical way is not enough. We need also to have the vision to see the value of that principle in our lives. It is not enough to see the value of the principle in the lives of others or in people's lives in general. We need also to see the value in our lives. We need to picture ourselves reaping the rewards of obedience to that principle. We need to see ourselves succeeding with it.

The word I would add to step two is commitment. Somehow commitment carries more force than decision. Of course, you can call these two words synonyms. But, as we have come to use them in our day, commitment seems to carry more of the get-up-and-keep-going meaning.

Perhaps I can illustrate this with a couple of stories.

I know a pretty good man who decided long ago to be true to the Church and to do certain other things. (What I have to say about him came from his own lips; so don't blame me if I sound too hard on him.) This man had great potential. It would be hard to find his equal in academic achievement or knowledge of the gospel. And the Lord blessed him with many marvelous spiritual experiences so that his testimony was immovable. Yet he never became a great servant of the Lord and essentially failed in most material things.

The problem was commitment, not decision. He had decided to be true to the gospel and to the Church. And he was. He did few, if any, negative things. But he was not committed to a plan of action. His family activities were not well planned, if planned at all. So the time would arrive and the activity would be a flop instead of an event. He hoped he'd get to the welfare farm; but he didn't actually schedule it and plan to be there. His home teaching visits were generally made; but they were last-minute desperate attempts to get something done since it was too late to do it right. And his business life was a mirror image of his Church life-as is so often the case. Somehow he never came to grips with the now. He was always living in the future or the past and letting the present run him instead of him running it. His life was reminiscent of that great insight from James: "A double minded man is unstable in all his ways." (James 1:8.) I don't know what will ever become of him. Because there are bright spots here and there on the record, I pray for the best. But his life could have been so different if he had been totally committed like the next man I want to tell you about.

I met this second man a year or two after I got married. He had a profound effect on my life; so I have to tell some personal background. I grew up in a basically LDS area; but we were not completely in the Church to begin with. My mother leaned toward the Catholic Church, but was not a member. There were seven children. Much of the time my mother had the double tasks of breadwinning and mothering. She worked nights and mothered in the daytime and slept when she could.

We all learned to help. I took my turn supporting the family. Then after high school and finding the right girl to take to the temple, I went to my mother and asked her permission to take my last two weeks' wages and get married, leaving the burden of the family on the next brother under me.

A year or two after we got married, my wife and I moved into the Hillside Stake and I met a great Latter-day Saint who was quite wealthy. I realize that some people think you can't be both great and wealthy, but I don't agree with that. Neither would they if they properly comprehended the scriptures and the lives of many wealthy Saints. A careful study of the lives of Brigham Young and Job alone should straighten out a lot of this kind of thinking. Of course, there are bad rich men. There also are bad poor men. The man I am telling about was a good rich man. He could have divested himself of all his money and property, but then his charities and some of his service would have been cut off and he would not have been an inspiration to a young man like me. I would not have seen a "vision" of what I could become.

This particular rich man has done a great deal of missionary work and has contributed lands and properties and many material things to the Church. I am sure that only he knows the extent of his charities. He had just been called as a stake missionary when I met him. He was also on the stake high council. I didn't understand why they would leave him in both callings. What they were doing, as I learned later, was preparing him for a calling as a mission president.

I was assigned as his companion. We had a district meeting at his residence. I remember walking into his home and being almost overcome by its beauty and comfort. I never had seen anything like that before in my life. I had been in some fairly nice homes, but not like his. My feet sank into the deep, thick carpeting. It was just a beautiful place with a handsome grand piano, big overstuffed chairs, a huge fireplace, and lovely paintings on the walls. I remember just going in and looking at all those things.

This was the middle of the winter, and as I began to take offmy overcoat, I found my host taking it off for me. I had never had anyone help me take off my overcoat before in my whole life. And this was not much of an overcoat. Someone had given it to me, and I had worn it for a few years. I was grateful to have it. I had known what it was to go without an overcoat. When I was at South High School I was in the a cappella choir, and we would sing all over Salt Lake City at Christmastime. I remember singing outside on a little plaza in Sugarhouse without an overcoat. All I had was a jacket someone had given me. There was about six inches of snow. It was still snowing, and the wind was blowing. I was embarrassed because people would say, "Aren't you cold?" And I'd say, "No, I feel just great!" I was really chilled to the bone, but I didn't want to let anyone know.

Anyway, I did wear my old overcoat to the stake missionary meeting, and my rich companion helped take it off. Then we went into the living room. I didn't hear much that night. I just looked around and thought about what my companion had accomplished in a temporal way and what that had enabled him to do in a spiritual way.

I remember I gave the closing prayer after we had finished our business. Then I went over to the closet and discovered that my coat was gone. Frankly, the thought went through my mind that my host had thrown it away. I decided I wouldn't ask for it. Then all of a sudden he was standing behind me, holding my coat for me to put it on. I had never had anyone do that before. I put my arm in and it went between the lining and the sleeve and got caught down there. If it had been possible, I'd have made a hole so my hand could have come out. I couldn't quite do that, so I had to pull my arm back out all the way and try to get it in the right place. It was very embarrassing.

I was never the same after that night. As I was walking home I knew all of a sudden that I could be something better and do something bigger. I had seen that my companion not only had all those fine material possessions, but his life was committed to the Lord's service. I decided I wanted to be that kind of a man. I used him as an example for a long time; and as I have gonearound the Church, I have found that there are many like him who are worthy of emulation. They have a common characteristic: They are committed. That is, they believe so strongly in what they are doing that they get it done. They are go-getters.

Solomon, in Eccl. 9:10, sums up well the attitude of the go-getter. "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might." Do it. Do it with your might. That's commitment.
