Vaughn J. Featherstone, Commitment ( 1982)

2 To Walk in High Places

As a new twelve-year-old Scout I attended a court of honor in which an older fellow in the troop, Jim Rasband, was awarded a beautiful red heart-shaped medal. It was called the Life Scout award. I remember how impressed we troop members were when it was pinned on his Scout shirt. That one experience of seeing an unusual Scout lift his head above the average boy and walk in high places probably contributed to my attainment of the Eagle rank.

I watched an older brother and other achievers excel and play football before large crowds of enthusiastic high school students. I saw young people succeed in speech, drama, student government, music, dance, and ROTC. Those who put forth sufficient effort and time usually became the best. Many years ago at Yale University the swim team was breaking many world records. A writer asked the coach how they were doing it. The coach replied, "I have taught them to break the pain barrier."

I attended Church not because I was forced to but because I desperately needed and wanted to. I saw men who walked in high places who were pure, gentle, kind. I met men who had time to spend with boys. Great men such as Percy Scofield,Lincoln Parker, Don Stout, Bruford Reynolds. I remember Percy Scofield, our bishop, hiking into Dog Lake with us. He wasn't a young man, and the hike just about killed him; but he went with US.

During World War II Don Stout wrote to me from Europe. A tank had turned upside down in a pond, and he and his comrades were inside for several hours not knowing if they were going to drown or suffocate. He shared some of his experiences and then in the last paragraph he said, "Vaughn, I want you to know I have never had a beer or a cigarette, never a drink of liquor or tea. I have never had coffee or even a cola drink in spite of all the pressure from the boys in my company." I told that to a friend and he said it was impossible, that no man could do that. I answered, "If Don said he did it, he did it."

I was twelve when I read his letter. I wept as I thought about him, and I decided right then and there that I was going to walk in high places like Don Stout.

As I grew older, the men who impressed me the most were those who were involved in serving others. They were in bishoprics and in other ward and stake executive positions. They served as Scoutmasters and Aaronic Priesthood advisers. They were great fathers and caring home teachers. I made the decision that I wanted to serve. I wanted to be like them. They seemed to radiate happiness, and they were successful because they were content to serve.

Wilford Kimball was our bishop when I was an older teenager. He had two daughters in my age group, Ardyth and Virginia. Every, I mean every, Sunday evening we would go to Bishop KimballÂs house. Always they would be there. Always we would have refreshments. Never once did any of us feel unwelcome. It wasn't just for a few months but literally for a few years. I don't know how they ever afforded it, let alone put up with ten to fifteen teenagers for two to three hours every Sunday night.

Of course, I don't mean to imply that a bishop and his wife who don't do this much are failing in their duty. I simply amcalling attention to one great bishop and his wife who did it this way. They were well paid for their sacrifice. From that little group has come five or six bishops, several high councilors, two stake presidents, several counselors in stake presidencies, and wives of these priesthood brethren, not to mention the Church leadership these ladies supplied. Bishop Kimball himself was later called as a stake president and then as a mission president. Some others who were there became mission presidents. What a privilege to walk with Wilford Kimball and his wife in a high place, their home.

I made the decision that I wanted to walk in high places-not in an aspiring way, but I wanted to serve. It appeared to me that leaders did most of the serving.

When I was about eighteen, I heard of solemn assemblies and priesthood leadership meetings held in conjunction with stake conferences. I heard about nine-hour testimony meetings in the mission field. I heard about meetings in the assembly room in the temple, and I longed to be worthy to one day attend such meetings. I didn't ever want anything to come into my life that would prevent me from having such opportunities.

All of my life I have wanted to walk in high places, and I have. Some of the highest places in which I have walked have been the humble homes of our sweet Lamanite brethren. I have found high places in the service of our snowy-crowned, long-living friends in and out of the Church. I have found a high place with a new convert who was talking to a young man. The convert said, "Your father is a good old boy." Then he asked, "Do you know what a good old boy is?" The young man said no. The convert explained: "In Texas we have men who are great men, gentlemen-refined, dignified, fine men. The good old boy is one level higher." I have known some good old boys and walked in high places with them.

Those high places can show up in some unlikely places, too, as the following verse indicates:

We have the nicest garbage man. He empties out our garbage can. He's just as nice as he can be. He always stops and talks with me. My mother doesn't like his smell, But, then, she doesn't know him well.

Perhaps this sweet verse expresses a sentiment that is not so surprising after all. The front page of the December 27, 1981, Salt Lake Tribune reported the results of a study by a state college in Pennsylvania which indicated that family members and neighbors hold garbage collectors in higher esteem than they do college professors. When we take time to really know people, we find much that is great and good about them. We are not so critical of failures or appearances. We begin to judge them for their true worth. Missionaries, for example, come to love those whom they serve simply because they serve them.

To all the men and women, old and young, to boyhood friends, to a great morn, to great brothers and sisters, to a wonderful wife, and to children with whom I have walked in high places, I say:

There's a comforting thought at the close of the day, When I'm weary and lonely and sad, That sort of grips hold of my crusty old heart And bids it be merry and glad. It gets in my soul and it drives out the blues, And finally thrills through and through. It is just a sweet memory that chants the refrain: "I'm glad I touch shoulders with you!" Did you know you were brave, did you know you were strong? Did you know there was one leaning hard? Did you know that I waited and listened and prayed, And was cheered by your simplest word? Did you know that I longed for the smile on your face, For the sound of your voice ringing true? Did you know that I grew stronger and better because I had merely touched shoulders with you? I am glad that I live, that I battle and strive For the place that I know I must fill; I am thankful for sorrows. I'll meet with a grin What fortunes may send, good or ill. I may not have wealth, I may not be great, But I know I shall always be true. For I have in my life that courage you gave When once I rubbed shoulders with you.

-Unknown

If you want to walk in high places, be prepared to make some sacrifices. Courage, integrity, purity, and spirituality will enable you to walk with great men, even leaders and rulers of nations, great business executives, and men of great wealth, without being afraid of feeling out of place. You can walk in the presence of bishops, stake presidents, General Authorities, and our prophet and be humbled but not fearful.

We now come to the commitments that must be made if we are to enjoy that most desirable of all successes, serving the Lord and his children. This success comes to those who heed the counsel of the General Authorities of this Church. Through obedience to the same commitments these men have generally become eminently successful in the business world, in their Church callings, and in their families. I suggest that you have the courage, wisdom, and good sense to follow their counsel. If you do, you always will walk in high places no matter what your specific callings may be.

Following their counsel represents commitment to a Christian standard. As we sow, so shall we reap. High standards reap high rewards: business success, trusted callings in the Church, and respect from decent people. Of course, we all suffer setbacks and temporary periods of seeming disillusionment when it seems that the rules do not work for us. Those are the times to remember the lesson of Job. He knew that he had lived according to the rules, so he did not make the mistake of blaming himself for his misfortunes. He kept his conviction that he was worthy. When it was all over, he realized that the Lord had tested him for a purpose, and his final reward exceeded all possible anticipation. So don't become discouraged and give up on yourself, on the rules, or on the gracious and merciful Creator.

Let me list and discuss some of the standards that Latter-day Saint priesthood leaders want you to consider. I will call them commitments, because you need to make commitments about these standards if you are to have the freedom and happiness that comes from walking in high places.

Good grooming is the first principle I would like to discuss. How a person grooms and dresses tells us much about what that person thinks of himself. There even have been times when custom or law prescribed the dress of trades, professions, and social classes. Some of this has carried over into our time and is used to reveal what people think about what they do or about their station in life.

Why do we send our missionaries forth clothed and groomed to reflect neatness, cleanliness, and discipline? Isn't it because we desire to make a good initial impression on those we meet so that our conduct and grooming will not stand in the way of generating an interest in the gospel? When you think of a great business executive, a prominent governmental official, a bishop or stake president, a ward or stake Relief Society president, what comes to mind? Generally it is a mental image of a well groomed individual.

The way I dress has been determined by a desire not to offend people I love and respect. Many years ago, as a young man in my early twenties, I thought my way through this matter of hair cuts. In doing so, I considered the people with whom I wanted most to be associated. I decided that I didn't need to satisfy any whim by wearing a radical or unusual hair style. I decided to stay with a hair style that would give me an appearance of greater maturity and a "settled-down" look. From my earliest married days I have been deeply involved in heavy assignments in the Church. And because I really wanted to serve in the Kingdom, I was certainly not going to let an exterior image cause my priesthood leaders not to consider me for a call. It was not their prejudices I feared; because I know they usually do not have any. It was the realization that we need to put ourbest foot forward. It was the people who still need a lot of help whom I did not want to needlessly offend. The master fisherman always puts the best bait on the hook.

John T. Malloy in Dress for Success explains the effect of grooming on success. There are two ideas in this book that I would like to emphasize. One is that, while good grooming and proper dress may not make up for other inadequacies, improper and radical dress and grooming definitely will stand in the way of success. This is true because most of us succeed or fail through the help or hindrance that comes to us from those who already are in a position to help or hinder. This is a reality that cannot be ignored.

The other idea in Malloy's book that I wish to emphasize is that grooming and dress have an effect on discipline, work habits, and attitudes. It seems that a person is making a statement about himself or herself when he or she dresses and grooms. And this statement affects conduct in ways that have a bearing on success and failure. Also, dress and grooming affect interpretation of conduct. A quiet and withdrawn deportment may be called surly if the person is unkempt, whereas it may be called humility if the person is well groomed. Again, an unkempt person may be saying, "I hate myself"; but his appearance may be interpreted as a declaration of hate for the manager of the firm in which he is seeking a position. Still further, a sloppy person may be saying, "I am so satisfied with myself that I do not need any of the props that insecure people use." But the officer behind the desk who is scrutinizing him may be thinking, "This person lacks the discipline and organization for the demanding position he is seeking." (New York: Warner Books.)

Of course, the above is not an exact quote from Malloy; but it is my expansion on the ideas I gleaned from his book. One may not wish to fully subscribe to everything Malloy says; but the priesthood and ladies of promise would profit from reading his book.

A second commitment, closely related to good grooming, is the commitment to keep your apartments or homes clean, evenbefore you are married and especially after you are married. There is something orderly about being orderly. When your mind is orderly, people see that. Orderliness is one of the things about my wife that has impressed me. Within three or four minutes after we get up in the morning our bed is made. She has rarely left the bedroom without making the bed first. In spite of having seven children and their friends and the other things that go with it, I haven't been embarrassed to have company come to our home. I haven't had to run around and grab all sorts of things from the living room floor and get them out of sight. She really is just terrific. And this is a common trait in wives of men who are called to responsibility in the Church and in business. They generally are neat and orderly and have learned to keep their houses clean. Of course, there are other strong qualities that give women charm and grace. But I think orderliness is a very critical commitment. Sisters, if a man is going to be able to support you and become what you can be proud of, you certainly can have a lot to do with it by sending him forth and welcoming him back in neatness and cleanliness in the haven where he gets his strength, regeneration, and motivation.

We are in a time when the home and the traditional role of women are under attack. Perhaps some of the traditional ideas do need reexamination. But the more I learn about who opposes these traditional ideas, the more I am willing to let the inspired prophets of God give us direction and leadership as we move cautiously forward in these troubled times. Perhaps there are homes in which the husband can rightly help provide some of the internal orderliness by helping with the housework. That is an internal matter that needs to be negotiated behind closed doors by those involved. But whatever you work out, try always to be aware of the divine and eternal ideal and work ever in that direction. That is the route to the greatest joy; but it is a path of peace, not strife.

Orderliness promotes peace of mind and efficiency. If beds are made when people get up, if clothes are put away when taken off, if dishes are returned to shelves after use, a load islifted from the mind that otherwise bears down and robs a part of the mental and emotional energy that is needed to get through the day. In our home we are apt to have our dishes gathered and washed before we are through with them. But if your wife isn't that way, brethren, remember that nagging wastes far more time than pitching in and helping get the job done, or, at least, started. Besides, it will help create habits that will be useful at work.

A third commitment that deserves a lot of attention is physical conditioning. Good conditioning improves appearance, enhances grooming, and prepares for those emergencies when extra demands are placed on us. This is a relative commitment because of the differences in physical capabilities. For instance, there are many who have been injured or who have inherent weaknesses. Everything has to be taken into account. Still it is a truism that most of us can improve our physical conditioning, and the improvement will show in appearances and in production. Some of the most inspiring examples of physical fitness have come to us from men and women in wheelchairs.

I think there does come a time occasionally when most of us need to stretch physically to see how much we can take. Emergencies arise and we are forced into something very strenuous. These are the times when heart attacks occur if we haven't prepared ourselves in advance. It is wise to build up fitness gradually if possible. Then, when the demand comes, we are in the physical condition to handle it more safely. If you have ever been in really great physical condition sometime in your life, you may realize that somewhere between that and where you most likely are there is a good standard that is compatible with your normal activity.

This principle was impressed on my mind when I was on a high council. I went to a distant city on business with a fine member of the Church. We had to make a connection in San Francisco. It was about a half a mile from the arrival concourse back in and down to the other end of the terminal. We both had our suitcases and started to run with them in hand as we onlyhad so many minutes to make the connection. I got to the plane first and said, "Hold up; I have a friend coming. He will be here in about the next thirty seconds." When I saw my friend, I was frightened. I thought he was going to have a heart attack and die before he even got on the plane. His countenance was gray and he almost collapsed into his seat. I was still puffing and panting myself as we sat there recovering. I realized that we had had a close call that would have been just an exhilarating experience if we had been practicing some principles of constant physical conditioning.

It would be good to be able, when or if the time comes, to equal the performance of a father in his fifties or sixties who climbed up Mount Olympus with us several years back to search for his son who was presumed lost up there. A lot of us went up for hours at a stretch, but the father was on Mount Olympus for three days and three nights without leaving the mountain. As a young man I was in a lot better condition than the father, but my motivation was different. I had gone on a search party to find someone; but he had gone to look for his son; and he would not come down off the mountain. He stayed there and walked, and you know how tired you can get climbing mountains. It was June or July and plenty hot. But the impressive thing is that he didn't have a heart attack-and he was able to go through that ordeal. I think we need occasionally to be able to do something like that and be in good enough condition to survive. Life has a way of putting physical demands on us and we just need to be able to meet these demands.

The other side of this coin is wisdom. If we get into a demanding situation, we need to have the wisdom not to exceed our capacities. This even can be a day-by-day challenge. Getting adequate daily rest is an important part of proper conditioning. I used to tell my missionaries, "I really don't care if you take a nap when you come in at lunch. In fact, I really would like you to because ten to fifteen minutes on the floor will make your study much more effective and you won't be dropping your head and going to sleep with your mind wandering." I think one reasonthe prophet has been able to survive and accomplish so much is the fact that he can take a nap on the floor somewhere in his office during the day. Those who cannot take short naps and gain some needed rest must learn to plan to get adequate rest. They may be the high-strung type who can get into serious health problems if they do not learn to relax and rest properly.

A fourth principle of preparation to walk in high places is a positive mental attitude. I think it was Paul H. Dunn who said that he was speaking before a group of businessmen who looked like they had been weaned on lemon juice through a dill pickle. That is pretty descriptive of a few groups to whom I have had to speak. A speaker in that situation needs a positive attitude.

Probably you all know about the Dale Carnegie memory course. Elder Marion D. Hanks once said, "You know, they have this remembering names program by, who is it? Tom Carnegin or somebody."

In that program they expect you to wake up in the morning with a positive attitude. If you wake up and think, Oh, man, there's the alarm! that is negative. You have to go back and start over again. You set the alarm for five minutes later and the alarm goes off and you think, Oh, man! It's time to get up! Really positive, you see.

In the mission field you jump out of bed at 6:30 A.M. and run to the shower and your companion has used all the hot water; but you say, "Boy, I love cold showers at 6:30 in the morning." You go to breakfast, and your companion has made hotcakes that are raw in the middle; but you say, "I love raw-in-the-middle pancakes." Because there are a lot of problems that can cause us to become very negative and ominous and, I suppose, dwarf what we really are trying to do, I think a positive outlook is important. A positive attitude is a part of the personalities of those who achieve.

Learning to love work is a fifth commitment that will prepare us to walk in high places. Remember Elder Thomas S. Monson's W formula: "Work will win when wishy-washy wishingwon't." I believe that if there is one common quality among achievers, it is that they love work more than nonachievers do. I think it is important for us sometimes to push ourselves beyond our usual limits so that we can learn our true capacities for work. I think we need to be in the kind of physical condition and mental attitude to do this.

Among other sacrifices, a person who walks in high places may have to get by with less sleep occasionally just to know he can do it when the need is really there. As I have mentioned earlier, my mother often had to forego the usual amount and time of sleep when I was young. One of the highest places I have ever walked was in her shadow. I saw an older brother who grew up fast and was able to go to work at fourteen in the Bauer Mines near Tooele because he was large of stature. He became the example to all of us who were his younger brothers and sisters. These family examples taught me how to work. And when I did get a job, I knew the family was depending on me to hold it.

I had worked for a five-store grocery chain all the way through junior high and high school. I continued with them full time upon graduating from high school, a total of eight years altogether. Then, when Albertson's came to Salt Lake, I thought maybe my chances of moving up would increase because it wasn't just a local firm. So I made an appointment with the district manager and went home and discussed it with my wife. That night I went over and over it in my mind. In fact, I am convinced that I did not sleep. Everything hinged on getting this new job; and I felt that I didn't have the confidence I needed to sell myself to Albertson's supervisor. I wanted very much to go to work for this different company. As I prepared through the night, I went over the interview a thousand times it seemed. Every time I thought of a question the district manager might ask, I would ask myself again, Why do you want to go to work for Albertson's? I responded in my mind to that question I can't tell you how many different times or in how many different ways.The next day I went to see the man and had to wait for him quite a while after the time of the appointment. I waited. I was dressed the best I possibly could in my only suit, a gray one.

I commend that to you when you go to look for a job. Don't go in your grubbies. Go as if you are in earnest about looking for a job. When you need a job, don't just go thinking, Here's an ad in the paper, I'll respond to that and go home again. Work at looking for a job. Go looking eight hours a day if you don't have one. You have nothing better to do, and that's the most important thing you need to do-get a job and get lined up and then work the way you ought to work. So, I'd suggest again, when you go looking for a job, work at it like it is your job. Work at it eight hours or ten or twelve hours a day until you get it.

Finally the Albertson's district manager came out to interview me. We interviewed back and forth for about twenty minutes. Then he said, "Well, the best we can offer you is $68 for a forty-hour week." This was 1954. I was making $107 at the time. We talked a little longer and he said that he thought they could go to $78 for a forty-hour week. I just couldn't make it on that. My car had broken down. We barely had enough money for house payments. How was I going to go to work and make ends meet and take care of tithing and other Church assessments and obligations? I remember telling the district manager that I really needed the job. I wanted opportunity. I promised him that if they would hire me I would do the best it was humanly possible for me to do or they could fire me and not pay me a penny. I could not have been more sincere.

"I'll tell you what we'll do," he said. "We'll give you $78 plus eight hours overtime which will be about $104 per week. That's the most we can give. We're only paying our department heads $110. Now, you go home and decide if you want to go to work for us, and we'll decide overnight whether we want to hire you."

Although a cut of: twelve dollars a month wasn't much, it was a lot on our scanty means. I told my wife what the salary would be and said, "I'm going to go. Will you support me?" Of course, she said she would.

The next morning I went down to my old job as I normally did; and at 9:00 A.M. as the store opened in walked five of the executives from Albertson's. They walked down through the produce department which I co-managed, examined it, said hello to me, left, and called me back in a little while and said they'd like to hire me. So I asked how soon. This was about May. "We'll hire you October fourth." I had to keep that a secret all that time, and I had to maintain the enthusiasm on the job that I had had before. It was one of the real tests of my life.

When I went to work for Albertson's, I just simply put my heart and soul into it and fifteen months later they made me the supervisor of an entire district. I believe in a success formula I picked up somewhere. The essence of this formula is that promotions come more rapidly to those who work harder and longer hours. The harder and longer you work, the sooner the promotions come. Of course, a Latter-day Saint will want to remember the family and other Church commitments so that his or her success will not destroy the very reasons for succeeding.

I believe that the work ethic is an attitude. It is a discipline. It is something that can become a habit. By that I mean that when you work fast and hard or when you are intense in studying, it becomes a habit; and every time you study, you study with that habit. When you read, you read in that habitual way. When you work, you work fast and hard if that is a habit. If you have developed the habit of sloth and laziness then those things stay with you; and every time you work, you work at that same slow pace and you don't get anything done. There is an excitement when the blood starts coursing through the veins and you are working fast. You think faster. You think more clearly. I believe there is a purging that takes place. President Harold B. Lee said, "The greatest poverty is the poverty of desire." I really believe that. When someone said that you are the light on the hill either for good or evil, he really meant it, To the Church, the leaders are the light. I believe that no other Church has the discipline and the government and the order that we do; and I am speaking now of work. Our people really are traditionally trained to work.

Warm human relations-how you get along with other people-is a sixth commitment I would like to recommend. It is closely related to work. Work and drive have a lot to do with human relations. We get along with others best when we feel the best about ourselves. And hard work is one of the greatest solutions to a poor self-image. In fact, I think learning to work hard and getting a strong testimony will cure almost all self-image problems.

If you are going to be uncommon and realize your potential, you must have this human-relations factor in correct operation. We really have to be warm, friendly, and kind. I realize that I am not going to please everyone, and I have to carry that on my heart. But I am not going to suffer over it and become negative. I still have to be pleased with myself and live with myself when I get through with whatever I have to do. So I want to be kind and warm. And when someone comes up after a meeting and says, "That was really a lousy speech," I'll just have to salvage my ego by saying to myself, That is his opinion. I really did the best I could with my limited talents. I have to live with myself on things like that.

I have watched the people that I admire most, that I love most, respect most, and want most to be like, and I haven't met any of them who don't have outstanding abilities in a human-relations way. Wherever they are, you see them visiting people with kindness and understanding. They know how to listen and really be interested. They understand the things that affect and help human relations.

Maybe the hardest preparation for walking in high places is this seventh one that I now would like to get you to think about. It is the task of learning to think. Elder Thomas S. Monson said, "Thinking. Thinking is the hardest work we go through." Dr. Hugh Nibley said something like this: "The mind will take a terrible revenge if one does not think on constructive things. It will reach out and grasp anything that is nearby. It is being worked all of the time, twenty-four hours a day. Consciouslyor subconsciously, it is involved." So, controlled thinking is the hardest work we do and it is the very essence of life, the meaning of being.

Thinking is mostly talking to yourself. The better vocabulary you have, the better this thinking can become. That is, it can get into things that are uncommon and things that test your mental strength. When we talk about controlled thinking, we are talking about this business of stretching our thinking capacity by vocabulary improvement. We also-and maybe more importantly-are talking about saying no to Satan when he attempts to invade and take over our minds. We must learn to turn that channel off if we wish to stay in control. That is the very basic meaning of intelligence as it is defined in the Doctrine and Covenants: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth. Light and truth forsake that evil one." (D&C 93:36-37.) Where do we forsake the "evil one"? In the dark recesses of our minds. That is where he lurks and attempts to take control. So flood the light on him and cast him out so that you can maintain control. Now, I am not saying that Satan himself is actually lurking in the dark recesses of your mind. Let me explain it with an analogy. Suppose you were a television set and you were being used to view pornography on some cable service. Then the television set would be invaded by evil. If you pick up negative, evil, or useless thoughts, you are allowing the spirit of the evil one to communicate to you and take control. Weak and ignoble thinking becomes a habit, and bad habits are the chains that are described in Alma 12:9-11. They take away light and truth.

Another important part of the thinking commitment is mental ambition. We would not have a good balance in this life if all of our work were simply physical. I think going out and working on a farm or in the yard until the perspiration just pours off is a great purging experience. The mind needs to go through that same kind of purging. We need to think so seriously sometimes that our heads almost ache when we finish. We haveall been involved in that kind of intensity at some time. When it is over there is a refreshment that comes and a feeling of accomplishment and peace because of the exertion.

This mental wrestling can take the form of prolonged prayer. It may be necessary to pray longer and harder sometimes in order to get the feeling that you have been heard. You remember the case of Enos and his day-long prayer. Of course, that was an extreme case involving a future prophet of God. If you ever get where you need to pray all day long, you will know it and the power will be given to you. It isn't the sort of thing you just set out to do because you would like to hear a voice like Enos did. Still, Enos's example is one you should ponder as you think of gaining the determination to think and communicate with God. There are lessons for everybody in the story of Enos.

We have discussed seven principles or commitments that help us prepare to walk in high places. There are others, of course. Let me now ask a few questions about your ambitions, your objectives, and your goals. These are questions you should ask yourselves often.

First, what do you really want out of life? Emerson said that if you will pay the price, you can have it.

If you could choose one person to be like, who would it be? Think about that. Who you choose tells you a lot about yourself.

What are you willing to do to reach your goals? Some experts who study things like this have said that if you take one hundred men when they are twenty-five and start them all out at the same time with the same goal, that only five of them will reach the goal by the time they retire. The goal will have faded out of the sight of the other ninety-five. Are you a fader, or do you stick to your commitments once they have been wisely made?

When are you going to start? A very critical question. Remember that Jacob said that the way is narrow, but the path is directly in front of your feet. (2 Ne. 9:41.) It is always there.

Where will you find the opportunities? Edward R. Sill wrote a verse entitled "Opportunity" that I memorized. It was about a prince and a coward. The coward broke his sword as an excuse to flee the battlefield. Later the prince, wounded and weaponless, came across the coward's sword and used it to turn the tide of battle and win a victory. Will you recognize your opportunities?.

What do you want to achieve in the particular field of your choice, be it religion or politics or whatever? Only specific goals are useful.

You will find part of the answer to all of the above questions in the preparations you make for success.

Giordano Bruno, an Italian philosopher, made a great discovery as a young man while running through the beautiful, flower-covered hills near his home in Italy. He discovered that no matter where he ran, or how far, he always remained the center of the universe. This is impressive to me; because each one of us is in the center of the universe. I thought about this as I visited in New York some time ago. While there, everything was revolving around me. Of course, I thought about home and had concerns that my family would be protected while I was away; but my world was a different world. You have all had this experience. The gospel of Jesus Christ teaches us to reach out beyond the center of the universe and therein we will find the great joy of life. We visualize Heavenly Father and his Great Son in the center of the universe, and we see ourselves one day in the center of our own universe-a vastly greater one than the one which revolves about us here. Then we think about how our Heavenly Father became what he is. Then we see that service and love are a great part of it. And that begins to shape our goals and attitudes. And we see that life calls for preparation and commitments.
