Vaughn J. Featherstone, Commitment ( 1982)

3 The Realm of the Final Inch: Planning With Commitment

There's a story about a farmer who fails to get his work done because he lacks firm commitment. Though I have changed the details, it goes something like this. The farmer told his wife he was going out to mow the north forty. On his way to the machine shed, he noticed a loose board on the corn crib. So he went to look for a hammer and some nails which he remembered leaving on the back porch. This led him through the garden which he noticed was quite weedy. He decided to weed a row of carrots, telling himself that he ought to weed a row a day. About two-thirds of the way down the carrot row he straightened up to rest his back and, looking over his shoulder, he saw he had left the gate open and some hens had come into the garden and were scratching up his sweet corn. It took about fifteen minutes to get them out and back into the hen yard. It took another half hour to mend the hole through which they were getting out. After that he figured he had just as well gather the eggs. As he began to do so, he noticed that the nests needed more straw; so he left the eggs and went after a bale of straw. Is he was about to pick up the straw, he noticed his pitchfork had a broken handle and remembered that he hadn't fixed it. Sohe went to the machine shop to hunt for the new handle he had bought. While hunting, he stumbled across the mowing machine and remembered he was going to spend the day mowing. It wasn't much past 10:00 A.M.; so he decided to return to his original plan. Only he remembered he hadn't greased the mower. He started to hunt for his grease gun. After some searching he remembered that he had left it in the garage. When he found it, it was empty, and he didn't have a refill. So he got in his car and went to town to get some grease. As he passed Sleepy Corners he stopped at Sleepy Joe's for a doughnut and a glass of milk. Some of the boys were there, and he learned that the bass were biting down at the reservoir south of town. He got home about lunch time. After lunch, on his way to the machine shed he stumbled over the hoe he had left in the garden. He remembered hoeing up some worms and decided to see if he could find some to set aside for some evening fishing. It didn't take long to get a can of worms. At this point he decided the day was pretty well shot anyway, and he had just as well go fishing right now instead of waiting until evening.

The opposite of this sort of aimlessness is well-directed persistence based on proper planning. Persistence eventually and finally wins. Sometimes worthwhile things come easily; but usually they come hard and slow.

In The First Circle Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn tells about the realm of the final inch. It is a beautiful concept.

"How to face difficulties?" he declared again. "In the realm of the unknown, difficulties must be viewed as a hidden treasure! Usually, the more difficult, the better. It's not as valuable if your difficulties stem from your own inner struggle. But when difficulties arise out of increasing objective resistance, that's marvelous!"...

ÂThe most rewarding path of investigation is: 'the greatest external resistance in the presence of the least internal resistance' Failures must be considered the cue for further application of effort and concentration of will power. And if substantial efforts have already been made, the failures are all the more joyous. It means that our crowbar has struck the iron box containing the treasure. Overcoming the increased difficulties is all the more valuable becausein failure the growth of the person performing the task takes place in proportion to the difficulty encountered!...

"And now listen: The rule of the Final Inch! The realm of the Final Inch! In the Language of Maximum Clarity it is immediately clear what that is. The work has been almost completed, the goal almost attained, everything seems completely right and the difficulties overcome. But the quality of the thing is not quite right. Finishing touches are needed, maybe still more research. In that moment of fatigue and self-satisfaction it is especially tempting to leave the work without having attained the apex of quality. Work in the area of the Final Inch is very, very complex and also especially valuable, because it is executed by the most perfected means. In fact, the rule of the Final Inch consists in this: not to shirk this crucial work. Not to postpone it, for the thoughts of the person performing the task will then stray from the realm of the Final Inch. And not to mind the time spent on it, knowing that one's purpose lies not in completing things faster but in the attainment of perfection." (Thomas P. Whitney, trans. [New York: Harper and Row, 1968], page 139.)

He says that this final-inch concept works better on external problems in our lives than it does on internal problems. You have an internal problem-one inside of you-when you are jealous or worried about someone else or don't have any drive. In this case the realm of the final inch is not as clearly applicable. Internal problems are harder to solve than external problems. But if the problem is external (like most of the problems we wrestle with in making a living and working in the Church), the concept of the realm of the final inch is really valuable. It is like digging down into a hole and coming to the treasure. When you hit the problem, it is like hitting your shovel on a buried treasure. Because there is where the growth comes. Solzhenitsyn says that most of us get the project just about finished and we are satisfied and let it drop there. But if we are aware of the importance of the realm of the final inch, we make that extra effort and take that extra time to go that extra bit and put in that extra elbow grease to give the task the polish that will make us really happy to present it to whomever requested it, whether it be staffwork in an organization or a contract out in the market place Then when the questions come up from priesthood leaders, employers, customers, or department leaders, we have the answer because we have worked hard and fully in the realm of the final inch. The final inch can take as much time and effort as all the rest. Probably the majority do not give it any time. But the finishers, the fully committed, do-and they are the happy souls who are responsible for most worthwhile achievements. In addition to other successes, they usually get the best jobs and are the least likely to lose their jobs. Of course, we mustn't make the mistake of assuming there will be no setbacks in this life and that everything will always be fair. But it is very shortsighted to let that keep us from becoming a finisher.

Even people of commitment sometimes overlook the importance of that careful preparation that comes from the kind of planning that uses a lot of foresight. I remember an embarrassing episode out of my own life that shows the value of planning in the realm of the final inch wherein potential disasters are foreseen and forestalled.

I served on the missionary committee when I was a young man still in my thirties. One of our assignments was to travel with the General Authorities and talk about missionary work This led to other requests to speak. One time in 1967, a fellow committee member, T. Bowring Woodbury, had a speaking assignment that he couldn't fulfill. He called and said, "Vaughn, I have a speaking assignment in Orem." (That's a town just north-west of where Brigham Young University is situated.) "I'd like you to go in my place and talk about missionary work." He gave me the date and I told him I'd be delighted to go.

About a week before I was to go he called up and said "Now, you haven't forgotten to go down to Orem next week have you?" I said I hadn't.

"You're sure nothing has come up?"

"No, Brother Woodbury, it hasn't. I'll be there."

"All right. I'm just double checking."

Then the day before I was to go, he called me again and said, "How is your car?" You can see that President Woodbury was a man of the final inch.

I said, "Well, we have two. My wife has one and I have one. Why?"

"I just want to know if you want to borrow my Cadillac. It has snow tires in case it snows or something."

"No, don't worry, Brother Woodbury. I've got a car and I'll get down there."

The next day he called up again about 2:00 P.M. and said, "Did you see what is outside?"

I replied, "Yes, it has been snowing all day."

"Are your snow tires good enough to get you down to Orem?" he asked.

I said, "Yes, sir, they are."

"You're sure you don't want to trade cars with me?"

"Don't worry," I answered. "I have snow treads and I can make it."

Brother Woodbury was a great planner. In fact, you might even say that he was an inspired planner in this case.

My wife called just after he did and said she had to go to the doctor and asked if I minded if she came down and dropped her car off and took mine. She said her appointment was at 2:30 and she would easily be home in plenty of time. "What time were you planning on leaving?"

I said, "I am speaking at 8:00 P.M.. I had better leave at 6:00 P.M. because it is snowing and I don't want to have any problems."

I went home at 5:00 P.M. in my wife's car, and my car wasn't there. Neither was my wife. I went into the house and thought I had better get cleaned up because she would be there soon. I got all ready and it was six o'clock. My talk was prepared, and she still hadn't come. I thought, Well, I had better wait. I don't want to take her car. I don't know if there are any problems with it, and I do know what my car will do.

So I waited around and pretty soon it was 6:15 and Ithought, It's only 35 or 40 miles down to Orem. That's no problem. Her car will go that far at least or she shouldn't be driving it anyway.

So I went out and got in her car after leaving her a note that said, "Some doctor's appointment-from 2:30 until whatever time you finally get home!" There was just a little bit of sarcasm in my note, I admit.

Anyway, I took off and started down Ninth East out toward the Draper turn-off. All of a sudden the temperature gauge was all the way over on and beyond boiling. I thought, What is this? Boy, I'm glad I left early.

I pulled into a gas station and said to the man who met me, "There is something wrong with my car. Would you mind checking it out?" He lifted the hood and looked around. I tell you, I met in that gas station the slowest human being in the world. He fiddled around with my car. He worked with it, and finally said, "One of your fan belts is broken."

I said, "Great. Would you mind putting one on for me?"

It was the third one in. He took off the first one and then he took off the second one, and here I was marching back and forth. I think he started getting a little excited as he could see me. Finally he reached up on the wall and said, "You know, I haven't the right size. I'll tell you what I'll do. We've got a station down on State Street, and I'll send one of my men down to get the right-sized one."

So he yelled to another man in the coffee shop across the street, and I met the second slowest man in the world. He moseyed across the street and climbed into his car and took off. By this time it was 6:30 and then 6:40 and then 6:45 and the guy still hadn't come back. When he had been gone about twenty minutes I said, "Just put my car back together. I'd rather try it like this or go somewhere else."

So he started getting a little excited. He put the two fan belts on. About that time this fellow came squealing into the gas station trying to impress us. He had the fan belt and I said, "Take them back off. I'd better stay and have the fan belt put on."

So he took off the outer two and tried this one on, and itwas the wrong size. By this time it was ten till seven. I told them to put my car back together. I drove out to our Sandy store and said to the assistant manager, "Harley, I've got an appointment down in Orem. I wonder if I could leave my car here and borrow yours. I'll be back by 9:30 or 10:00. I'll leave my car here in case you need it. It doesn't have a fan belt, but at least you could drive a little way without any problems."

He said, "Golly, you could borrow it; but it is an open jeep and there is a lot of snow on the seat."

I said, "Well, maybe I'd better take my own car."

I thought, This is for the Lord, and I don't know much about cars. So I just jumped in. We'll do it, I thought. I forgot how many times I had learned that the Lord helps only after we have done all we can do. Even then there has to be a very good reason that involves the Lord's plans as well as ours. I am not saying that prayers are not helpful or won't be answered. But the purpose of this life would be frustrated if we had it as easy as we sometimes want it.

I headed out, and the water gauge went over to boiling. Then all of a sudden the temperature started dropping a little bit and I thought, Isn't it great what prayer will do? I don't know why, but it started dropping down until it was just about boiling. Then as I started up over the Point of the Mountain, all of a sudden it went all the way back and hung over to the right as far as it would go, and the motor started crackling and sparking. I'm not joking. I unlocked the door and cracked it open so that if the car exploded I could dive out into the snow. It was getting that hot.

I got past the Point of the Mountain and was coming down the other side and I saw Jay Lambert's gas station and thought, What a break! I'll pull in. So I did, but everything was closed.

It was about 7:30 by then, and I still had half an hour; so I decided to go out and hitchhike, as my car wouldn't start. There was a telephone booth there; I called up the family of the man who had invited Brother Woodbury to speak and said, "This is Vaughn Featherstone. My car has broken down out around thePoint of the Mountain at Jay Lambert's gas station. I'm about a half an hour out of Orem, but I'll go out and hitchhike; and if I can get a ride, I'll be there even if it is a little late." I hung up, and she called her husband at the ward house and gave him the message.

I went out and started hitchhiking. It isn't easy to get a ride when it is really snowing. I was in my black suit with a black top coat over it. I must have looked like the devil standing out there. They would see me and just go shooting right on past. Finally at about 8:15 I hadn't got a ride and I thought, Even if I get a ride now, it will be 8:45 before I get to Orem; and by the time I get to the ward house, it will be about time for the closing prayer.

After a few more minutes I walked across the street and thought I'd go back to Salt Lake. I was just feeling terrible. As luck would have it, the first car passed me, slowed down, turned around, and came back. The driver was a professor from BYU who, I guess, wasn't afraid of the devil. He stopped and picked me up and took me right to my door. I walked in about 9:15, and my wife wasn't there. That was a blessing. I went into my den and sat down with all the lights off. The thing that kept going over in my mind was T. Bowring Woodbury. He had foreseen all the problems and had done everything he could to get me there; and I had turned down all his offers of help. Now, I would have to call him the next day and say that I didn't make it. What made matters worse was that this particular stake had had only four convert baptisms during the whole year and they averaged only about six hours of proselyting per stake missionary. I was going down there with the theme "No matter how valid, an excuse never changes performance." Well, I really learned a great lesson about final-inch preparation.

Probably most of the people who have stumbled over a gold nugget have gone to their graves thinking they stumbled over a rock. You at least have to know what a gold nugget looks like so that if you stumble over one you can recognize what it is when you look back at it. As is usually the case in a disastrous experience, there was a gold nugget in my experience with T.Bowring Woodbury's speaking assignment. It was the rocky fact that we aren't able to meet commitments until we are prepared to cope with all reasonable contingencies. There were at least three things I could have done, any one of which would have forestalled the disaster: 1) saw to it that my wife's car was in good shape, 2) traded cars with Brother Woodbury when I traded cars with my wife, or, 3) thereafter called Brother Woodbury and borrowed his Cadillac as soon as I suspected possible trouble.

I am happy to be able to say that failing to meet commitments has never been a habit with me. But I occasionally get caught in the backwash of human error. I do not excuse myself. We should try to foresee and forestall all possible operations of the so-called Murphy's Law. That's the law that says, in one version of many, "Nature is on the side of the hidden flaw." I know that we can find no end of examples to prove that; but I believe that the Lord is on the side of any and all who prepare as best they can and then go ahead prayerfully. The better we plan, the less likely we are to get caught by a hidden flaw and the more worthy we will be of the Lord's intervention in our behalf.

The idea is to have all bases covered, like the boy who went home with the worst report card ever. He presented it to his father even though he hated to do so. His father looked at it, and it was just deplorable. He commented that he had never seen a more terrible report card than this one, and the son said, "Yes, dad, what do you think the problem is? Heredity or environment?" The boy thought that covered his tracks pretty well; but he found that it didn't.

As long as we are on the subject of schools and students, I think it is proper to state that a lot of cheating on exams is due to lack of foresight. The student doesn't foresee the pressure he is going to be under when he has the exam right in front of him and realizes that he isn't prepared. Then temptation becomes too great. A few years ago I had a colleague on the Missionary Committee who commented that one reason he never hadcheated as a student was that he had more confidence in his own knowledge than in that of anyone he sat by. He said, "I've noticed that most cheaters don't have good judgment about where to look for the right answers."

I can illustrate this with another story. This one is about a student who apparently had been cheating. The teacher called the father in, and the father said, "I don't believe my son, Adam, would cheat."

The teacher said, "We have proof."

"What is your proof?"

"The first question was Who was the sixteenth president of the United States? The fellow across the aisle from your son wrote Abraham Lincoln and your son, Adam, wrote Abraham Lincoln.

The father said, "Well, they could both be right."

"Yes, but the second question was the tip-off: Who was the seventeenth president of the United States? The fellow across the aisle wrote Lyndon B. Johnson and your son wrote Lyndon B. Johnson."

The father said, "Well, they could both be wrong."

The teacher said, "Well, the third question was the clincher: What were the causes of the Civil War? The fellow across the aisle wrote I don't know, and your son wrote Neither do I."

A religion teacher at BYU told about a student who wanted to be a medical doctor; so he enrolled in a pre-med program. This course brought him face to face with some classes that proved very hard. He wondered if this wasn't a sign that God didn't want him to be a doctor. It seemed reasonable to him that God would make it easy for him to become what God wanted him to become. His religion teacher used the stow of Nephi getting the Brass Plates as a means of showing this young man that the Lord doesn't remove the obstacles from the paths we are to follow-whether we choose those paths or God chooses them. Usually the only time we should give up a path is when we learn that it was chosen unwisely and is leading us intosomething that will take us off the path that leads to the celestial kingdom. When we know we have planned well, we must have the commitment to push the plan through to success.

I can illustrate this with a story about a young man from a little town in Idaho who became chief executive officer of a corporation that was doing seven billion dollars in sales every year. A few years ago I had the privilege of visiting him for about four hours in his New York office. The year before, this company, a large grocery chain, lost 157 million dollars. That would be the annual income of all the wage earners of between fifty and a hundred typical American LDS wards, depending on where you picked them. Of course, that would not be counting the welfare cases or the very wealthy. Put another way, 157 million would pay a salary of twenty thousand dollars to 7,850 families for a year.

Contrary to what many people believe, big grocery corporations rarely have a final net profit of more than 1 or 2 percent and cannot survive large losses. This particular corporation faced closing its doors and putting many thousands of people out of work. Again, contrary to popular belief, big corporations consider it a sacred obligation to maintain high employment. It is built into the dynamics of the way big business operates just as it is built into the dynamics of the way big government operates. Only big business cannot tax; therefore, it has to make a profit or go into receivership.

This young man from Idaho was hired as chief executive to cure the problem. He knew the cure was going to hurt; because he had to close stores that couldn't be brought back to profitability in order to save the stores that were making a profit or could be brought up to profitability. He was hired in February. By October the company had closed 1,321 stores. Their sales for the following year were equal to what they had been before the 1,321 stores were closed. To get this change effected, they had to change many top executives. This chief executive told me, "When I went to work for that company, I studied the executivesituation and realized that I would have to change 75 percent of these high-paid men to save the jobs of the thousands who were facing unemployment because of loose and faulty supervision. This would not be an easy task. Other men have had this same plan and made that same commitment to themselves before they went to work for a new organization. I made it; and then after I became acquainted with the executives I knew I must change, I started thinking about these men. I thought, This is a great man. We couldn't find anyone better on the outside. But I knew that was wrong. These executives had to be moved out to break up a failure-acceptance pattern. I'd go home and look in the mirror and say, 'You must, you must keep the commitment. You've got to keep that commitment.' I kept the commitment; but every single night I'd have to go home and tell myself the same thing: 'You've got to keep the commitment you made because it was right when you were thinking clearly. Now don't let anything cloud your thinking.'"

Now you can see a turnabout in this company almost like electricity. You can feel the vibrations when you walk into the corporate headquarters. It isn't sleeping anymore. It is a giant. I think this experience of a successful executive teaches us the lesson that we must be willing to do the hard things. Sooner or later we all come face to face with them. If our commitment is strong, we will be able to do the hard things that lead to success whether it is saving fifty thousand corporate jobs or getting through a tough college course enroute to a demanding profession.

Some people-maybe most now days-think the 1,321 stores shouldn't have been closed and the executives replaced. All they can see is the temporary unemployment caused by the shake-up. They cannot see the greater unemployment and displacement that would have occurred if the whole corporation had failed and gone under. And they cannot see the great economic loss in the inefficiency of the old and failing leadership of a corporation that is floundering in the seas of complacency,red tape, and regulation, and about to sink to the bottom. And they cannot see the growth and new jobs created since the ship was rescued.

There is one principle that we must remember as we go along trying to do things right and be successful. You might call it the principle of carry-over. That is, when you overcome one fault, it becomes easier to overcome another. This may explain why chastity is so important to success. I mean real success, of course. A person may be very successful in his chosen field of economic endeavor and still have his life in a shambles. Nothing is so devastating to a life as unchastity. I don't know of a truly great man who is immoral. I am saying who is immoral. Those who have been immoral can overcome the problem. It can be erased and forgotten through repentance. Even among nonmembers and non-Christians the act of reformation, the discarding of evil practices, has a profound effect on the whole life of the person who reforms. Of course, he cannot become a celestial being without the application of the principles of the gospel. His reformation, without faith in Christ, baptism, the laying on of hands, etc., is not full repentance; but it is a great step toward full repentance. And it will have a profound effect on other aspects of that person's life. There will be a carry-over to other principles of success. It will be easier to be persistent, to work hard on the final inch.

Let me share an idea that came from Emerson. He said we can have anything we want. All we have to do is pay the price and take it. That works in both directions. Anyone reading this, if he or she wants to, can be immoral. It is just that simple. But you have to pay the price; and I want to tell you that the price would stagger you if you knew what it is. If you ever pay the price yourself or have occasion to help someone else through the sorrow of paying the price, you will learn what a dear price you pay for immorality. Sometimes people turn it around and think they are giving up a lot to be chaste-a lot of what? Peace of mind? Happy families? Eternal joy? Self-respect? The respect andconfidence of others? Freedom from divorce and other legal entanglements? It isn't a sacrifice to pass up sin and its aftermath.

One man who came to me for help to get back into fellow. ship told me that he had been married in the temple. He knew what would happen if he was unfaithful to his wife. He knew what it would do to his children. He thought of excommunication, his family's embarrassment, possible separation and divorce and still chose a route to disaster for a few moments of what he supposed would be great pleasure. As he sat before me, he said he didn't know what came over him; but there he was. He had risked everything he held dear, and it had proved to be a small plan.

President Kimball once said, "Make no small plans. They have no magic to stir men's souls." I was very impressed when he said that. His life has been a living example of that. Think about President Kimball and what has been done in his relatively short ministry. We have expanded from about seventeen thousand missionaries to nearly double that. We have added many new missions. The work is going across the earth as it never has before. Temples have been announced all over the world. President Kimball made no small plans. And you would have to look long and hard to find a person who was more committed to the great plans he planned.
