Vaughn J. Featherstone, Commitment ( 1982)

4 The Inspiration of Great Books

Some time ago I served as a mission president in the Texas San Antonio Mission. One day in Harlingen a good brother handed me a large, thick volume and said, "I would like you to read this book." The book was Happy Homes and the Hearts That Make Them, by Samuel Smiles.

I said, "Thanks, but I have enough reading to last through my mission,"

He pushed the book into my hands and said, "I want you to read it. Don't worry about bringing it back until you finish it."

I said as kindly as I could, "Thanks, but I really don't have time for it."

He would not take no for an answer. Finally I took the book and told him I would return it when I was back in Harlingen in two weeks.

I carried the volume home with me on the plane. I took it to the office and placed it on my desk where it would be a constant reminder so I could be certain to return it on time. The day before I was to return it, I thought, I'd better at leas read enough to let him know I kept my commitment to him. I picked up the book and started to read. I read an hour, a second hour. I could hardlystop. I read late into the night. It is one of the greatest books I have ever read.

The next day on the way to Harlingen I decided I had have the book. I was unable to make contact with the loaner;; I gave the book to one of my missionaries and asked him return it. I said, "Tell him I want to buy it from him. I will give him twenty-five dollars or even fifty dollars, but I must have that book."

The elder returned the book to the owner and carried my message. Then he wrote to me and said that Brother Allred said that it was not for sale.

The next time I saw this good brother I said to him, "I must have that book. I will give you a hundred dollars for it."

He said, "It is the only copy I have and it is not for sale. However, I will try to find you a copy." It was printed in 1882 by the U.S. Publishing House. Hope was dim that I might ever get a copy.

About three months later I was attending a stake conference in McAllen, Texas. Brother Allred came up to me and he handed me a sack. He said, "This is a gift for you." I opened the sack and looked in. There was a copy of Happy Homes and the Hearts That Make Them. I could not have been more pleased. It had taken him three months and then his son found a copy in a small bookstore in a small community in Eastern Michigan.

I asked, "How much do I owe you for getting me a copy?

" He said, "Nothing. I want you to have this. My son paid for it, and he didn't tell me how much because he wanted to give to you." Then he continued, "You have published two book Would you please send him an autographed copy of each of them?"

I could not believe my good fortune. I would have given him ten copies of each of my books for that one volume. Of course, he knew that; but he was interested in a different reward, the pleasure of giving.

Why was I so impressed with this book? I found in it some great pearls of truth that I have never read elsewhere. Whenread a book I make notations of things that impress me on the inside cover. My copy of this book has such notations as this: happiness, pages 11, 12, 13; husband's expectation, page 17; woman's importance to man, pages 18, 93, 95, 116; character and genius, page 59; story of Joseph Corbett's mother, page 56; like President Kimball, page 71; Washington's reputation, pages 76, 80, 102; great workers, great thinkers, pages 79, 170, 180; men not to be conquered, page 86; Sir Waiter Scott, page 515; and many more. Some of you may recall that this volume was often referred to and quoted in "The Spoken Word," by Richard L. Evans.

Reading opens doors, thoughts, ideas, fantasies, experiences, and it increases knowledge and understanding. Through the masterful writings of those who share their minds through books I have been lifted vicariously to great heights and have experienced the dramatic mentally as if I were physically doing the things about which I was reading.

Books transport us vicariously to every conceivable corner of this abundant creation of God that we call earth. They give us opportunities to probe the minds of the greatest thinkers in all of history. Books excite our emotions to high levels. As I read and reread Les Miserables, by Victor Hugo, many emotions filled my breast. I wept as I suffered with the "little ones" who were so cruelly mistreated. I rejoiced and sorrowed on a constantly shifting basis. I felt heroism, inner conflict, turmoil, strength, courage, terror, and faith with each chapter. The translated version I have is about 1,220 pages. The first time I read it I committed myself to read forty pages each night so that I could finish in thirty days. I kept that commitment. Then I read it twice more and still read in it regularly. What a loss I would have suffered if I had not kept my full commitment to read the entire book.

I love good books and I love the men who have taken the time to write them. Some of my most glorious experiences have come from reading. Oh, what rest, what exquisite joy to be transported to the greatest experiences of adventure, spirit, greatness, love, mercy, and charity through good books!

Books are very precious. I can count thousands of hours of pleasure and inspiration they have given me. They are drink and food when the pressures of a busy life have drained my spiritual energies and have left me with a thirst that milk cannot quench and with a hunger that honey cannot satisfy. I have feelers out for new and precious volumes that are coming on the market, and I listen to the people I admire and respect to hear the titles of the classics they have read in the past. I have bought as many books as I could and have thus accumulated about two thousand volumes, a great number of which I have read.

Malcolm Muggeridge, in The End of Christendom, tells a story that illustrates the nurture of books. He went to visit a wizened, old, blind bushman in Darwin, Australia. This man had heard Muggeridge on the radio from his hospital bed and had asked for a visit. Muggeridge was deeply touched and searched his mind desperately for something to say to cheer him. Suddenly he remembered what Gloster said to the old man in King Lear: "I stumbled when I saw." As Muggeridge left the ward, he could hear the poor old man repeating the words over and over: "I stumbled when I saw." He had heard with his ears, his heart, and his mind. Muggeridge concluded the story with this comment: "That is what I mean by the marvelous power of words when they are used with true force in their true meaning." (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1980, page 3.)

I think of the need to read as a dual commitment: first, the commitment to read on a regular basis; and second, the commitment to learn from the "great trees in the forest," the patriarchs who have wisdom to shed upon us in as great abundance as the leaves falling to the earth in the autumn. We may have to search for the great books. They are not always the popular ones. They are not always those that are honored by the famous and the learned. If our standards are the standard works, we will develop the values that will help us find the best books.

I think that the height of a patriarch in the forest of authors can best be measured by the growth he generates or the light hesheds on the reader. This growth must be so lasting that it serves as well in the next life as it does in this. The light must be eternal or it is darkness instead of light. I would like to fortify this idea in the words of Og Mandino. In his book The Greatest Salesman in the World he said this:

Today I am born anew and my birthplace is a vineyard where there is fruit for all.

Today I will pluck grapes of wisdom from the tallest and fullest vines in the vineyard, for these were planted by the wisest of my profession who have come before me, generation upon generation.

Today I will savor the taste of grapes from those vines and verily I will swallow the seed of success buried in each and new life will sprout within me. (New York: Frederick Fell Publishers, Inc., 1968, pages 57-58.)

The faithful know that the tallest vines in the vineyard are the prophets and apostles of all ages, especially their words that are preserved in holy writ. We can learn wisdom as we apply the teachings and principles they share. There may be some others as good and wise; but remember the endowment the prophets and apostles have by the laying on of hands which sets them apart to their high calling, one part of which is the dispensing of the wisdom that comes directly from God by new revelation.

There are many books available. We can select from them as we please. Each book contains a philosophy or thought that the author is desirous of sharing. It may well be his or her greatest thinking on the subject. Undoubtedly the author has intense feelings or he or she would not have taken precious time to write the book. But we must have true Christian standards to guide us in our selections. Our time is precious, too. It would take many lifetimes to read all the books; and many are best left untouched.

Elder Sterling W. Sill in his own books has suggested many of the books that I have purchased and read. Many books about which he has written have become my favorite possessions and companions. The list would include Bunker Bean, A Fortune toShare, Acres of Diamonds, much of the Harvard Classics, The Magnificent Obsession, The Man Without a Country, The Other Wiseman, Disputed Passage, Sohrab and Rustum, Ivanhoe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, and many more. When I served as a stake president, Elder Sill visited our stake. What a marvelous two days of training and teaching! As he left to return to Salt Lake, one of our bishops said, "It was like trying to force all the wisdom and knowledge of years through the small end of a funnel. It was all there. It just couldn't come out fast enough." His love of books had a great deal of influence on what he became. And so it can with you if you love the right books.

Read great books. Associate vicariously or in reality with men and women of character and integrity. Rub shoulders with them. Probe into their mental recesses and stretch yourself to a new dimension. You will never be the same. With each experience you will become a larger person, more nearly like those with whom you associate through reading. Commit now to read uplifting literature and great books every day while always reading the scriptures on a daily basis.

Commitments to read regularly can be a great help to the spiritual and intellectual development of most people; but the amount of time or the number of pages will vary from person to person if wisdom prevails. There are people who make emotional commitments that are unrealistic and. impossible to keep. Also, we vary a great deal in nervous and physical stamina. Some need eight hours minimum sleep every night or they get sick. All these variables have to be taken into account.

I guess every mission president can tell you how missionaries come in and sit in front of them and say, "President, I've been doing some thinking and I heard what you said at conference and I'm going to improve. I'm going to do this and this and this." And you are aware that some of them may not be using good judgment; because they said that the time before and the time before that. But they want to. Of course, most of them do keep their commitments.

I want to suggest something to you: Don't make a commitmentthat you don't keep. If you have decided on January first that you are going to read the Bible by April first, keep that commitment or don't make it. You can harm your character by making commitments you don't keep. It can become a habit, an ingrained characteristic. You are telling your subconscious mind that it is all right to make all these promises and then not keep them. By and by the subconscious begins to feed back a negative feeling. It tells you that you are a failure and never keep your promises to yourself. The longer this goes on, the harder it is to undo the damage. It would have been better to have stayed satisfied with yourself as you were.

Drop it down and say, "I'm only going to read one page a day," or some amount that you know is possible, reasonable, and in line with your other time demands. Then do it. Don't ever set an unreasonable goal that you can't keep. The size or difficulty of the commitment is really critical. I've seen this in men and women in and out of the Church. Great people everywhere seem to have an ability to commit to something and then really get it done. The idea is to push yourself, but not so much that you set up a failure pattern. If you are going to commit to read the scriptures fifteen minutes a day, do it, and never violate that commitment. Maybe a verse a day or a one minute commitment is all you can make to start with. Very few people are able to keep a commitment of an hour of reading a day. Such a commitment usually means failure. So be practical.

I had a great blessing as a young man. I read Elder Sterling W. Sill's first leadership book. When I finished the chapter "Twice Born Men," which is toward the end of the book, it so affected me that I went downstairs and knelt down and prayed for a long time. I was never the same after that. I came back up to bed an hour or so later, and I just wasn't the same. I was a different person. I had made a commitment that I was going to read. I credit my reading with supplying more of my education than any time I spent in school. And I find this is generally true among truly educated people: They have learned more from the great books they have read than from their formal education.

I decided I was going to read every night a certain period of time. I knew that if I was going to read the books that are commonly recommended and, on top of that, read the scriptures every day, it would take a strong commitment. Therefore, I made a commitment that has become a habit. No matter what time I get the duties of the day finished, I read my committed allotment of time in something like Les Misérables, or Uncle Tom's Cabin, or A Tale of Two Cities-the great classics. Then I always conclude by reading out of the scriptures. I can't tell you the reading that I have been able to accomplish through the years just by doing that one thing: keeping that commitment to myself. I commend that to you. Even a minute a day is enough to finish a fair-sized book in a year. That is more serious reading than most mature people accomplish. But whatever you do, do not commit to something you can't or won't do. And, of course, pick the time of day that suits your schedule and personality. For some it may be the first thing in the morning. Some use their lunch hour.

After Jesus' resurrection, he appeared several times to various witnesses chosen beforehand, foremost among whom were the apostles. On the occasion that John calls "the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his disciples" (John 21:14), Jesus pressed Peter very hard to make a commitment to feed Jesus' sheep. Three times he asked Peter, "Lovest thou me?" Twice Peter answered, "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee." The third time, being "grieved" at Jesus' repetition of the question, Peter answered, "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee." (John 21:15-17.)

Then Jesus made this significant prophecy:

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.

This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me. (John 21:18-19.)

Adam Clarke, in his famous commentary on the Old and New Testaments, made the following observation on these verses:

Wetstein observes that it was a custom at Rome to put the necks of those who were to be crucified into a yoke, and to stretch out their hands and fasten them to the end of it; and having thus led them through the city they were carried out to be crucified.... Thus then Peter was girded, chained, and carried whither he would not-not that he was unwilling to die for Christ; but he was a man -he did not love death; but he loved his life less than he loved his God....

Ancient writers state that, about thirty-four years after this [After Jesus' prophecy], Peter was crucified; and that he deemed it so glorious a thing to die for Christ that he begged to be crucified with his head downwards, not considering himself worthy to die in the same posture in which his Lord did. So [wrote] Eusebius, Prudentius, Chrysostom, and Augustin. (Clarke's Commentary, Matthew to Revelation [Nashville: Abingdon, n.d.], page 663. Italics as in the original.)

I hope none of us have to go as far as Peter had to go to keep our commitments; but we should be willing to when the commitments are good. We should make them small enough so that we can surely keep them. Then we will not be fragmenting the fabric of our character. Then as our character grows, our commitments can be larger and harder. That is what is meant by learning to walk before you run.

A recent reading experience deeply affected my family life. My sons had been after me to read The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings (3 volumes) by J. R. R. Tolkien. Since my reading time is limited, I am very selective and try to read only at my highest interest or greatest pleasure level. I have always loved adventure and exploration books; but I thought something like Tolkien's works might be a little too much on the fantasy or science-fiction side for my purposes. I came later to the realization that Professor Tolkien was more of a philosopher, perhaps, than a storyteller. Though he certainly was a great storyteller. Thosewho have pursued him even as far as the Silmarillion are aware that his stories have the roots of eternity in them. There are shadows of the war in heaven, a fallen angel of light, fallen men, degrees of intelligences, and possibly even the wanderings of the lost tribes of Israel. Of course, most of it seems to be based on pagan mythology. Like all the ancient legends and myths, it tends to verify the biblical account of a world tortured by great cataclysms and wars that devastate whole lands and peoples. Accompanying everything else, there is the thread of tragedy. If you have wept over David, you will weep over Feanor.

Perhaps all those who read this are not aware that Professor Tolkien's books-at least The Hobbit and the trilogy-are must reading in many secondary and college reading lists for literature courses. J. R. R. Tolkien was a professor of Anglo-Saxon at Oxford University for twenty years and then occupied the Merton endowed English languages and literature professorial chair there for the fourteen years before his retirement. Tolkien's several books have sold upwards of forty million copies. The Hobbit and each volume of the trilogy or The Lord of the Rings had sold eight million copies by 1981, a total of over thirty-two million copies for these four most popular of Tolkien's books. He died in 1973 having received much acclaim. But his fame after death has far exceeded anything he knew in life.

My sons pressed me to read Tolkien's four most popular books, and I felt an obligation to do it so that we could discuss them together. As soon as I gave in and commenced reading, my sons started getting excited. As a family we have told and retold the stories, adventures, and intimate experiences of Frodo, Gandalf and Arathorn. The hours we have spent excitedly discussing these books were worth every moment of time it took to read them.

I read the trilogy in about forty days, a task of about fifteen hundred pages. It was an adventure. There was nothing degrading. Right and truth triumphed in the end. Tolkien is a magnificent artist who paints pictures with words. With great talent heexpresses his creative imagination as skillfully as anyone I have ever read. A steady, constant commitment to good twines itself like a golden thread from chapter to chapter and book to book.

There are many side benefits from keeping our commitments to self-improvement through reading, participating in cultural experiences, writing, studying scriptures, praying and exercising daily, and so forth. Most everyone believes in all of these things, but few actually do them. Those who make a commitment to self-improvement realize the initial blessings and the side benefits, as my reading of Tolkien illustrates. These side benefits are many, but better human relations lead the way.

There is one more thought that I would like to pursue before leaving this idea of the value of books. The Bible has been called the Book of Books and many other ennobling titles. Some of the world's greatest thinkers have said that Job is the greatest, the most sublime, piece of literature ever penned. Others have said that David was the most gifted musician and psalmist of all time. Moses was the greatest law giver. Until humanism conquered our courts and law schools, the Bible, especially Moses, was consulted as the last authority in the field of law. Paul was hailed as the master theologian and missionary. And through it all, the Shepherd of Israel, the Christ of Christendom, was the source of Job's, Moses', David's, and Paul's inspiration. Jehovah's infinite mind gave the writers of the Bible the words that have set fire to the very inside of the bones of hundreds of millions who have read them. (Jer. 20:9.) Untold thousands have given their lives for the Bible. It has floated down to you through the centuries on a river of blood. How precious to you is this book that has been bought so dearly?

The Communists in Russia set out to crush the Bible and Christianity. But they have failed. Prisoners in Siberia carry scraps of paper in their pockets on which are copied choice passages from the Gospels. They survive by reading these passages when they can. They not only survive, they are changed dramatically into kind and gracious Christians. Think of the power of the words of this book, the Bible!

Muggeridge testifies further to the power of the books of the great Tolstoy. He tells how in an interview with Anatoli Kusnyetsov, another Soviet Christian writer, he asked Kusnyetsov how he came about his Christian orientation. Kusnyetsov said "that Stalin made one fatal error: he neglected to suppress the works of Tolstoy." Had Stalin been more of a reader-at least of great and good books-he would have know that Tolstoy's books were filled with Christianity and perpetuated much of the Bible's thought and inspiration. This explains-at least in part-the fact that Russian officials admit that as many as 30 percent of their people are still "believers." (Malcolm Muggeridge, The End of Christendom, pages 44-46.)

Thus some of the best books are preparing a people for a great missionary work and harvest that awaits us. And it is not only in Russia where this is happening. Besides the influence of the Bible, there are cases here and there about the world where copies of the Book of Mormon have converted whole congregations before a missionary ever was seen.

Such are the profound influences of the written word, not just of the scriptures but of Christ-oriented writers in the great literature. Besides the Christian influence there is much of value, especially in the pursuit of scientific knowledge and other useful information, in the great works of other honest and capable thinkers. If you haven't begun to enrich your life by reading, perhaps it is time to dig for this treasure by making some kind of a reading commitment, be it great or small.
