Vaughn J. Featherstone, Commitment ( 1982)

5 Turning Bad Things Into Good With Courage

There was a minister down in Harlingen, Texas, who was pretty critical of the elders. He would watch for them on the street and then slip up behind them and say, "Are you wearing your secret underwear?" He did this over and over. The elders were offended, befuddled, and embarrassed. They didn't know how to handle it. What made matters worse, this minister was a big intimidating man—about six foot five and 260 pounds. His father also was a minister. They had a little printing press and some other business.

One day this big minister saw a new elder, Elder Cornet, and his companion in the post office as they were in line waiting to buy some stamps. He walked up behind this new victim and said, "Do you have your secret underwear on?" Elder Cornet looked shocked as he turned around and looked at this stranger. Then he backed off and in a voice loud enough for everyone in the post office to hear said, "Man, what kind of a weirdo are you, asking about my underwear?" All of a sudden all the attention was on this man, and he turned red and walked out of the post office. You would have to know Elder Cornet to fully appreciate this. He was a convert of only about a year when he went on his mission and had had the kind of background that gave him this sort of presence of mind.

I felt a responsibility and desire to interview this minister; so I went down to Harlingen to see him. I took off my mission president identification button and put it in my pocket. I had the elders drop me off at the corner near where he lived. I went down the street and knocked on his door. His wife came to the door, and I asked to see her husband, the pastor. She said he was across the street in the printing plant in his father's home. I asked if I could go over and see him. She not only said I could but she took me right over and into the house. I probably wouldn't have gotten in if she hadn't been there. The old minister was in a wheelchair, and as he looked at me I felt that he suspected something was amiss.

He started wheeling over toward me and said, "Who did you say you were?"

I said, "I'm Vaughn Featherstone. I used to work in Boise for the Albertson's food centers. I was the corporate training director up there."

He heaved a sign of relief and said, "Well, come in and sit down."

"Thank you." I sat down and said, "I'd just like to tell you a little more. Four years ago I was called by the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to be a member of the Presiding Bishopric of that church."

"Well, you can get out of my home. If I had known who you were, you wouldn't have been allowed to come into it."

I said, "I know that. That is why I didn't tell you. But I want to just say this much to you...." Then we started talking.

He asked, "Do you believe in Christ?"

I said, "Of course we do."

He then asked, "Do you believe in God the Father?"

I said, "We certainly do."

He went on asking other questions and then he asked, "Do you believe that Jesus Christ and God the Eternal Father are separate?"

I said, "Of course they are."

"Then get out of my house."

This was the second time he had asked me to leave and I just sat there. Of course, his son (six foot five, about 260 pounds) was in the other room. But he wasn't all that lean and all that hard; so I was not intimidated—yet at least. So I said to him, very much like Paul on the way to Damascus, "The Lord would call you to do a great work here. I have a message for you just as surely as the Lord had a message for Paul." Then I told him what he could do if he would listen to us and let us take him through the discussions.

He said, "I won't do it. I'm not interested. I know you are messengers of the devil."

Then I asked them if they would read the Book of Mormon.

He said, "We've got one, but we won't read it."

I asked, "Will you read one chapter or just one page?"

"I won't touch it."

I turned to the son who had been asking about the secret underwear and asked, "Will you read it?"

He said, "Well, I'll read some of it."

I asked, "Will you read 3 Nephi?"

He said, "Well ... okay, I'll read 3 Nephi."

I said, "You're a man of your word, a pastor in Jesus Christ's labor, as you put it, so I would expect you to keep your word. Then, after you have read that book, you will know what to do. You will ask God if it is true."

Then the old man said, "What are you doing here anyway?"

"We have had a problem with your son. He has been walking up behind our elders and criticizing them about the sacred underclothing that we wear. I want you to know that they are sacred. And I can't imagine why, if you profess to be followers of Jesus Christ, you would do that. I can't believe that Jesus or any of his followers would say something so critical about something so sacred to someone else."

This old pastor turned to his son and said, "Did you do that?"

The son looked embarrassed and blushed; but he was on the spot. He said, "Well, I didn't mean any harm." He didn't tell his experience with Elder Cornet in the post office. Neither did I. My only reason for being there was to improve a bad situation. I had no malicious feelings.

Finally, the meeting was just about ended. I had been there about half an hour, which was twenty-nine minutes longer than I was led to hope for at the start. I stood up and bore my testimony to them and said, "One day you will have a witness borne to your soul who you have had in your home this day. I am an ambassador of Christ and have been sent to you by his true apostles."

The old one said, "You have not."

"I have and I bear that testimony to you." I told them about Joseph Smith being a prophet and the Book of Mormon being true. Then I reached out to shake hands and the old minister wouldn't shake hands with me. He said it would be like shaking hands with the devil.

I said, "All right, adieu, brethren."

They said, "We're not your brethren."

I said, "Yes you are. You just don't know it yet."

I left and that was it. But I believe that there does come a time when we must stand up to be counted. I think we ought to defend our testimonies. There are times when someone is critical and it is best to ignore it or overlook it. But I have been in many situations where someone has been critical of the Church when I thought it was necessary to stand up and be counted. Someone has said, "Though argument does not change belief, the lack of it destroys belief."

We have had no more problems in Harlingen with those ministers from that day on. They quit criticizing us openly about anything. I believe they had at least some inkling of whom they were speaking with.

Sometimes members and even elders will speculate about how we would feel if missionaries from other churches came to our doors with their message. They make it sound as if we would be facing the same problems in that situation that the people of the world face when our elders come to their doors. Well, if that is the case, then we wouldn't be sending out any missionaries. And, if you believe that, you have no business investing any time or money in missionary work. Either this is the kingdom of God, restored by Gods, angels, and ordained servants of God, or it isn't. If it verily is the kingdom of God, then what God has said is true: The angels go before us and the Spirit bears witness. (D&C 84:62-91, especially verse 88.) And when missionaries from other churches come to our doors, the situation is reversed: The Spirit bears witness that they are not the servants of the Master. But we don't have to tell them that. We can try to tell them the glorious good news we have heard ourselves about the angels who have flown through the midst of heaven and have restored the truths that were lost.

What you have just read represents the faith of this fine young man, Elder Cornet, who fulfilled his mission, went home, and married in the temple. He had been in the Church just a year when he went out. He was one of the greatest of all the elders who came to Texas. One of his strongest points was simply that he feared no man. Like the young David, he believed that God is with the people who have been commissioned by God. He absolutely wasn't afraid of anyone and his work showed that. Very often people do the wrong thing because they haven't the courage to do the right thing.

Commitment, in a large sense, demands self-control of the highest order. Self-control in any form is nothing less than courage. True manhood may never come to an individual until self-control is an integral part of his character. The same can be said for true womanhood, though it generally is conceded that women seem to be naturally endowed with more self-control than men.

Self control is at the root of all the virtues. Let a man give the reins to his impulses and passions and from that moment he yields up his moral freedom. He is carried along the current of life, and becomes the slave of his strongest desires for the time being.

The most self reliant, self governing man is always under discipline; and the more perfect the discipline, the higher will be his moral condition. He has to drill his desires and keep them in subjection to the higher powers of his nature. They must obey the word of command of the internal monitor—the conscience—otherwise they will be but the mere slaves of their inclinations, the sport of feeling and impulse. (Happy Homes and the Hearts That Make Them, Samuel Smiles [Chicago: U.S. Publishing House; 1882], pages 472, 473.)

The Church has taught and continues to instruct us that the greatest seminary of moral discipline is the home. Men and women who demonstrate self-control, frugality, and discipline, and who set examples for their children in these matters are the teachers.

The best regulated home is always that in which the discipline is the most perfect, and yet where it is the least felt. (Happy Homes and the Hearts That Make Them, page 474.)

The men who are really men are "gentle" men. In Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story, Truman G. Madsen quotes B. H. Roberts as follows: "They make no slaves of their women; they make companions of them; and in honoring them they honor themselves." (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, Inc., 1980, page 96.)

It is a simple matter to judge men. Watch closely how they treat women. Observe carefully their relationship with little children. Make a study of how they respect and deal with other men. The truly great man is noble in relations with all men, all women, and ever so taken up with little children. He attracts, not repels, others.

I read a story about an explorer named George Dawson in a Royal Bank of Canada Newsletter. George Dawson was slight in stature, just over five feet when he was full gown. He had serious respiratory diseases and was not strong. He was an engineer and spent most of his adult life exploring, mapping, and surveying Canada. Winter and summer he labored. He died at a relatively young age of just over fifty. A town that has been immortalized in stories, poetry, and song is named after him. At his funeral they eulogized him in these words:

And tell him the men he worked with Say, judging as best they can, That in lands that try manhood the hardest He was tested and proven a man.

Commitment and self-control are as inseparable as loving brothers. The man or woman who would keep commitments must not be deterred, redirected, or distracted, or become wishy-washy or weak-kneed. Self-control is a great quality that keeps our eyes single to our goals.

I have always loved David, the psalmist. As a boy, I remember reading in the Bible about him. His words as a teenage visitor to the army of Israel thrilled me. On that occasion Goliath, the giant of Gath, had challenged Saul's army daily to send out a single combatant to meet him. The winner was also to win victory for his side of the war. No one had accepted the challenge. Only the teenaged David comprehended the true implications of the situation. He said, "Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living god?" (1 Sam. 17:26.)

David's words greatly provoked his oldest brother, Eliab, who said, "Why camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the haughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle." (1 Sam. 17:28.)

And David replied, "What have I now done? Is there not a cause?" (1 Sam. 17:29.)

He could have defended his position by saying his father had sent him with food. But David now saw a larger cause and was so wrapped up in it that it pervaded his whole mind. He had a heart like unto God's own heart. He had slain a lion and a bear in defense of his father's flocks and rightly discerned that his power was the power of the Lord.

It is very likely that no one much more than hoped that David could succeed. Yet so desperate was Israel's plight-not because of any actual danger, but because of the fear of the wicked who had lost their faith-that even the king, a greatwarrior in his own right, accepted David's offer to meet Goliath. David must have been a good-sized lad; he did not refuse Saul's armor because it was too big, but because he had not learned to fight in such trappings. And Saul was head and shoulders above all Israel in his youth. (1 Sam. 9:2.) But it was in the heart of David where his strength lay. When he went out to meet Goliath, he answered Goliath's insulting taunt with these words that probably have inspired and thrilled more godly and brave souls than any other words ever spoken:

Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou has defied.

This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.

And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the Lord's and he will give you into our hands. (1 Sam. 17:45-47.)

Then David did not go forward with shaking legs and cautious step. His strength was not vitiated by assailing doubts. But he "hasted, and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine." (1 Sam. 17:48.) Mind you, it was not Goliath alone who stood out there in front of him. There was a large army with a wall of spears and swords pointed in his direction. Thousands of arrows were notched and ready. Because as soon as David fell, the Philistines would pour down the hillside, across the vale, and up into the cringing ranks of the Israelites. As David went forward as fast as he could run, he was fitting a stone into his sling, a very round one that he had selected from the brook over which he had crossed. When he was near enough, he whirled the sling around his head and released the stone. It sank into Goliath's forehead, and he fell to the ground with a crash. David then severed the giant's head with Goliath's own sword. I can imagine that he held it up for all Israel to see. Consternation swept the ranks of the Philistines, and the Israelites remembered who theywere. Then all of David's prophecy to Goliath was fulfilled and a very bad situation was made good by courage and commitment.

David became the standard by which God judged all other kings, and none measured up to him in the conduct of his duty as king-in his fairness as a judge, and in his generosity to his associates and to the downtrodden. But David's commitment was not complete. At least it wavered in regard to his personal life. We do not know his ultimate fate; but we do know that he was both a great positive and negative example, but at different times, to which we often look for guidance.

It is not uncommon for the Saints, like David, to be more willing to do the dramatic things than the day by day common, ordinary heroics that usually are not called heroics. Brigham Young said that more Saints are willing to die for the Church than live for it. When I think of day by day quiet heroics, I think most of all mothers. In our day especially it takes courage to be a mother.

A daughter of a leader in one of our stakes announced, "I am

not going to have any children."

Her father said, "What?"

She repeated, "I'm not going to have any children. Don't you know that there is a zero population campaign and we should not have any children? What's more, we have four in our family already and I would appreciate it if you wouldn't have any more. I am embarrassed to go to school and feel the pressure there. I am simply a political outcast because we have four children in our family."

Now, that illustrates an attitude that unfortunately has even crept into the thinking of some of the daughters of Zion. By contrast let me tell you another story. A little mother back East who was expecting her fifth child went in to see a doctor. They had just moved back there, and she asked him to be her obstetrician and he said he would be glad to. They started filling out a case history, and as they got down to children, he asked, "How many children do you have?"

She said, "This will be our fifth."

He gasped and said, "What do you mean? You have four and are expecting your fifth? I had better not treat you during your pregnancy. What we had better do is have an abortion performed. I will make the arrangements. You are way over the limit right now with four children. You surely do not want any more. By the way, how many children were you planning on having?"

This woman stood up, but before she walked out of his office she said, "At least thirty-five."

God bless her. I tell you, when people tell a righteous Saint one thing and God says another, it doesn't set well. Our faithful sisters wouldn't care if they were beaten to death. If God tells them to have children, they will have them. Never mind what Darwin, Malthus, and Women's Lib say. Our mothers want to stand in the liberty that makes them free, and that is the liberty of obedience to God. But, brethren, they don't need to be compelled to be obedient in this manner. Having a baby is a choice blessing and a wondrous gift. So it ought to be voluntary. Besides, most of your wives will have as many babies voluntarily as they would under righteous persuasion. So let them feel happy about it.

Looking at it from the standpoint of worldly philosophy, having babies might be called a bad thing. Of course, it isn't. It is a beautiful thing. But it is a great trial. Through courage, however, all good women turn this great physical trial into good.

The Book of Mormon is rich in stories about missionaries who fumed bad situations into good by courage. The first half of the book of Alma is especially rich in these stories. There we read about Ammon and his brethren who asked to go among the Lamanites to preach the gospel. It was a very dangerous assignment. They were in danger of arrest, imprisonment, and execution daily. Yet they converted thousands of souls. And it was because of their courage. Read again the story of Ammon, who was bound and brought before the king in the land of Ishmael. This king could do as he pleased with Ammon-killhim, enslave him, or set him free. Ammon asked only to be a servant of the king, who was so pleased with Ammon's deportment and courage that he gave him his wish. Later Ammon's courageous defense of the king's flocks led to an opportunity to teach the gospel to the king and many of his people. This, in turn, led to other great teaching experiences and courageous deeds.

Joseph, the son of Jacob, is another example of courage in the face of adversity. You recall that Joseph was sold by his brothers and was taken into a foreign land, the land of Egypt. In those days that may as well have been halfway round the world. Anyway, Joseph arrived in Egypt a slave and ended up in the household staff of Potiphar. But he didn't pout and cringe and feel sorry for himself. He worked hard and served well. It was not long until he was second only to Potiphar. He had made a bad situation into a good one by courage and optimism. But there was worse to come.

Potiphar's wife fell in love with Joseph. Joseph was a very good-looking man. Women were deeply affected by his beauty of body and soul. In one version of an interesting tradition, Potiphar's wife, having been criticized for her love for Joseph, invited forty of the ladies of the court to see for themselves. She gave them knives and oranges to cut and called for Joseph. When they saw him, they were so amazed at his beauty that their hands all slipped and they all cut themselves and exclaimed, "O...! This is not a human being, this is none other than a glorious angel!" (Adam Clarke, Clarke's Commentary, Genesis to Esther, page 228.) In another version, they were all sewing and jabbed themselves with their needles when they saw Joseph. How Potiphar stayed in the dark is not explained in these traditions.

Finally, Potiphar's wife was so overcome with lust that she tried to force her attentions on Joseph. Joseph's reply to her pleadings was a classic that has been an inspiration to the righteous ever since: "How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?" The scriptural account says that "... he left hisgarment in her hand, and fled, and got him out." (Gen. 39:9, 12.) There are no end of people who would be better off in this world and especially the next if they had "got them out" of temptation while they still could. But it didn't fare well with Joseph in the short run. Potiphar's wife changed the details of the story and used Joseph's cloak as proof that he had tried to seduce her. Potiphar believed the lie and Joseph spent several years in prison.

Did Joseph spend his time in prison cursing his luck and his Maker? Not on your life. He went to work and became the chief trustee of the prison. God was with him and he prospered. He even was blessed with the powers of the Spirit so that he interpreted dreams. I can imagine that he preached the gospel to whomever would listen. But he did not neglect his duties. Like Ammon, he served his master well. And this led to another great experience. Eventually, he turned this bad thing into such a good thing that he became the savior of all his people Israel. Because of his suffering and his service, he is used sometimes as a prototype of Christ. He became a king in Egypt, second only to the Pharaoh. All power was given to him in Egypt to do as he pleased. And we know of no case in which he misused that power.

I suppose if we took a test right now and asked the readers if they have been effective in missionary work or if they are doing what they ought to be doing in missionary work, most would think they haven't measured up. I think for some reason there is something in the Church that makes us feel guilty that we are not doing enough. No matter how much we do, we are made to feel it is too little. But maybe you are better off than you think. If we asked how many of you are living a good life, an exemplary life, everyone could say yes most of the time. If we asked how many are supporting or have supported missionaries in the field, nearly everyone could respond affirmatively. How many subscribe to the New Era or Ensign for other people? Many do. We could go down the list of missionary responsibilities and about the only thing you are not doing is actual proselyting orgetting missionaries into the homes of your friends. Most of you probably aren't holding cottage meetings quite the way you should and maybe could. But really, you are 99 percent missionaries, and I think you ought to feel good about that. We do not want you to feel guilty. We just want you to go that one extra little turn and introduce your friends to missionaries. Some of you claim that you don't want the missionaries to go to your friends because the missionaries aren't capable enough to teach your friends. J. Golden Kimball is reported to have said, "I know this Church is true, or the missionaries would have ruined it long ago." There are some unprepared missionaries; but most of them can handle whatever comes along if they have courage. And if you are "smart" enough to think the missionaries can't handle it, that puts an even greater burden on you: You had better get busy and do it yourself so it will be done right.

But with most of us the thing that is holding us back is that we do not have the courage to ask our friends to let us send the missionaries over. It reminds me of the woman who went in to get her boy up for school, and she said to him, "You've got to go."

He said, "I'm not going to go today."

She said, "You have to go."

He said, "I won't go."

Finally, she put a little pressure on him and said, "You are going to go. You give me two good reasons why you're not going to go."

He said, "In the first place, all the students hate me and in the second place all the teachers hate me. Now, you give me two good reasons why I should go."

She said, "In the first place, you are forty-four years old and in the second place you are the principal."

I suppose that is it. Members are all principals, and we need to get up and do something courageous about missionary work and everything else we may be shirking. And the only thing wrong with telling that is that the ones who didn't need to hear it will feel guilty and the ones who did need to hear it might know where the valve is that turns off the guilty juices.

When I was a mission president I went down to McAllen, Texas, and met a wonderful family after Sunday School. Elder Brown said to me, "President, I want you to meet this family, Brother and Sister Gutierrez and their four adult children. Three of them are school teachers and three of them are going to be baptized today." Then he told me which were going to be baptized.

I said, "What about the rest of you?"

They said, "Well, we are not ready yet."

So I talked to them for a minute, bore my testimony, and then put my arm around Brother Gutierrez, this old, hard, Mexican father who had worked all his life. He had rough, gnarled hands which had supported his children all the way through high school and college. They were respected in the community and were making a real contribution. I put my arm around him and said, "Brother Gutierrez, one day you and this good woman will kneel across the altar in a holy temple and you will be sealed together for all eternity. These four grown sons and daughters will be dressed in white clothing as you will be, and you will be sealed as a forever family by someone who has authority. I know that will take place. Please read the Book of Mormon and pray about it. Ask God if this book is true and ask him if Joseph Smith really was a prophet." Then I left and went out. It was right after meeting.

You would have to see the McAllen chapel to fully appreciate the rest of the story. It is about the normal size; but it has a special front made of uniformly large rocks that the members picked up for that purpose. It is very beautiful, really magnificent. And there is a wide and spectacular walkway between the stake offices, the chapel, and the cultural hall. There are palm trees on each side of the walkway. They keep the lawn just manicured, and it is a beautiful place for people to come to. To me, at least, it is the most elegant and beautiful church house of any denomination in the McAllen area.

After meeting the Gutierrez family, I went out to get into the car to take my wife over to the bishop's. Elder Brown went into the baptism and then he came running out before we leftand he looked like he had something to say. So I said, "Elder Brown, what can I do for you?"

He said, "Nothing," and shook hands.

I said, "Good."

He stood there and I said, "Are you sure there is nothing I can do for you?"

He said, "Yes, I'm sure."

He stood there and I said, "Do you have a place to eat dinner?" I thought maybe he didn't have any place and wanted to eat with us.

He said, "Yes."

So I got into the car and said, "All right, Elder Brown, we'll see you." And he kind of just stood there as we took off. We got about half way to the bishop's house and I said to my wife, "Now I know what Elder Brown was trying to say. I've got to go back."

I took her to the bishop's, turned around and went back. There were a few cars parked there, no one outside. At least, I didn't think there was.

I climbed out of the car, walked down the long, beautiful walk; and I saw the most pitiful, forlorn figure I have ever seen in my life. Sitting alongside the big planter box in front of the McAllen Stake Center was Brother Gutierrez. When I was within ten feet of him, the door opened and Elder Brown came out and saw me. Tears came to his eyes. He didn't say anything but turned and walked back inside.

So I sat down by Brother Gutierrez and said, "Brother Gutierrez, you know that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the true church, don't you?"

He said that he did.

"You know that the Book of Mormon is true?"

He said, "I know that."

I said, "You know Joseph was a prophet, don't you?"

He said, "Yes, I do."

I said, "Why aren't you in there being baptized with your family?"

This great old man stood up, looked up at our chapel, and said, "This is a magnificent church. I have got to go out and find another job so I can afford to belong to it."

I sat down with him again and told him about a scroungy little kid who had to wear nurse's shoes to church, an inactive father, a mother who wasn't a member of the Church at that time. I told him what the Church had done for me. I told him that the cost of belonging to the Lord's Church is always the same to every soul and is as easy or hard whether rich or poor. It depends on the state of the soul of each convert. In three parables the Savior illustrated this. He told how a certain man found a treasure hidden in a field and he sold all that he had and bought the field. He also said that the king of heaven is likened unto a goodly merchant, who, finding a pearl of great price, sold all that he had and purchased the pearl. Jesus also likened the kingdom of heaven unto a fisher's net which is cast into the sea. It brings forth of every kind. The good are placed in vessels and the rest are cast off. Then I said to him, "The price is always and everlastingly will be the same for you, for me, for the wealthiest man in the Church. It always is the same. It simply is all we have and nothing less."

The truth of the matter is that everything belongs to the Lord. We are only the stewards of his wealth; and he has a lot more to say about what portion he gives us than we like to think. Some may be rich in lands and goods but poor in talents and gifts. Others may be rich in talents and gifts and poor in land and goods. But they all have to give freely of what they have to build up the kingdom. Then they are rich indeed; because their riches, in a sense, follow them. They can take it with them. We must have the courage to tell that to our contacts so that they understand the terms of God's great covenant of salvation and exaltation. And they must have the courage to accept that doctrine. When they do, they can go from the worst of worlds to the best of worlds.
