Vaughn J. Featherstone, Commitment ( 1982)

6 When Wisdom Dictates a Change of Commitment

As the astronauts went to and from the moon, their direction had to be corrected from time to time. Thus, while it would have appeared to the human eye that the Apollo was traveling in a straight line, its course was really a sort of a zigzag. Our lives, even at best, are somewhat like that. We have to make constant corrections as we pursue with determination the short- and long-range goals to which we are committed. One reason for that is that we sometimes find that some short-range goal has taken us off course to the long-range goal. We may even find that a long-range goal no longer suits us. When we change it, many short-range goals may have to be dropped because they do not 'help us progress toward the new long-range goal.

Sometimes we even find that we have been impractical in the choice of a goal and we are unable to reach it because of circumstances beyond our control. For instance, we may have pitted our wills against someone with a stronger will, as did a man I heard of once. This fellow thought his wife ought to serve him. He felt it should be a goal of a good marriage for the wife to wait on the husband and make him feel good. So he went home from work one day and announced this plan to his wife.She sounded agreeable so he laid out the routine. She was to meet him in the hallway when he came home; take him into the living room; seat him in the big easy chair; take off his shoes: put on his slippers; bring him the evening paper; and then crown this whole event by bringing in a nice, tall, cool lemonade. The next night he came home and waited in the hallway and nothing happened. He went into the living room; sat down; took off his shoes himself; slipped his slippers on; went in and got the newspaper; and a while later went out to the kitchen and got a nice, tall, cool lemonade.

While he was in the kitchen, he said to his wife, "Remember what we talked about yesterday?"

She said, "I remember."

"Didn't you think that was a good idea?"

"I thought it was a good idea."

So he thought she just forgot.

The next night he came home and stood in the hallway and again nothing happened. So he decided to change his strategy. He decided he would love her into it. When Saturday came she started getting dressed to go to the store. When he started

changing his clothes too, she said, "Where are you going?"

He said, "I want to go to the store with you."

When she got over the shock, they went to the store. She thought to herself, He is here to check and see if I am paying the right amount for things. But he was a gentleman about everything. He pushed the cart up and down the aisles and they filled it, with not an unkind word said.

She thought, He will blow his stack when he gets to the checkstand and has to pay the tab. But the groceries were checked out with no problem. He helped her out to the car. He assisted her into the house. He put the groceries away.

During the next six weeks he was the ideal husband. He helped with the dishes. He put his pants on hangers in the closet, not over the back of the chair in the bedroom. He hit the hamper with his underwear and stockings. He even squeezed the toothpaste at the bottom of the tube. A perfect husband.

Six weeks later, sure enough it happened. Home from work; met in the hall; ushered into the living room; seated in the big easy chair; shoes taken off; slippers placed on; newspaper brought in; and in a little while, a nice, tall, cool lemonade was brought in to climax this great achievement.

Only, instead of him in the chair, it was her.

Of course, the great thing about it was that this was now the way he wanted it. He didn't want it any other way than that. And, if it had worked out the other way, it only should have if that were the way she wanted it. You see, nothing is good that isn't voluntary.

The purpose of that story was not to designate who should wait on whom in a marriage. In some marriages the husband may serve the wife most, and in others it may be the opposite. Nobody should count. While marriage is a contract, none of the details are enforceable in any practical sense. Everything taken has to be given voluntarily or it is spoiled in the taking. But there is so much that can be given in a marriage and there is so much joy in the giving that wise married people concentrate on goals that improve themselves not their spouses.

And that is one rule we must always remember in setting goals: We may set goals to increase our own light and to offer that light to others; but we cannot set goals for others. We only can inspire them to set their own goals. Once we have accepted Christ as our ideal, we have to give up all goals that are based on using compulsion to improve the lives of others or to make a better world. Defensive force by units of government (including the family, which is the basic unit of government) to punish crime or deter foreign aggression is legitimate. But any form of force to bring about positive good or social improvement is offensive force, and it puts you on the side of the powers of darkness. So the long-range goal must be the Christlike ideal, and all short-range goals should be brought into line. (Incidentally, families must not use even defensive force in precisely the way other governmental units may use it. Children are to be disciplined with love and wisdom.)

Sometimes integrity demands that we abandon or change some commitments. This can happen even when the commitment we abandon is a good commitment, though no longer as important as it was when compared to the new commitment that takes its place. Humans can err; but if to be Christlike is always the goal, we will be constantly correcting in the right direction as did the Apollo mission returning to earth.

A marvelous young missionary served locally in one of the Spanish-speaking countries. While he was on his mission his mother ran off with a man, leaving her large family without a parent. There was no father in the home, so the oldest daughter took over the family. Although she was still relatively young, the family seemed to survive well enough so that the missionary was able to remain in the field. One day Robert Burton, a staff member in the Missionary Department, brought me the news that the oldest daughter, who was not a member of the Church, had decided to abandon the family and go away to school.

The missionary contacted his mission president to ask what he should do. He wanted to serve the Lord, but there was no one at home to care for the younger brothers and sisters. He felt he needed to go home and hold his family together. He already had served twenty months as an excellent missionary.

When Brother Burton told me the story and asked for a decision, I could not respond. I was so filled with emotion for this young elder and his family that I sat for several moments trying to control myself as tears welled up in my eyes. The decision was to have him return to his home to support and care for this family that his father and then his mother had abandoned. Although his commitment when he was called on a mission was for twenty-four months, conditions changed and now his commitment had to be modified and turned to the family. There should never be a feeling of guilt or disloyalty when our commitments are changed because integrity and Christian conduct demand it. Of course, every case is unique. That is why priesthood counsel should be sought when callings are involved in a change of commitment.

Sometimes missionaries teach people who are unwilling to accept the restored gospel because of previous commitments that they thought were to Christ. But we encourage them to reconsider. For example, a woman who had been taught the gospel off and on and had known the elders all her life shared a commitment she had made. She promised her father on his deathbed that she would never leave their church. All through the years she resisted the missionaries and kept her commitment to her father. This woman had gained a testimony that Joseph Smith was a prophet, that the Book of Mormon was true, and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was the Lord's true Church. However, her commitment to her father plagued her. She felt that she could not break a deathbed promise.

Finally she had a special manifestation. Her father appeared to her and informed her that her family on the other side of the veil were waiting for her to accept the gospel. She immediately was baptized into the Church, feeling free of guilt and worry. This same thing happens many times in almost every mission. Some well-meaning relative gets a commitment from a loved one not to join The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or not to leave his or her present church. Then it takes a special revelation or the persuasion of a particularly inspired missionary to get the commitment changed and the person on the right course.

There is another major factor which those who have made such commitments should consider. Loyalty can be misguided. When someone is blessed with a testimony of Jesus' relationship to this Church, then the course should be clear. The Savior said, "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." (Matthew 10:37.)

No commitment should be kept if it stands between you and Christ. Some decisions have eternal consequences; and when a commitment is changed for the better, there should be no guilt. It is a change for the better if the change brings the person and his or her family closer to Christ. The new commitment is theone to hold firm. Every soul who walks this earth may gain a testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel. Once that happens, then our absolute and total allegiance must be to our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, above family members or anyone else. The commitments we make to him should be our firm and total ones if they have been based on the truth about him and his modern work.

Just after I arrived in Texas I went out to the airport to see Elders Cornet and Gibson off. We were met there by a little convert named Sister Hilcher. She was on crutches because of a crippled leg. Sister Hilcher's son came in with a camera, and they invited us out so she could have her son take some pictures.

When they had taken the pictures, she called me over to the side and said, "I'd like to share something with you. I have always loved and enjoyed people; so when Elder Gibson and his companion came to my home, I wanted these two fine young men to come in. I don't have very many visitors so I didn't mind talking with them. After the third visit I could see that they wanted to baptize me. I told them that as a little girl I wanted to be a Roman Catholic more than anything in the world. I pleaded with my mother to let me join the Catholic Church; but she would not let me. Finally when I was eighteen, I was initiated into the Roman Catholic Church through the ceremonies they use. I told the elders quite clearly, 'I have been a Roman Catholic ever since, and I intend to be a Roman Catholic all the rest of my life. You're welcome to talk to me, but I will not join your church. I intend to be a Roman Catholic.' At this point a clear voice came to me and said, 'But what do you know about it?' I turned to the elders and said to them, 'But what do I know about it?' And they went through the discussions and I joined the Church." Now she was out at the airport seeing Elder Gibson off for home.

At the same time there was a Brother Jackson seeing Elder Gibson off. He said, "Do you remember the day that I told you never to come back again?"

Very quietly Elder Gibson said, "Yes, I remember."

Then, also very quietly, Brother Jackson responded, "Thank God you came back."

We had a solemn assembly in Texas the next August. The First Presidency and others of the Brethren were there. Seated on the first row to pass the sacrament was President Jackson, now the president of his elders quorum. He was passing the sacrament in a solemn assembly. That thrilled me. This glorious experience never could have come to him if he had not had the courage and wisdom to change a commitment that needed changing.

The very essence of missionary work is the business of helping people change commitments of greater or lesser value for the great commitment of following the true Christ in his true Church. Sometimes it takes one approach and sometimes another. The Spirit will provide the special help we need, as the following story illustrates.

A Catholic priest came to a meeting in which I was speaking. He did not wear his priestly robes, but just came in street clothes. About halfway through my talk I felt impressed to bear a testimony directly to him. I just looked right down in the front where he was sitting and said, "I want everyone here to know that when Joseph Smith walked out of the Sacred Grove, he knew more about God, the Eternal Father, and his Son, Jesus Christ, than all of the pastors, all of the ministers, and all of the popes who have ever walked the earth."

That statement struck this priest with great force and eventually had the necessary prompting effect to help get him into the Church. I learned just before I left Texas to return to Salt Lake that he was going to join the Church. We ought to have a testimony and share it with forthrightness when prompted to do so by the Spirit. I could have reasoned with him about all the things the Church has done that are great, and it probably wouldn't have done much good; but a testimony startled him and caused him to think.

I want to share this next story with you because it shows the power of testimony in a special and significant way. Two of ourelders went to the home of Bryce Wanless, a man in his early thirties. His wife, Sue, let them in and listened to them and asked them to come back when her husband was there. Bryce told me after his baptism that when the elders returned that night, he noticed that as they gave the discussion they said, "We know," not "We believe" or "We think." They said, "We know this Church is true," and "We know that God does live," and "We know that Jesus Christ has visited the earth in this day."

The elders invited Bryce and his wife to Church on Sunday. They came and sat about a third of the way back in the middle of the center section of the chapel. One of the Primary-age boys was present with his little rubber flipper and his spit wads. Who did he hit on the back of the head but Bryce Wanless? When I heard that I just got sick. But, you know Bryce turned around and looked at them, and later explained to the elders, "It really hurt-not the spit wad; but it hurt that that kind of conduct should take place in the Church when we believed what we were hearing."

But he and his wife went home and they talked about it and they decided that the conduct of the people really didn't make any difference. Bryce said, "We knew what the elders had said was true."

About a year later when I was in Salt Lake for a general conference, I had the privilege of sealing Bryce and Sue and their two children together for time and all eternity in the Salt Lake Temple.

I don't want to leave the impression that converts must have bad experiences or have a hard time changing commitments from churches that "lack the power of godliness" to the one that Jesus called "the only true and living church." (D&C 1:30.) Many people seem to be just waiting for the missionaries to arrive. would like to tell you about some of these cases because it may help someone decide to go on a mission or help someone decide to commit himself or herself fully to this great work. After all that is the meaning in Jacob 2:18-19: Before you settle on any other commitments, get a hope in Christ. That is, find the kingdom. A hope in Christ is another way of describing what happens to you when you have the testimony of Jesus. If you have a hope in Christ-that is, if you have found the kingdom -all the other things will come if you seek them for the right purposes. So, again, there is a hierarchy of commitments. Christ is at the top and all else must fall into line with that one so that there is no disharmony.

We had a young missionary couple in Texas, LeRoy Wilcox and his wife, who tracted over thirteen thousand homes and kept track of what happened. It was a very interesting account. At one home a little lady came to the door. They introduced themselves as missionaries from the Church. She said, "You might as well come in. For ten years I have been searching for the true church, and I haven't found it yet. I might as well listen to you."

After they had finished the first discussion, she said, "I have a whole lot of friends and they know that I've been searching for the true church. Every once in a while, almost every month, I get a call from one or the other of them and they say, 'Have you found the true church yet? When you find it, let us know; because we know that you will recognize it.'"

Brother and Sister Wilcox completed the visit with the usual testimony and prayer. As they got up to leave, for some reason Brother Wilcox said, "We want you to know that we have come from far, far away to give you this message."

She looked startled and said, "Did you say far, far away?"

He said, "Yes."

"How far?"

"Over sixteen hundred miles-from Orem, Utah."

She said, "That is far away. You know, about two years ago a woman appeared to me in a dream and she said, 'You will find the true church. Messengers will come from far, far away.'" What a blessing!

Almost that same week the Wilcoxes had another experience wherein they quoted from Moro. 10:4: "And when ye shallreceive these things...." They went through the whole passage. When they had finished, the woman they were visiting said, "I have been searching for that scripture. I heard that in a dream. I was told that I would find the truth wherever I would find that scripture. Where is it? Will you let me read it?"

They opened the Book of Mormon, and she read it two or three times. She soon joined the Church.

Down on the Rio Grande a Spanish-speaking elder in our mission went to a home and knocked on the door, and the woman of the house said, "Come in. Maybe you can help me." They said, "We think we can."

So they went in and said, "What's the problem?"

She replied, "I had a dream. I dreamed last night that there was a man and he met me and took me by the hand and walked with me all the way down to the Rio Grande. Then he walked out into the river and beckoned for me to come out into the river."

They said, "We think we have the answer."

So they started through the first discussion, and as they got to the Joseph Smith story, they flipped the page over to the portrait of the Prophet Joseph Smith; and she said, "That is the man." She also is in the Church.

Of course, not all conversions are that spectacular. And not all spiritual promptings are listened to immediately. There was a Baptist couple down in Corpus Christi who were really active in their own church; but they let the missionaries teach them the discussions. When the missionaries got to the point where they presented the baptismal challenge, the couple said, "We've decided to stay active in our own church." Yet all through the lessons they had committed and known the teachings they has heard were true. Still, right at the last, they again said, "No, we are going to go back to our own church." The husband was teaching Sunday School. The wife also had a position in their Baptist congregation, and their two boys were active.

This couple later said that a month passed and their churchattendance declined. After six months they were totally inactive. Finally, after almost a year, the wife approached her husband and asked, "Don't you think we'd better go back to church?"

He asked, "Which one?"

She answered, "The Mormon Church."

He said, "Yes, we'd better." And they came over to church. I was there the night that this couple and their two children were baptized.

You see, it is very difficult for people to come into the Church when all of their roots are elsewhere. They get a testimony and they know they have heard the truth; but can you imagine what a traumatic experience it is to lose all of your friends and leave behind all those who despise the LDS Church and are so critical?

Sometimes you don't know exactly what is holding up the commitment. I was at the mission office one day, and Elder Gifford, who was a zone leader, called me up and said, "President, we are working with a Lutheran minister. He let us teach him. We had him on his knees, and he prayed with us and asked if the Church was true; but we can't get him to commit. He must have some questions. Would you mind coming out and talking to him?"

I said, "No, I'd be delighted to. Does he know I'm coming?"

Elder Gifford responded, "Oh, no. We didn't dare tell him you were coming until we had found out whether or not you could come."

I said, "You go ask him; and if he'll let me come, I'd be glad to come."

They called back and told me that he had said that a visit would be all right. So I went to Knippa, Texas, with Elder Gifford on Friday about 2:00 P.M. He was actually a former Lutheran minister and had moved over into the Knippa area in Texas and, as I recall, had bought about fifty acres and was just living off the land. He had a few cattle, some bees, a garden, and so forth. He had let his beard grow; and he and his family werereally living modestly by our standards. They were eating well and doing most things well; but they lived humbly. They welcomed us into their home, which he had built. It had rough-hewn floorboards. It was rustic throughout, but really nice and clean.

Elder Gifford asked if we could have a prayer. They agreed, so we did. Then Elder Gifford said, "We've asked President Featherstone to answer any questions you may have." I told him who I was and what my assignment was as a mission president. Then I told him I was also a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy. Because of his scriptural background he had an interest in that.

After about ten minutes, I said, "Please feel free to ask any question you would like about the Church."

He said, "I don't have any questions."

That really surprised me. I felt a need to say something lest we all find ourselves sitting there in silence. So I started telling him what the usual questions were and gave him the full answers. I went through about six of the hard ones-from polygamy to tithing. Then, again, I said, "Now, do you have any questions?"

He said, "No." So I went through some more of the standard questions. It was almost like an interview with myself. Of

course, I meant it to be a sort of interview with him.

Then I said, "Any other questions?"

By now about forty minutes had passed and he said, "Well, yes, I do have one." He opened his Doctrine and Covenants and read just a little quote and asked a very simple question. I think he just wanted to make sure he had asked a question so that I wouldn't feel bad about him not asking any questions. I answered that one and said, "Any more?"

He said, "No."

I said, "Well, Brother Joens, normally when we come to a home we really love to kneel with the family and have a prayer. We'd like to do that. Again, normally it would be up to you todecide who should pray; but would you mind if I would give the prayer today? I feel impressed to, and I would really like to leave a blessing in your home if that is all right with you."

He said, "I'd like you to do that."

So we knelt down, all of us-his family, the two missionaries, and myself-and had a prayer. When we got up off our knees, Brother Joens came over to me and said, "Last Monday when the elders were here they challenged me to be baptized. I asked the Lord if I should. While I was praying I had a very strong impression that before I would be baptized the president would come to my home and offer a prayer in my home. That has been done. I'd like to be baptized."

They baptized him the following Monday in a little creek that flows through his property. They dammed it up and baptized him and his family in that little pond.

There is an awakening, as President Kimball calls it, a brooding of the Spirit. Who knows how many thousands-even hundreds of thousands-are out there waiting for a knock on the door? Wouldn't it be a marvelous thing if, instead of near 30 percent, we could send 80 or 90 percent of our young men on missions? Commitment is the word-commitment in families, commitment from childhood on, commitment to go, and commitment to prepare. Often there is commitment, but to the wrong goals first. There has to be a changing of priorities. And if there were, strangely enough, the other commitments would more likely be fulfilled in the right order and for the right purposes.

I would like to share a few excerpts from Ben Hur. They are in my book A Generation of Excellence, but they seem to be especially applicable here. It is a great example of commitment. In a memorable quotation from Lew Wallace's great book, a father, Simonides, describes his daughter: "The Lord hath been good to me in many ways; but thou, Esther, art the sovereign excellence of his favor." A young woman reading this may well find a goal for which she would work. For her father, her bishop, or for someone she prized to say such a thing about her would indeed be a strong motivational factor in her life.

The spirit of greatness comes out loud and clear as Simonides, who is responsible for all investments of the Hur family, questions Malluch the servant concerning Ben Hur.

ÂIn what he said or did, Malluch, could you in anywise detect his master-idea?" [Meaning, his main motive for his words and actions.]

"As to that, Master Simonides," Malluch responds, "I can answer with much assurance. He is devoted to finding his mother and sister-that first. Then he has a grievance against Rome; and as the Messala of whom I told you had something to do with the wrong, the great present object is to humiliate him...."

"The Messala is influential," said Simonides, thoughtfully.

"Yes; but the next meeting will be in the Circus."

"Well, and then?"

"The son of Arrius [Ben Hurl will win."

"How know you?"

Malluch smiled.

"I am judging by what he says."

"Is that all?"

"No; there is a much better sign-his spirit."

"Ay; but Malluch, his idea of vengeance-what is its scope? ... Is his feeling but the vagary of a sensitive boy, or has it the seasoning of suffering manhood to give it endurance?"

Many of us who have worked with young men and women have found youth with great spirit. It's more than what they say it's a spirit that thunders so loudly that no one can misunderstand.

Recall again with me the words of Ben Hur as he met with Sheik Ilderim and discussed the possibility of riding the sheik'; four Arabian white stallions in the circus against Messala:

"Enough!" he said. "If at the roots of thy tongue is a lie in coil Solomon himself had not been safe against thee.... But as to thy skill. What experience hast thou in racing with chariots? And the horses-canst thou make them creatures of thy will... to come a call? To go, if thou sayest it, to the last extreme of breath and strength? ... The gift, my son, is not to everyone. Ah ... I knew a king who governed millions of men, their perfect master, but could not win the respect of a horse."

And then Ben Hur's response:

"I know now why it is that in the love of an .Arab his horse is next to his children; and I know, also, why the Arab horses are the best in the world; but, good sheik, I would not have you judge me by words alone; for, as you know, all promises of men sometimes fail. Give me the trial first on some plain hereabout, and put the four in my hand tomorrow.... I tell thee thy sons of the Desert, though they have separately the speed of eagles and the endurance of lions, will fail if they are not trained to run together under the yoke. For bethink thee, Sheik, in every four there is one the slowest and one the swiftest."

Then came the competition between Ben Hur and the four Arabians of Sheik Ilderim against Messala. Before the eyes of the excited crowd, with the chariots side by side, with lightning quickness Messala reached out and whipped the flesh of the white Arabians that had never to that day felt the whip. But the hardening experience of the galleys gave Ben Hut the ascendancy over even that emergency. "So he kept his place, and gave the four free rein, and called to them in soothing voice, trying merely to guide them round the dangerous turn; and before the fever of the people began to abate, he had back the mastery [and] the sympathy and admiration of every one not a Roman." Ben Hur won the race-the direct result of his character as an individual.

I have always loved the poem that follows. I have committed it to memory. It is called "The Fool's Prayer," and was written by Edward R. Sill.

The royal feast was done; the King Sought some new sport to banish care, And to his jester cried: "Sir Fool, Kneel now, and make for us a prayer!"

The jester doffed his cap and bells, And stood the mocking court before; They could not see the bitter smile Behind the painted grin he wore.

He bowed his head, and bent his knee Upon the monarch's silken stool; His pleading voice arose: "O Lord, Be merciful to me, a fool!

"No pity, Lord, could change the heart From red with wrong to white as wool; The rod must heal the sin: but, Lord, Be merciful to me, a fool!

"'Tis not by guilt the onward sweep Of truth and right, O Lord, we stay; 'Tis by our follies that so long We hold the earth from heaven away.

"These clumsy feet, still in the mire, Go crushing blossoms without end; These hard, well-meaning hands we thrust Among the heart-strings of a friend.

"The ill-timed truth we might have kept- Who knows how sharp it pierced and stung? The word we had not sense to say- Who knows how grandly it had rung?

"Our faults no tenderness should ask, The chastening stripes must cleanse them all; But for our blunders-Oh, in shame Before the eyes of heaven we fall.

"Earth bears no balsam for mistakes; Men crown the knave, and scourge the tool That did his will; but Thou, O Lord, Be merciful to me, a fool!"

The room was hushed; in silence rose The King, and sought his gardens cool, And walked apart, and murmured low, "Be merciful to me, a fool!"

(One Hundred and One Famous Poems, pages 159-160.)

Even a king can change or modify a commitment. Some would call this repentance. Our greatest loyalty, our greatest allegiance, must be to our Savior. Every soul should keep sacred the commitments that are true and eternal, such as faithfulness to our husbands and wives, honest toil for our employer, self-development and improvement principles, and love for the Savior. There is no conflict between good and true commitments; so if you feel conflict, seek for the errant commitment, the one that wanders from the core of truth that is in Christ. Then discard it. That is what wisdom dictates.
