Vaughn J. Featherstone, Commitment ( 1982)

7 Love of Christ Ties All Commitments Together

Throughout this book I have kept coming back to the idea that all commitments should be based on a commitment to our Savior. Otherwise our commitments may not be harmonious: They may work against each other. For instance, it would be impossible to have a commitment to eventually arrive in the celestial kingdom and at the same time be firmly resolved to be the world's greatest hit man or the world's highest-paid burlesque entertainer. Satan is served by sin; but God is served by love and righteousness. We show which one we love by our commitments.

Of course, we are all developing and maturing, as in our taste in music. You usually don't arrive at the stage where you love most the words of David and Isaiah and the music of Handel and Beethoven and others who were inspired by David and Isaiah very early in life. You probably will be a Rodgers and Hammerstein addict before that. And still earlier, perhaps, you may have a passion for Elton John or even the Beatles. And, of course, you will never give up loving the best of the worlds of jazz and rock, because they do produce some beautiful music. But these are lesser stars in the heavens of music. They do notshine as brightly as those that reflect the shining light of the bright and morning star. (Rev. 22:16.)

I am trying to appeal to your innate desire to grow. I had an experience with one of my sons which might help me explain, at least in part, the point I am getting at. This happened a number of years ago, Our son Lawrence had promised to get tickets to an Elton John concert for his brother Scott. Perhaps this story will go over better if I explain that I like some of Elton John's music. We had a lot of his records in our home. Scott played the piano, and I had to listen to him playing Elton John music. So I heard a lot of Elton John.

Scott had one of those shirts with Elton John embroidered across the back. I said, "Scott, you have a good name. Why don't you have Scott Featherstone embroidered across the back?" But I guess that wasn't a very good idea.

I came back from a stake conference visit one night about 11 P.M. and Lawrence said, "Dad, would you take me up to the University of Utah tomorrow morning?"

I said, "What for?"

He responded, "Scott called and he wants me to get some Elton John tickets for him."

"What time do we have to get up there? What time does the box office open?."

Lawrence said, "About 9 A.M., I believe."

I said, "Well, if we get up there by 7 A.M., would that be early enough?"

He said, "Dad! We've got to be up there by 5 A.M."

Events proved that Lawrence and I didn't fully grasp the Elton John situation. We got up at 4:30 A.M. and drove up to the Special Events Center. You can't believe the mass of humanity we found. I told Lawrence it would take him two days to find the end of the line. This was a Monday morning, you understand. We learned that the first people got in line Friday afternoon, and the line had been growing ever since. Talk about feeling like the last one to dinner!

When Lawrence and I faced the day of reckoning, I said toScott, "Suppose you had never seen or heard the prophet in your whole life, would you stand outside the Tabernacle doors from Friday to Monday to get a ticket to go to conference?" That had never entered his mind. I am amazed at the motivation of young people. I am also amazed at the misdirection that motivation sometimes takes. But I suppose it is not until we have been totally immersed in the glory and mercy of the Savior that the great Christian composers of word and song really sound better than the music of rock and jazz. I don't know the source of the inspiration of some of our current musicians and poets; but I know that the great Christian composers were students of Job, David, Isaiah, and other great biblical artists whose inspiration was all centered in Christ. I love the following statement from Adam Clarke:

But the highest merit of David, and that which seems to have been almost exclusively his own, was his poetic genius. As a Divine poet, even God himself had created none greater, either before or since. In this science and gift he is therefore the [masterpiece] of the Almighty. Moses wrote some fine verses; Solomon two fine poems, an ode and an elegy. The prophets, particularly Isaiah, in several chapters of his prophecy; Jeremiah, in his book of Lamentations; and some of the minor prophets, in a few select verses, have given us specimens of a profound poetical genius; but we have no whole like that of David. The sublimity, the depth, the excursive fancy, the discursive power, the vast compass of thought, the knowledge of heaven and earth, of God and nature, the work of the Spirit, the endlessly varied temptations of Satan, the knowledge of the human heart, the travail of the soul, the full comprehension of the ... personification of the whole of inanimate nature, of every virtue, and of every vice, the immense grasp of thought embodying and arranging, and afterwards clothing in suitable language, the vast assemblage of ideas furnished by the natural and spiritual world; in a word, the spirit of poetry, the true genie createur, the ... framework of the framer, the poetry of the poet, not the fiction of the inventive genius; but the production of truth, hidden before in the bosom of God and nature, and exhibited in the most pleasing colours, with the most impressive pathos and irresistible harmonic diction: these qualities, these supramundane excellences, are found in no other poet that ever graced the annals of the world; they exist in their perfection only in David king of Israel. What is peculiarly remarkable in David is,he has succeeded to the very highest degree in every species of poetic composition that has for its object the glory of God and the welfare of man; and there is not one poet who has succeeded him, that has not failed when he attempted to sing of God, the punishment and rewards of the future world, and the unsearchable riches of Christ.

The hymns which he produced have been the general song of the universal Church; and men of all nations find in these compositions a language at once suitable to their feelings, and expressive of their highest joys and deepest sorrows, as well as of all the endlessly varied wishes and desires of their hearts. Hail, thou sweet singer of Israel! thy voice is still heard in all the assemblies of the saints. (Clarke's Commentary, Job to Malachi, pages 696-7. Italics as in original.)

The sentiments and very words of David truly do still ring in the assemblies of the Saints-the Latter-day Saints. Read again Ps. 22 through 25 and see how many of the greatest of hymns you can name that have taken words and concepts from these poetic utterances. The main point I wish to make in quoting Clarke on David is that the Messiah, whom we call Jesus, was the inspiration of David. To him David prayed. Of him he sang. About him he composed over a hundred hymns of the most excellent and even prophetic quality (though it is not easy to prove that many really were about Jesus). In any event, they carry his Spirit and speak his words. All David's hope for ultimate pardon rested in his Messiah. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that David's psalms were the psalms of Jesus; for the Saints can speak from the mind of Christ. (1 Cor. 2:16.) He is the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel (Matt. 21:42-44), the sure foundation whereon if men build, they cannot fall. (Acts 4: 11-12; Hel. 5:12.) So the first task is to find the kingdom and take possession of the mind of Christ, which, as Paul explained to the Corinthians, is the legacy of the Saints.

Think what a contribution selfish people of great talent could have made if their commitments had been made to Jesus Christ instead of to themselves! We will do better in every aspect of our lives if we commit to a God in whose life we see miracles, power over disease and death; one who, as a glorified, resurrectedbeing, said to John, his beloved disciple, "I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death." (Rev. 1:18.)

Commit to no one less than this. Whose life says this much? Who else could truly say, "Come and follow me"? And where else can you truly follow him but in a church that bears his name and claims all the powers that he gave his disciples in antiquity when he was here on the earth? All who claim to be Christians should prayerfully exclaim: "Would God that it were true!"

To the Jew and to the Gentile of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, I would like to declare my testimony of Jesus Christ by sharing some of the feelings in my heart as I have searched for my Messiah. In attempting to share with you my feelings about Jesus Christ, I am in no way trying to prove to you his divinity. I am sharing my innermost feelings of why I love him so much and why he has been able to enlist me body and soul into his cause.

As a boy of nine or ten I purchased a paperback copy of a Bible for twenty-five cents. Reading about Abraham and his intercession on behalf of the people of Sodom, I felt a warmth in my soul. I am sure that my cheeks flushed and my heart expanded as I read how Abraham entreated the Lord to spare the city if there were fifty righteous souls, then forty-five, forty, thirty, twenty, and finally ten. The love the Lord had for his servant Abraham and the respect he had for even ten righteous souls would have saved Sodom if there had been ten righteous souls there. I learned later that Abraham followed and worshipped Christ just as we follow and worship Christ. There was nothing primitive about his religion.

As a young man I read with intense interest the account of Moses as he led the flock to the backside of the desert and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.

And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

And Moses said, I will not turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.

And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.

And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God. (Ex. 3:2-6.)

I felt like I was living with Moses. In my young imagination I could see these things transpire. My love of the God of ancient Israel was increased through the awe and reverence I felt for the great men who sought him and loved him.

Later in my life the scriptures became a constant companion. I have read from them daily for the last thirty years of my life. The vicarious experiences I have had could not be bought with all the treasures of the earth. I have associated with many of the great and noble of the earth. I have felt like Elisha must have felt when he was with Elijah just prior to Elijah's ascension to heaven in a whirlwind.

And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground.

And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me. (2 Kgs. 2:8-9.)

I have often felt to say, "Let a double portion of thy spirit rest upon me" as I have associated with the Brethren and have come to know and love them. The best men and the greatest men I know have committed their lives and souls to Jesus Christ.

I remember the feelings I had when I read the account of the woman who had an issue of blood for twelve years. The scriptures say that she had spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any. How often we find souls in the same situation today! Reference to having spent all her living would lead us to believe she was in dire and desperate circumstances"and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse." We see those who suffer for years from disease and sickness; and who of us is not moved with great compassion and feels his utter helplessness in relieving the suffering ones? For twelve long years, 4,383 days, the woman had suffered. Now she had heard of Jesus and his miracles; and as Jesus went and much people with him and thronged about him, this woman said, "If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole." She came in the "press" of the crowd behind Jesus and touched his garment "and straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague." Apparently she then fell back through the crowd, the miracle complete. Her bosom must have swelled with inexpressible gratitude.

"And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes?" The disciples must have been shocked at this question, for they responded, "Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?"

Jesus "looked round about to see her that had done this thing." Now note the woman's attitude. This poor, gentle, healed one, fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before him; and stripped of all false pride and in pure humility, possibly even feeling guilty, for this act, told him the whole truth. We can see her kneeling before the Savior with tear-filled eyes, totally and absolutely submissive to his will.

Then we hear this from our beloved Lord: "Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague." (Mark 5:25-34.) The initial healing was through her faith. His blessing was a ratification which confirmed her faith. She was whole. To me this incident is one of the most beautiful in all the scriptures to show the magnificent love of Jesus Christ. I felt his compassion and love toward others, and my love increased toward him.

Again, in a very special way, another scriptural account of my Messiah taught me an important lesson of life. He and hisdisciples "went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts." She also must have had some knowledge about his miracles. The meeting was not by chance. She sought him. When she found him, she "cried unto him, saying, ... O lord, thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil." There is no question that he heard her, "but he answered her not a word." The woman for herself may not have pressed the issue further; but for the love for her daughter, she continued to pursue her request. The disciples, noting that he had ignored her request and given her no heed, "came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us." I cannot believe that any of our Brethren today would do that.

The Savior still did not respond to the woman, but to his disciples he said, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel." The disciples apparently had to ponder his response, but the woman impulsively came and worshipped him, saying, simply "Lord, help me."

A person would have to be made of stone to ignore this pitiful plea. In my mind I can picture her kneeling before him, pleading with her eyes as well as her voice, "Lord, help me!" To this desperate request the Lord gave this, to our age, incredible reply, "It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs." The woman kneeling in front of him could have stood up and said, "I am not a dog, I do not have to be insulted like that. I have some pride, too, you know." She did not. In one of the greatest expressions of love and humility, forgetting self, again stripping away all false pride, she said, "Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table."

"Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour." (Matt. 15:21-28.)

It took much thought and prayer to understand this experience. I couldn't imagine the Master I worship with all my heart appearing to be so harsh. Understanding came. Of course he was emphasizing the covenant with Israel, that all nations were to beblessed through Israel, and Israel through the Messiah. In the wisdom of God, the gospel would be first taken to the Jews, and Jesus' ministry was to be with them. (2 Ne. 10:3-5.) Also, he undoubtedly knew the heart of this woman; and during the moments she pled with him and he did not respond, I'm sure he could discern her spirit and knew what her responses would be. It was a great teaching moment, not only for his disciples, but for all generations of man from that time forth. The lesson this noble woman taught us about humility and trust in absolute acceptance of the order of God's kingdom will be a blessing to us forever. As we read her beautiful, humble response, suddenly we have a vision of what true humility is and how it must please our Lord. I am so grateful that some translator did not leave this account out, feeling it was unworthy of Jesus. Many of us never would have had one of the supreme lessons in humility in all of the writings of the Savior. I love him for his love and ability to teach with impact. This lesson was for Jesus' disciples as well as for the woman and the crowd.

Again I saw the Messiah as he "went into a city called Nain; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people." He didn't rebuke the crowds or send them away. He understood their need. This day as they flocked after him, "he came nigh to the gate of the city." There he beheld "a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow." The throng following Jesus must have stopped as he stopped to behold the funeral procession.

On this occasion conditions were different. We find that Jesus was viewing something of which he was not a part. Those in the procession probably did not take notice of him as he stood and watched the procession "with much people." The young man was dead and had been laid on a bier which was being carried through the streets of the city. The widowed mother was grief stricken. The large crowd that attended the funeral procession was probably an indication of the sympathy which the people of the city felt for this widow's loss of her only son. I imagine that, as she followed those carrying the bier,she walked with her head bowed, suffering a grief that was beyond description.

The Master approached her and "had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not." She must have looked up to see who thus addressed her. I can visualize her swollen, tired eyes looking into his, and the words she had heard seeming to be spoken by one who truly did care and who could feel every bit of her suffering. This brief confrontation with the widow and what transpired as he looked into her soul and said, "Weep not," can only be imagined. Then "he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered the boy to his mother." (Luke 7:11-17.)

I think as Jesus performed this miracle his heart must have been full, for he knew in an incomprehensible way the joy that would come to the widowed mother in the next few moments. Had we been there, we probably would have seen him shed tears of love. I wonder if he didn't stand there for just a moment or two, feeling, as none of us can, the overflowing joy of a widow's heart as she clung fiercely to her son.

I love Jesus for his love. I love him for his gentleness, his mercy, his forgiving heart. I love him for his long-suffering, for his absolute purity and his charity. I love him as my Savior and Redeemer, the great I Am, the King of kings. And I worship him because he is literally the Son of God.

I would like now to shift to some of the glorious modern revelations which have come from my Messiah. He loves us and speaks to us today, too. He is still the Messiah and he operates the same as he did in the days of Abraham, Moses, and Elijah, and the same as he did when he came in the meridian of time when he was rejected by the Jews. At a special conference held at Hiram, Ohio, November 1, 1831, the Lord revealed a proclamation of warning and commandment to the Church and to the inhabitants of the earth. A few verses follow:

And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days.

And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them.

Behold, this is mine authority, and the authority of my servants, and my preface unto the book of my commandments, which I have given them to publish unto you, O inhabitants of the earth.

Wherefore, fear and tremble, O ye people, for what I the Lord have decreed in them shall be fulfilled.

And verily I say unto you, that they who go forth, bearing these tidings unto the inhabitants of the earth, to them is power given to seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious; ...

And also those to whom these commandments were given, might have power to lay the foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth, with which I the Lord, am well pleased. (D&C 1:4-8, 30.)

The faithful members of the Church of Jesus Christ bear their solemn and sacred witness that Jesus Christ has visited the earth in our day, that he has once again established his church on the earth. We know, as did certain devout Jews of every nation on the day of Pentecost, that Jesus who was crucified was both Lord and Christ. Ours is not a belief nor a hope, not a feeling nor a tradition. It is purely and simply a knowledge and a witness that there is only one authorized agency on the face of the earth that has the keys, gifts, and power to function as the Church of Jesus Christ. We have a special witness which we bear to Jew and Gentile alike to come unto Christ. Be not faithless but believing.

To the Jews we declare, "Come and find the Messiah whom ye seek. Peter, Paul, James, and John and other Jews have added to their ancient witness a modern witness that Jesus Christ is the Messiah whom ye seek. Humble yourselves before the great God of heaven and receive your personal witness. His arms are outstretched to you, his beloved chosen people. His love extends mercy and blessing to all who will come unto him, We plead with you, O Israel, give ear to him who 'would have gathered you under his wings as a hen gathereth her chickens and ye would not.' We bear witness that the time will soon come when all Israel will know. Exercise your faith and look not further fora Messiah. For he has come. Come into the true fold of Christ and be numbered among his sheep, that you may once again know the true shepherd who laid down his life for his sheep. His words are true and faithful and they will come to pass. In this day in a revelation the Savior revealed to the Prophet Joseph those things that will transpire before your brethren will accept the gospel as a nation."

Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations.

And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount, and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake.

And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly.

And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. (D&C 45:47-53.)

O House of Judah, you can surely know. Do not delay your investigation of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints one more hour. The Lord said, "My sheep hear my voice." (John 10:3-16.) You will have a special witness as you read the New Testament, which is a witness for Jesus Christ. You will read the Book of Mormon, which is a second witness for Christ; and you will have that sure knowledge that Jesus is Jehovah, the very Messiah. Yea, then you will rejoice because you will have walked by faith and will not have waited to be converted with your nation when that time comes when all Israel will know in sorrow.

We declare our love for you Gentiles. Come and be grafted into the true vine. Join yourself and kindred to modern Israel.There is a God in heaven who lives. He is a personal God. He is literally the Father of Jesus Christ. Jesus is the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. God the Father and Jesus Christ have visited the earth again in this day. Peter, James, and John have restored the apostolic authority which gave Joseph Smith the authorization to organize Christ's Church. The Church is named after Jesus Christ because it is his Church. It has a prophet who stands at the head of the Church who is just a whisper away from the Savior. He receives revelation and inspiration to guide the Church in these troubled times. There is a quorum of twelve living apostles who hold the same keys and authorities which the ancient apostles held. The priesthood and its power have been conferred upon worthy men so that the kingdom can function. Every priesthood bearer in the Church can trace his priesthood authority back to Jesus Christ.

God the Father and Jesus Christ are not mysterious essences, or ethereal substances without form, which fill the immensity of space while dwelling in the souls of men. They are not part of a trinity that is of one substance that is a nonsubstance with three distinct manifestations, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the so-called Triune God.

We know by special witness of modern prophets who actually saw them that they are separate and distinct personages. We know that the Father and the Son have bodies of flesh and bone as tangible as man's, but the Holy Ghost is a personage of spirit. Remember the words of the Ten Commandments which have thundered down from Sinai: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me."

Come to a church which tithes its members. As the Prophet Joseph said, a church that does not have the power to call upon its members to sacrifice everything does not have the power to save them. Come and pay your tithes and offerings; and, as the Lord has promised, he will open up the windows of heaven and pour out a blessing that you have not room to receive. (Mal. 3:8-10.)

Jesus had the power to seal on earth and in heaven. Again men have been given those sealing powers. They are sacred powers and they are used to seal a man and his wife and children together as a family unit for all eternity. These sealing powers are found only in this Church. Others may claim to have these powers; but we testify boldly and humbly that they are counterfeit powers and avail nothing. All of the hosts of your ancestors who died without an opportunity to hear the gospel and embrace its truth will yet have that privilege. This is the reason that the Savior has directed that we seek after our dead. Proxy work is done in the temples to provide a means of eternal exaltation for all mankind. Free agency is an eternal principle and ever and always will be exercised. The dead for whom the proxy work is done will still have the right to accept or reject the work that is done for them. The gospel will be preached to them in the spirit world.

The Savior's Church was a proselyting church. The world can hardly comprehend the great ends to which the Church goes to see that every living soul has an opportunity to hear the gospel of Jesus Christ. Great hosts of missionaries and members, constantly, with the patience and persistence of fishers and hunters, attempt to share the gospel with friends and neighbors.

Again, we invite all to come and participate, to contribute their work and talents to the great welfare program of the Church of Jesus Christ. Welfare in the Church of Jesus Christ is motivated by charity, which is the pure love of Christ. In the Savior's welfare program we contribute time, talents, and monies for the benefit of all. The poor, the widow, the afflicted, the jobless-all come under the great umbrella of charity in the Church. Each soul who receives maintains dignity and self-respect because each works to the extent of his or her ability for that which is received.

There is an organization which we call the Primary for children who are ages three to eleven. Remember the Savior said, "Suffer the little children to come unto me." The Savior'sorganization for women, the great Relief Society, draws all women together in a Christlike sisterhood. The aged, the youth, the young adult, the widow, the widower, the handicapped and disadvantaged, the rich and poor, the executive and laborer, the doctor, the teacher, the student, and every living soul find meaning and refuge in the Church. Why? Because it is Christ's true Church.

I once heard president Harold B. Lee quote Abraham Lincoln in about these words: If a man had a tightrope and stretched it across Niagara Falls, then he commenced to attempt to cross the tightrope, carrying in his arms everything you treasured as priceless and dear, you would not be yelling at him trying to get him to lose his balance and fall. You would be kneeling and praying with all of your soul that he would make it. So it is with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Every soul on the earth who has heard the message ought to kneel and pray with all his or her heart that it is true. They ought to say, "Would to God that it were true."

It would seem that everyone would want a church which declares that Jesus Christ has personally visited the earth and re-established his Church. Indeed, shouldn't every person desire to have a church which is led by God's living oracles, modern apostles and prophets, a church that has sealing powers which are used to seal a family together for all eternity? "Would to God that it were true."
