Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Preface

The defining event of the Latter-day Saint faith is the restoration of the gospel—the process that reestablished on earth, through the ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Church of Jesus Christ and all the blessings that accompany it. Those blessings include the Lord's priesthood—the authority to act in his name and speak his words in his behalf. They also include his doctrine, restored anew in pristine purity, to teach us what we need to know to serve him and return to his presence. Among other things, the doctrine of the Restoration teaches us the answers to life's greatest questions, including who we are, why we exist, and what lies beyond death for us.

This book is an introduction to the Restoration during the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith and to the events by which it was accomplished. It begins with chapters that summarize the Apostasy, the process by which the ancient Church of Jesus Christ was lost from the earth along with the pure doctrine of God that was taught in it. Then it follows in sequence the principal events and contributions of the Restoration, beginning with the circumstances that led to the First Vision and culminating in the great doctrinal teachings from the last years of Joseph Smith's life. Although this is not a history book, it chronicles the major milestones of the Restoration within the context of events in the earliest days of the Church.

Each topic in this book deserves an entire volume, but I hope this survey will provide a useful summary that will lead to greater study and greater appreciation for the marvelous blessings of the restored Church of Jesus Christ and the gospel message that it proclaims to the world. I present this book as an expression of my own testimony of the truth of the Restoration, of the divine origin of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and of the divinity of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

I would like to thank faithful assistants who have checked sources, edited, and proofed the pages of this book: Lisa M. Kurki, Jason O. Roberts, Ana N. Shaw, and LeGrande W. Smith. To Suzanne Brady and her colleagues at Deseret Book I am also thankful. I would also like to express my appreciation to honored colleagues at Brigham Young University who have read portions of the manuscript and have offered invaluable suggestions: Richard L. Anderson, Alexander L. Baugh, Dong Sull Choi, Richard O. Cowan, Larry E. Dahl, Richard D. Draper, H. Dean Garrett, Leon R. Hartshorn, Dennis L. Largey, Robert J. Matthews, Paul H. Peterson, Larry C. Porter, Stephen E. Robinson, and Bruce A. Van Orden.

1996 Deseret Book Co.
