Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 1

What Do We Mean by "True Church"?

Individuals who are not members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are often puzzled when they hear us say that ours is the "true church." Because the Lord has declared such to be the case (D&C 1:30), we need not apologize for this assertion, nor should we think ourselves bold for believing it. But we do need to know what it means.

Obviously, if there is a true church, it is not because the people in it are "truer" than others or because they try harder to please God. A church can only be the church of Jesus Christ if the Lord himself establishes it, authorizes it, and recognizes its works as valid and binding. The question, then, is not one of good intent but one of divine authorization.

The scriptures teach us that this divine authorization is to be manifested in two fundamental ways: in the authority for God's earthly servants to act in his name, and in teachings that are revealed from him and are acknowledged by him to be correct. Thus the true church must possess true authority and true doctrine, and both of these must be revealed from God. We believe that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints meets these necessary requirements.

True Authority

When the Lord taught his ancient apostles, whom he had called to be ministers of the gospel, he said, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you" (John 15:16). Most readers of the New Testament overlook the importance of this short sentence, but it carries a message that is a fundamental principle of true religion. People do not have the right to call themselves to act in God's name. Nowhere in the scriptures do we have examples of the Lord's true servants designating themselves to his work. Neither a desire to serve, nor a sense of mission, nor a love of God and fellowmen—however heartfelt and sincere these may be—authorizes one to enter the Lord's ministry. The scriptural precedent shows that the call must be from God. And where God already has true servants on earth, the call comes through them, his representatives.

This principle is taught in the New Testament in a discussion of priesthood authority: "No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (Heb. 5:4). The Old Testament tells us how Aaron was called. The Lord's authorized servant, Moses, learned by revelation that it was God's will that Aaron serve (Ex. 28:1). Accordingly, the prophet called and ordained him (Ex. 40:12-16). Jesus called the apostles (Matt. 4:19-22; 10:1-8) and seventy others (Luke 10:1-2) to minister in his name. After his resurrection, the apostles, who served as his representatives on earth, called another to replace Judas and join them in their apostolic work (Acts 1:15-26). They also called seven others to important assignments (Acts 6:3-6), as well as elders and bishops to preside in local congregations (e.g., Acts 14:23; Titus 1:5). This pattern is always followed when authorized servants of God are found.

The book of Acts provides an interesting account from the history of the Early Church that illustrates some of these fundamentals. When Philip preached the gospel in Samaria, he met with success and converted many. Having been authorized to do so, he baptized his converts in the name of Jesus (Acts 8:5-12). But it appears that his authority did not extend to the laying on of hands to give the gift of the Holy Ghost; for this, the apostles were called from Jerusalem (Acts 8:14-17). However sincere, worthy, or desirous Philip may have been, his assignment had limitations, and he knew he could not call himself to prerogatives that were not his. When the apostles gave the new believers the gift of the Holy Ghost, a convert named Simon, recognizing that the apostles had authority from God, sought to purchase it (Acts 8:18-19). Even with his confused understanding of the nature of priesthood, he realized that he could not call himself to it but must receive it from God's servants who already possessed it.

Many honorable persons with the purest of motives have devoted their lives to the service of Christ and their fellowmen. It is safe to suppose that they will be rewarded abundantly in the eternities for their devoted efforts. But with respect to priesthood authority—the power to minister in Christ's name as his authorized representatives—the principles seen in New Testament times are as valid today as they were then. As the Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "We believe that a man must be called of God by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof" (Article of Faith 5; see also D&C 42:11).

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints could not assert that it is the Lord's church unless its own claim to authority were consistent with these principles. Our testimony is that in every way it meets the scriptural standard. Joseph Smith was called of God in the most literal way. Initially, God the Father and Jesus Christ appeared to him—the First Vision. Subsequently, he was ordained and given authority by the ministry of heavenly messengers. John the Baptist ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, which includes the authority to baptize. The ancient apostles Peter, James, and John ordained him to the holy apostleship, conferring on him the keys of the kingdom—the authority for mortals to preside on earth in Christ's name as his earthly representatives.

This apostolic power has continued in the Church from Joseph Smith's time to our own. It is the authority by which modern apostles and prophets lead the Church today. All who have held priesthood in the Church of Jesus Christ have received it through a chain that links them back to Joseph Smith's ordinations under the hands of resurrected men from ancient times. Individuals are called through the spirit of revelation by those already possessing authority, and they are ordained or set apart by them. Thus they, in turn, become the Lord's authorized servants, and their works are valid and acknowledged of God.

True Doctrine

As with priesthood, doctrine can only be recognized as true and authoritative if it is revealed from God. Otherwise, it represents—at best—an honorable attempt to understand the mind of God without any way to know it.

True doctrine flows from true priesthood authority. Joseph Smith taught that the Melchizedek Priesthood "is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven." [^1] It is "the channel through which the Almighty commenced revealing his glory at the beginning of the creation of this earth and through which he has continued to reveal himself to the children of men to the present time and through which he will make known his purposes to the end of time." [^2] Thus, where the keys of the priesthood are found, the windows of heaven will be open. Where true authority is not found, revelation sufficient to guide individuals to salvation is lacking.

Knowing that the Bible contains the word of God, many Christians have learned to rely on it as the source of their doctrinal knowledge. In this they are to be commended, because they recognize that the truth of God can only be known by what has been revealed from him to his servants. This understanding is far superior to the idea that divine truth can be ascertained through human reasoning or through the philosophies of men. Were it not for the Restoration, a belief that the Holy Bible is the sole repository of revealed sacred knowledge might be the best option available for honest seekers of the truth.

But the restoration of the gospel changes the situation dramatically. Through Joseph Smith, a modern prophet, we learn that the Bible does not contain all that God revealed anciently, nor did it arrive in our day without inaccuracies. He taught that "many important points, touching the salvation of man, had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled." [^3] He said that he believed in the Bible "as it came from the pen of the original writers," [^4] or "as far as it is translated correctly" (Article of Faith 8), with "translated" seemingly referring to the entire process of transmission from the original manuscripts to modern-language translations. But "ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." [^5]

These are not new ideas to serious students of the Bible, who have long recognized imperfections in its transmission. What is remarkable, however, is what the Lord did to reveal anew the fulness of his gospel—by opening the heavens again. The restoration of doctrinal truth through Joseph Smith is what one latter-day apostle has called a "wonderful flood of light." [^6] And indeed it is both wonderful and luminous.

The doctrinal restoration involves the revelation of new books of scripture, which Latter-day Saints view as authoritative alongside the Bible. Joseph Smith added more to the canon than any other known individual in history. The Book of Mormon, which was revealed through him, is a sacred record similar to the Bible. But its teachings of Christ and his plan of redemption are not surpassed in any other book. The Doctrine and Covenants contains more than one hundred divine communications from God to his modern Prophet, in which he gave from heaven an abundance of truth concerning his will for us. The Pearl of Great Price, a collection of doctrinal revelations reserved to come forth in our day, reveals things that are not found in any other source. Through the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, the Prophet restored truth that had become lost through the corruption of ancient revealed texts, giving us the scriptures "even as they are in [God's] own bosom, to the salvation of [his] own elect" (D&C 35:20).

The Prophet's sermons and writings are another source of divine revelation. By the power of the Holy Ghost, he had a clear understanding of truth and knew how to teach it. And because he had that power, we have been blessed with a doctrinal outpouring that is perhaps unsurpassed at any time in history except when Jesus himself taught on earth. Because we know that Jesus was the source of the Prophet's revelations, we can trust his teachings to be the mind and will of the Lord for our time. They are true because they pass the only valid test of doctrinal authenticity: they were revealed from God.

The True Church

Because this modern-day revelation of priesthood and doctrine brings back authority and truth that had existed in earlier times, we call this process the Restoration. We proclaim that the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored and that the Church of Jesus Christ, long absent from the earth, is again to be found and is acknowledged as the Lord's Church. Christ directs his Church through apostles and prophets, whose authority continues that which was restored to Joseph Smith by Peter, James, and John. "For thus shall my church be called in the last days," the Lord said, "even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (D&C 115:4). It is "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30).

Why is it the true church? Because the Lord established it, revealed its teachings, revealed the authority under which it is governed, continues to direct its affairs, and recognizes its works as valid and binding.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), 38.
[^2] 2. Ibid., 39.
[^3] 3. Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:372.
[^4] 4. Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 256.
[^5] 5. Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), 6:57.
[^6] 6. Neal A. Maxwell, A Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990), 15.
