Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 2

The Apostasy

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has taught since its beginning that there was an apostasy of the Church that was founded by Jesus during his earthly ministry and led by the apostles after his ascension. This is a fundamental belief of our religion: if there had not been an apostasy, there would have been no need for a restoration.

To understand the Apostasy, we must first understand that Jesus established a church. We Latter-day Saints take this fact for granted, because we see evidence of church organization in the New Testament (e.g., Acts 1:12-16; 4:32-37; 6:1-7). But even more important, it is a matter of doctrinal principle that wherever the gospel, the keys of the priesthood, and the saving ordinances exist, there will be found the Church of Jesus Christ. These circumstances existed from the very beginning of the Savior's ministry.

The book of Acts and the New Testament epistles contain a wealth of information about the ancient Church in its early years. After Jesus' resurrection it was presided over by apostles whom he had called (Matt. 4:19-22; 10:1-8) and to whom he had given the authority and the inspiration to call others when vacancies in the Twelve occurred (Acts 1:15-26). Local Church leaders served under the direction of the Twelve, from whom they received their authority and their message (e.g., Acts 14:22-23; Titus 1:5). Spiritual gifts were common in the Church (Acts 2:1-4; 3:1-7), and the power of Christ was at work as the message of salvation spread into many lands (Acts 14:3-10). The vitality of the Church was evidence of its divinity. Its leaders possessed the authority of God, and its message was the pure doctrine of Christ.

A century later, things had changed dramatically. The original apostles were gone, but others were no longer being called to take their places. Christians spoke with longing of the old days when the Lord's servants were among them. [^1] The doctrinal unity of which the Twelve were guardians had dissolved, and groups with very diverse teachings had come into existence and were competing for power in the Christian community. [^2]

Rebellion, Mutiny, Revolution

In seeking a definition of apostasy, Church members frequently turn to 2 Thessalonians 2:3 and cite the phrase in the King James Version, "a falling away." Unfortunately, the translation of this verse is both inadequate and misleading, and it has been the cause of some historical misinformation in the Church that has made it difficult to understand the nature of the Apostasy and how it happened. The intent of the original word is much more dramatic and points to something much more profound than "a falling away."

The Greek word used by Paul in 2 Thessalonians 2:3 is apostasÃa, from which we have the English word apostasy. It is constructed from two Greek roots: the verb hÃstemi, "to stand," and the preposition apo, "away from." The word means "rebellion," "mutiny," "revolt," or "revolution," and it is used in ancient contexts with reference to uprisings against established authority. The idea of a gentle drifting that comes to mind with the phrase "a falling away" is not one of its meanings.

In a revolution or rebellion, the objective is to remove the leaders and replace them with others whose views are more compatible with those of the rebels. The result is not only new leadership but also new policies and new objectives. This image describes what is meant by apostasÃa. And sadly it also describes what happened to the Early Christian Church, according to the New Testament. Because of rebellion against the authority and doctrine of the apostles, the Early Church came to an end less than a century after its formation. [^3]

As the process of apostasÃa developed, doctrines that inspired Church leaders had taught were corrupted and changed by others not of similar inspiration, the authority to act in God's name was taken from the earth, and the Christianity that existed thereafter, despite the honorable efforts of many individuals in it, did not enjoy divine endorsement as the Lord's own church. The Apostasy, then, refers to the circumstances that brought about the demise of the Early Church and to the period of time from its fall—about A.D. 100—until the time of the Restoration, beginning in 1820. But for most of the world, the Apostasy continues today.

Seducing Spirits

Perhaps the most remarkable witness of the apostasy of New Testament Christianity is the New Testament itself. Its writers prophesied that apostasy would take place and have a grave effect on their work. Those prophecies are the best place to start as we endeavor to understand what happened to the Early Church. They are important because they show us that Christ and the apostles anticipated the Apostasy and especially because they shed light on the nature of it and the process that brought it about. The following is an outline of some relevant verses. [^4]

Matthew 24:5, 9-11. "Many" false Christs "shall deceive many" (24:5). "Then shall many be offended" (24:10). The word offended is used to translate the Greek skandalÃzo, which means to "trip." In a religious context such as this, it means to "give up one's faith": "many will turn away from the faith" (NIV), or "many will fall from their faith" (REB). [^5] And "many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many" (24:11).

Acts 20:29-31. "Grievous wolves" will "enter in among" the Church, and they will not spare the flock (20:29). "Of your own selves" men will arise, teaching "perverse things" so they can "draw away disciples after them" (20:30), or "in order to get the disciples to break away and follow them" (REB).

2 Thessalonians 2:1-12. The apostasÃa (Paul wrote the, not a) will take place (2:3): "the rebellion" (NIV, NRSV), "the Great Revolt" (JB). Satan—the "man of sin," "the son of perdition"—will come to the fore (2:3). He will sit in God's place as though he were God (2:4). This "mystery of iniquity" was being held back at the time Paul was writing until God withdrew the power that restrained it (2:6-8).

1 Timothy 4:1-3. In "the latter times," that is, the final days of the Early Church, [^6] "some shall depart from the faith," following "seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils" (4:1). Examples of false teachings are a prohibition against marriage and the introduction of unauthorized dietary restrictions (4:3).

2 Timothy 4:3-4. There would be a rejection of "sound doctrine" (4:3). Having "itching ears" for religion, they will obtain teachers after their own liking (4:3). They will "turn away their ears from the truth" and turn to "fables" (4:4).

2 Peter 2:1-3. "There shall be false teachers among you" (2:1), who will "secretly introduce" (NIV) "damnable heresies" (2:1). "Many" will follow them (2:2), as a result of which "the way of truth" will be blasphemed (2:2). Thus they will "make merchandise of you" with false doctrine (2:3): "feigned words" (KJV), "stories they have made up" (NIV), "sheer fabrications" (REB).

1 John 2:18. "Ye" were warned that "antichrist" would come in "the last time," which, according to John, was the time in which he wrote.

Jude 1:4, 17-19. There had been warnings long ago about people infiltrating and perverting the faith: "certain men crept in unawares" (1:4). The apostles warned of "mockers" in the "last time" (1:17-18). Revelation 13:1-9. Satan's beast will blaspheme "against God" and his work (13:6). He will "make war with the saints" and will "overcome them" (13:7). He will have power over "all that dwell upon the earth" (13:8).

These passages paint a disheartening picture of the future of the Early Church, because it is obvious that both Jesus and his apostles knew that apostate influences would have a powerful effect on it. The verses cited show clearly the pattern of how the Apostasy would work: the rejection of true doctrine, the appearance of self-appointed teachers, and the introduction of man-made religion. Subsequent history shows that the Church did not survive the process intact. [^7]

Watching the Apostasy Happen

In addition to foretelling the spread of apostasy, the New Testament recorded much of it as it was taking place. The apostles' letters show them struggling with false teachings and practices that were making their way into the Church. In the earliest letters these problems were relatively minor and perhaps were remedied by sound apostolic teaching. But as time progressed, the false ideas against which the apostles contended became increasingly malignant and increasingly successful. As the Church grew, so also did the cancerous elements within it that finally led to its death. The New Testament recorded the process while it happened. [^8]

Apostate practices are mentioned in a number of New Testament verses. Paul contended against those who formed factions by playing favorites with Church leaders (1 Cor. 1:10-16; 3:3-10; 11:18). The Corinthian Saints allowed a case of incest to go uncorrected (1 Cor. 5:1-13), and they engaged in inappropriate observance of the sacrament (1 Cor. 11:23-34). Uninspired notions concerning the gifts of the Spirit led them to distorted behavior (1 Cor. 14:1-14, 33). Evil speaking against the apostle Paul was evident (2 Cor. 11-12; Gal. 1). Some Church members were transforming their faith into a Judaized Christianity and were bringing into the Church Jewish holidays (Gal. 4:10) and Jewish ritual (Gal. 5:2-4).

False beliefs play an even more prominent role than do apostate practices in the documents of the New Testament. For example, some Thessalonian Saints had developed the idea that the second coming of Christ was "at hand" (2 Thes. 2:2-4). Some elsewhere had apparently developed mistaken notions about the relationship between faith and works (James 2:14-17, 26). Some Corinthian Church members were teaching that Jesus had not risen from the dead and that there is no resurrection (1 Cor. 15:1-58). Some Galatians were turning to what the apostle Paul called "another gospel," under the influence of those who would "pervert the gospel of Christ" (Gal. 1:6-7). They believed that the law of Moses was necessary for salvation (Gal. 3:1-5).

These examples all come from the period between A.D. 50 and 60. It may be argued that some of these problems would not be of major consequence, assuming that the corrective teaching in the apostles' letters and visits would be received and obeyed. But as is evident in the earliest Christian writings of the second century, by the end of the first century the apostles were gone, [^9] and Christianity had lost its doctrinal anchor. These events suggest that the cumulative effect of false beliefs was more successful than the apostolic efforts to correct them.

Beginning in the 60s, doctrinal problems of a more serious nature grew in the Early Church. They clearly threatened the Church's existence and jeopardized the salvation of those who were affected by them.

It is in this period of history that we see the first evidences of what later became known as Gnosticism. Most of what we know of Gnosticism comes from sources a century or more after the days of the apostles, so we understand it best in its fully developed form of later years. But the New Testament gives unmistakable evidence that it was already developing and gaining ground while the Early Church was still alive. Gnosticism was an aberrant Christian doctrine that taught that physical matter and everything associated with it were evil. Because God could not consist of matter or even be the creator of matter, all material creation had to be looked upon as perverse. Some Gnostics believed in a chain of lower deities, each less holy than the one above. The lowest of these, the evil Jehovah of the Old Testament, created the material world.

In his epistle to the Colossians, Paul contended with a doctrinal heresy that he neither named nor described. But the words he used to warn the Colossian Saints against it suggest that it was Gnosticism in an early form. Paul's emphasis on Christ's supremacy in the universe (Col. 1:16-19; 2:9-10) and his warning against the worship of "angels" (Col. 1:15-2:23) seem to respond to Gnostic belief in lower deities. Paul gave a stern warning against accepting any doctrine that was different than the apostolic message that he had taught: "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ" (2:6-8). "Let no man beguile you" (2:18).

The Pastoral Epistles also show evidence of early Gnosticism. Paul's warnings against "genealogies" likely had reference to the descending chain of Gnostic deities. He wrote of "fables and endless genealogies" (1 Tim. 1:4), "vain babblings" (1 Tim. 6:20), "foolish questions, and genealogies" (Titus 3:9). He also warned against "what is falsely called knowledge" (1 Tim. 6:20, NIV, NRSV). "Knowledge" ("science" in the KJV) is the word used to translate the Greek gnosis, from which the word Gnosticism comes. The Gnostics believed they had a special revealed gnosis, or knowledge, by which they alone understood scripture, knew God, and were saved. This knowledge, they believed, was not available to the uninitiated mainstream of Christianity.

John's letters, perhaps the latest writings in the New Testament, show additional evidence of Gnosticism creeping into the Early Church. The immediate apostate doctrine was Docetism—the belief that Jesus did not really come in the flesh (1 Jn. 4:2-3; 2 Jn. 1:7). Docetism was a product of the fundamental philosophy that all matter is evil. Because Jesus therefore could not have actually had a material body, he only seemed, or appeared, to come in the flesh.

It does not take much imagination to realize the consequences of this kind of belief. Like John, we can see that this doctrine denies the reality of Christ's mortal experiences, his suffering and death in the Atonement, his physical resurrection, and ours as well. John pointed out that the Saints had been warned that "antichrist" would come in the last days of the Church (1 Jn. 2:18). They are here, he wrote, and they came from among the Saints (1 Jn. 2:18-19). Many false prophets have arisen (1 Jn. 4:1). For John, the test of antichrist was whether one believed that Jesus actually came in the flesh (1 Jn. 4:2-3). As an eyewitness of the Savior he reminded his readers: "We have heard," "we have seen with our eyes," "we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life" (1 Jn. 1:1). He pleaded with the Saints to hold on to true doctrine: "Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. . . . These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you" (1 Jn. 2:24, 26).

Other varieties of apostasy developed in the Early Church and are evidenced in the New Testament. Paul spoke of "profane and vain babblings," which "will increase unto more ungodliness. And their word will eat as doth a canker" (2 Tim. 2:16-17). Two men guilty of spreading false doctrine had destroyed the faith of some by teaching that the final resurrection had already taken place (2 Tim. 2:17-18). Paul and his teachings were being rejected: "This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me" (2 Tim. 1:15). Paul had taught the gospel in the Roman province of Asia more than a decade earlier, and his message had been accepted by tremendous numbers (Acts 19:8-22). Now they were "all" turning from him and his message. Jude lamented the rejection of "the faith which was once delivered unto the saints" (Jude 1:3). He spoke of those who "reject authority, and defame dignitaries" (Jude 1:8). [^10] He said that his readers had been warned long ago about people infiltrating and perverting the faith (Jude 1:4). They are here, he said (Jude 1:4). The apostles had warned of "mockers" in the last days of the Church (Jude 1:17-18). They are here, Jude wrote. They do not have the Spirit, and they are dividing the Saints (Jude 1:19).

John's Revelation provides additional evidence of the growth of apostasy. He spoke of the existence of false apostles (Rev. 2:2), of false prophecy (2:20-24), and extensively of apostate doctrine and behavior (Rev. 2:4-6, 14-16, 20-24; 3:2-4, 15-17). If John's words paint a fair picture of the overall status of Early Christianity near the end of the first century, we cannot avoid the conclusion that the prophecies of apostasy were then being fulfilled. Of the seven churches addressed in the book of Revelation, only two were not condemned. One of the five condemned churches was ready to die because of its sins; another was to be spit out of God's mouth. The rest were guilty of serious error, and each was told in strong terms that if it did not repent it would be rejected.

Finally, in what we assume is the last-written document of the New Testament, we have an example of direct rejection of the Lord's anointed leader. Diotrephes, a local Church leader who "loveth to have the preeminence" among the Saints (3 Jn. 1:9), rejected John, the senior and probably the only remaining apostle at the time. John had written to him, but Diotrephes would not receive him. In fact, Diotrephes excommunicated those who would (3 Jn. 1:10).

This was apostasy by any definition. John promised to deal with the offending leader when he could, but if Diotrephes did not recognize John's authority, no doubt he would not have responded to his discipline, either. Now in the third generation of Christian history, we see not only doctrinal apostasy taking place but also an act of open rebellion against priesthood authority. This was not without significant consequences: those who rejected John severed the final legitimate link of doctrine and priesthood between Christ and the church that bore his name.

With Tears

When Paul met with the elders of the Church in Asia at what would be the end of his ministry among them, he counseled them with deep feelings about what he foresaw in their future:

"Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears" (Acts 20:28-31).

Significantly, Paul warned Church leaders not only to watch out for their flock but also to watch out for themselves. Among those "grievous wolves" who would enter and not spare the flock would be some of those same leaders, who, having been entrusted with the Lord's Church, would speak "perverse things, to draw disciples after them."

History has not left us a full record of the Apostasy, though we have New Testament prophecies foretelling it and New Testament examples of its taking place. But when our historical evidence begins again in the next centuries, we see a different church, teaching a different gospel. And we know that despite the warnings and the tears, something both dramatic and tragic has taken place.

Notes

Â 1. See Justin Martyr (A.D. 110-65), Hortatory Address to the Greeks, 8; and Hegessipus, in Eusebius, Church History, 3.32.7-8. These can be found in A. Roberts and J. Donaldson, eds., The Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols. (reprint, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1951); and P. Schaff and H. Wace, eds., The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, 2d series, 14 vols. (reprint, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1983).

Â 2. See especially Hegessipus and also Irenaeus, Against Heresies; Clement of Alexandria, The Stromata, or Miscellanies; Tertullian, Against Marcion, Against Valentinius, Prescription against Heretics, and Scorpiace. All of these are available in Roberts and Donaldson, Ante-Nicene Fathers.

Â 3. See Chapter 3, 19-30.

Â 4. For a much fuller discussion, see Kent P. Jackson, "Watch and Remember: The New Testament and the Great Apostasy," in By Study and Also by Faith: Essays in Honor of Hugh W. Nibley on the Occasion of His Eightieth Birthday, ed. John M. Lundquist and Stephen D. Ricks, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies), 1:81-95; and "Early Signs of the Apostasy," Ensign, Dec. 1984, 8-10.

Â 5. Bible verses quoted are from the King James Version unless otherwise noted. Some passages are from the following English translations: JB, Jerusalem Bible; NIV, New International Version; NRSV, New Revised Standard Version; REB, Revised English Bible.

Â 6. See Jackson, "Watch and Remember," 89-90.

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), 38.
[^2] 2. Ibid., 39.
[^3] 3. Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:372.
[^4] 4. Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 256.
[^5] 5. Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), 6:57.
[^6] 6. Neal A. Maxwell, A Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990), 15.
[^7] Â 7. See Chapter 3, 19-30.
[^8] Â 8. See the fuller discussions in Jackson, "Watch and Remember," 95-117, and "Early Signs of the Apostasy," 10-16.
[^9] Â 9. See n. 1. Clement of Rome (ca. A.D. 96) and Ignatius of Antioch (ca. 107), like Justin and Hegessipus, wrote as though the days of the apostles were past. See 1 Clement, 42.1-5; 44.1-3; 47.1-6; and Ignatius to the Magnesians, 6.1 and 13.2 in Kirsopp Lake, trans., The Apostolic Fathers, 2 vols. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1949), vol. 1.
[^10] 1 Clement, 42.2-4; in Staniforth, Early Christian Writings, 45.
