Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 4

The Journey of Christianity

A discussion of the Apostasy rightly focuses on the Church in the first century A.D. The philosophers, councils, and creeds that led to medieval and modern Christianity are a separate matter, a part of the aftermath of the Apostasy many years later. But the development of traditional Christianity is a subject of interest to us, because it explains the origins of the Christian faith that existed at the time of the Restoration and that still exists today. Thus we will examine some of the major events and individuals of Christianity's formative years. [^1] The following examples were chosen because they were key elements in Christianity's evolution and because they are representative of others.

In the centuries after the fall of the Early Church, many people continued to believe in Christ and acknowledge him as the source of their salvation. Christianity grew as converts flocked to its message, often in the face of severe persecution. But the Christian religion that became a political and social force in the Roman empire was not the same as that which had existed when the Lord's apostles were on the earth, endowed with the keys of the kingdom and the authority to speak and act in Christ's name. Inasmuch as the keys of the priesthood are also the keys of revelation, [^2] it was inevitable that once the apostleship was taken from the Church, so also would be taken the divine guidance that it had enjoyed under the leadership of the Twelve. Believers were thus left to their own resources as Christianity journeyed into the future on an uncharted path, where its doctrine continued to develop with the passage of time. The result, however well-intentioned the people may have been, was a new Christian faith that included fundamental teachings that are largely at variance with the revelations of heaven.

Philo, Clement, and Origen

In its early years, Christianity found itself increasingly exposed to the cultural and philosophical influences of its surroundings. The entire New Testament took place within the sphere of Greek culture, which in previous centuries had become the culture of a huge area of the ancient world. After the conquests of Alexander the Great in the fourth century before Christ, Hellenism, the Greek culture of Alexander and his successors, spread dramatically throughout the Mediterranean area and into western Asia. It became the culture of the day, in due time supplanting many of the native cultures or changing them radically. Greek thought was very attractive to many because it placed man—particularly educated, intellectual man—at the center of the universe and gave him the keys to find what was perceived as truth. Native belief systems in many cases proved unable to retain their character in the face of the popularity of Greek culture. Over the centuries, indigenous religions underwent profound changes, as their beliefs were syncretized or substantially compromised by the imported ideas of the Greeks.

Judaism was not immune to the influences of Hellenism, particularly in the Hellenistic city of Alexandria, in Egypt, which had a very large population of Jews. The Jews there were thoroughly Greek in many ways, speaking Greek as their native tongue, accepting Hellenism as their native culture, and incorporating much of Greek thought into their religion. Jews in Palestine and Mesopotamia were more conservative, but even there Greek ideas made their way into their religion.

Philo of Alexandria (ca. 15 B.C. to A.D. 50) was a Jewish philosopher who was roughly contemporary with Jesus. He is important to our understanding of the development of Christian theology not only because of his influence on later Christian thinkers but also because his efforts to Hellenize Judaism illustrate the likely process of the Hellenization of Christianity.

Philo wrote scriptural commentaries and philosophical treatises that were defenses of the Jewish faith. In his writing he argued that the religion of Moses and the philosophy of the Greeks were compatible sources of truth, with the philosophy being derivative of the religion. To show their compatibility, he explained Judaism in terms that made it acceptable within the Hellenistic cultural context. And in doing so, he created what might be considered the first successful synthesis of Greek philosophy and revealed religion. Philo defended the Old Testament as God's revelation, yet he freely explained away as allegory much of its historical and doctrinal content, especially anything that stood out in contrast to prevailing cultural interpretations. That is particularly true of his concept of Deity. His primary philosophical influence was Plato, and like other students of Plato in the Hellenistic period, Philo adopted a belief in God that contrasted sharply with the God of the Old Testament. [^3]

Philo rejected all anthropomorphic references to the God of Israel, accepting instead the view of Deity that was in style among the Greeks of his generation. Thus he believed that the passages that depict God with humanlike shape or other humanlike characteristics are to be explained as metaphor. Anticipating Christian theology of later generations, he taught that God's existence could be known but that it is impossible to know anything else about him.

Though his effect on Judaism was minimal (because Jewish thought developed along different lines), Philo's influence on the evolution of Christianity was enormous. Early Christian theologians, who like Philo merged philosophy and revelation, invoked him as a model. In their teaching, he and his writings became a forerunner to the development of classical Christian theology, as well as medieval philosophy in general. His influence was especially felt in the thought of Clement, Origen, and Ambrose.

Clement of Alexandria (150-215) was an important Christian apologist of the second and third centuries. [^4] His contribution to church history was in his efforts to explain and promote Christianity in terms that would be acceptable to the intellectuals of his time. Like Philo, he created a synthesis of his own religion and Greek philosophy. In his view, philosophy was to the Greeks what the law of Moses was to the Jews—one of the paths whereby individuals could be brought to the higher revelation of Christianity. [^5] Drawing from the Platonic tradition of Greek philosophy, Clement believed in a transcendent God who was beyond all comprehension. And even Christ, he taught, "was entirely impassible; inaccessible to any movement of feeling—either pleasure or pain." [^6] Clement was succeeded at his school in Alexandria by his student Origen (185-254), who followed the precedent of his teacher and the earlier example of Philo in the process of accommodating his religion to Greek thought. Like Clement, Origen was well versed in Greek philosophy and, significantly, he received some of his training in it under Ammonius Saccas, the founder of the philosophy called Neoplatonism.

Origen was a Christian theologian and writer of profound importance. [^7] A scholar of the Bible, he wrote extensive treatises on doctrinal and scriptural topics, large commentaries on biblical texts, and defenses of Christianity against pagans and heretics. Among his most important writings is a text called On First Principles, a large work of theology. Not all of his many works have survived, however, in part because some of his writings were so lengthy as to make copying them impractical. But some did not survive because later generations had mixed feelings about his doctrinal speculations.

Origen wrote in a generation of theological freedom, before the time when the ecumenical councils of the fourth and later centuries codified the official doctrines of the church. In those councils and in the writings of contemporary theologians, some of Origen's beliefs were rejected as dangerous, and he himself was identified frequently as a heretic. Among the most heretical of his beliefs was his teaching of the premortal existence of human souls. He taught that those who are now mortals existed before birth, where, being agents with free will, they made choices. Except for Christ, all fell to some degree from their pure state. The most wicked and rebellious in that premortal setting fell to become devils. Origen's view of Christ's status was another factor that earned him the disapproval of later theologians. In a time when the doctrine of the Trinity was in the early stages of its evolution, Origen taught that the Son, though divine, was subordinate to the Father. In the councils of the next two centuries, when the trinitarian unity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost was officially formulated, this subordinationist belief was viewed as false and was rejected. [^8]

Although Latter-day Saint readers may see an element of truth in some of Origen's teachings, other aspects of his theology are less easily harmonized with revelation. His God, for example, had much more in common with the god of Platonic philosophy than with the God of the Old and New Testaments. Even in his own lifetime he was accused of corrupting Christianity with pagan philosophy. Like Philo, he used an extremely allegorical interpretive method when reading scripture and believed that the highest interpretation was a "spiritual exegesis" that we would say shows little resemblance to a passage's original context or intent. Physical resurrection, for example, was viewed as a metaphor for a deeper spiritual process. His asceticism was legendary, even to the point that he castrated himself to avoid physical temptation. [^9] His life and writings became influential in establishing monasticism in the church.

The One

While early apologists were attempting to make Christianity appear respectable within the context of Greek thought, a new strain of philosophy was developing that eventually had a permanent effect on the Christian faith, particularly on its doctrine of God. [^10] Along with some other philosophers of his time, Philo of Alexandria is classified as a Middle-Platonist, representing a school of thought that two centuries after his day would blossom into the powerful and lasting Neoplatonism, the philosophy that in late antiquity was fused forever with Christian theology.

Neoplatonism was largely the creation of two non-Christian Alexandrian philosophers: Ammonius Saccas (who had been a teacher of Origen) and his student Plotinus. Its view of existence was characterized by a belief in multiple spheres of reality, the lowest being our universe with its limitations of time and space. The highest existence is described as the realm of an entity called "the One," "the ultimate principle, which is absolutely free from determinations and limitations and utterly transcends any conceivable reality, so that it may be said to be 'beyond being.'" Because this ultimate, transcendent, undefinable entity "has no limitations, it has no division, attributes, or qualifications; it cannot really be named, or even properly described as being, but may be called 'the One' to designate its complete simplicity. . . . Since this supreme principle is absolutely simple and undetermined (or devoid of specific traits), man's knowledge of it must be radically different from any other kind of knowledge. It is not an object (a separate, determined, limited thing) and no predicates can be applied to it; hence it can be known only if it raises the mind to an immediate union with itself, which cannot be imagined or described." [^11]

Plotinus (205-70), the earliest Neoplatonic thinker whose words have been preserved, advocated this view of the ultimate essence and passed his teachings on to others. It soon became a powerful philosophy with wide-ranging influence. From the third century on, Christianity developed under the umbrella of Neoplatonism and its belief in "the One." Over the years the Christian faith learned from it, drew much of its strength and inspiration from it, absorbed much of its world view, and was influenced by it immeasurably. As a pagan school of thought Neoplatonism eventually died out, but as a philosophical foundation of Christianity it continues, even today. Predictably, and very sadly, at an early date "the One"—the unknowable, indefinable, ultimate reality of the philosophers—was identified with the God of the church. And Christianity has never been the same since.

Councils and Creeds

Beginning in the fourth century, more than two hundred years after the last apostle guided the Church, a process was developed to establish and standardize Christian beliefs. In a series of "ecumenical councils," church leaders debated, decided, and officially proclaimed the doctrines of their faith. The resulting policies, creeds, and doctrinal decisions—established by the authority of the bishops and the imperial power of the Roman/Byzantine state—are the foundations of Christianity even to our day. Thus the councils serve a formative function in traditional Christianity that is similar to that of the First Vision and the coming of Moroni in our own religion.

Seven ecumenical councils in late antiquity and the early Middle Ages are accepted by Catholics and Orthodox as establishing the fundamental beliefs of their faith. Some Protestants accept all seven councils, but others—following the lead of Martin Luther—accept only the first four. [^12] It must be stated from the outset that Latter-day Saints accept none of them, coming as they did many years after the Lord had withdrawn from the earth his Church with the authority to speak in his name. Christian doctrines had already undergone centuries of transformation before the earliest councils met to clarify and codify the religious traditions that they had received. Still, these councils were among the most important events in history, because in them was developed what the world today knows as Christianity.

The First Council of Nicea (325) was brought about as a result of what is called the Arian controversy. [^13] Arius was a theologian who taught that Christ is not truly divine but is a finite, created being who had a beginning. Only God the Father is self-existent; Jesus is not self-existent and thus could not be God. Arianism was an effort to reconcile a literal reading of the New Testament text to Neoplatonism, with its absolutely unique and transcendent Deity. Arians believed that Christ, though the most perfect creation in the material world, was entirely unlike God, who was eternal and uncreated. And Christ was subordinate to God's will.

Arius's doctrine was opposed primarily by Athanasius, another prominent theologian of the time. The controversy caused enough concern that Constantine, the Roman emperor, called a large meeting of bishops at his palace in Nicea (in northwest Turkey) to settle the matter. Constantine, who only later was baptized a Christian, presided at the meeting. At issue was the long-standing question whether Jesus was "of the same substance" (homoousion) as the Father, or whether he was "of like substance." In short, are Jesus and the Father the same being, or is Jesus something separate who is like the Father?

The question may seem unusual to some modern readers, but within the philosophical context of the fourth century it was an important issue. Platonic tradition maintained the absolute uniqueness of Deity. And "the One" of Neoplatonism was necessarily unknowable, indefinable, and utterly unlike anything else in existence. Jesus, in contrast, is described in the New Testament as a man who, though divine, had attributes common to other humans. How could he be both God and something radically other than God at the same time?

The council decided in favor of the views of Athanasius that the Son is of one substance with the Father and not a separate individual. That decision preserved the absolute singularity of God and avoided the problem of having someone other than him with status similar to his. But how the Father and the Son could be the same essence—two persons within the same being—was to be a mystery, something not intended to be understood. Like most everything else about God, it was unknowable.

The decision of the Council of Nicea established, with permanent force, the doctrine that the Father and the Son are one incomprehensible being. [^14] Every other detail of the Christian faith, passed down through sixteen centuries and hundreds of millions of people, rests on that fundamental belief that was codified then as the official doctrine of the church. In due time the theology of Nicea would be refined to fully state the doctrine of the Trinity, the belief in the oneness of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Later councils clarified the details, but the core of the Nicene trinitarian doctrine has remained the very cornerstone of the Christian faith to the present time.

The second ecumenical council was held at Constantinople. The emperor Theodosius I convened it to deal with the continuing debate about the nature of the Trinity. [^15] The previous year, before his baptism, he had issued an edict mandating belief in the consubstantiality of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost as a condition for being a Christian. In the summer of 381 he called the council, inviting 150 Greek-speaking bishops to deal with the matter. The council reaffirmed the doctrine of Nicea, putting a virtual end to Arianism as a viable alternative theology. And it more fully defined the doctrine of the Trinity and the equality of the Holy Ghost with the Father and the Son: the Holy Ghost is of the same essence as the Father and the Son and is coexistent with them in the Trinity.

The official statement of this council is called popularly "the Nicene Creed," but more accurately it is "the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed." It reads in part: "We believe in one God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible; And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten from the Father before all ages, [God of God,] light from light, true God from true God, begotten not made, of one substance with the Father. . . . And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord and life-giver, Who proceeds from the Father [and the Son], Who with the Father and the Son is together worshiped and together glorified." [^16]

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] As described in the Presbyterian Church's 1995 policy statement on their relationship with the LDS faith, Latter-day Saints are not part of "the historic apostolic tradition of the Christian Church." "Relations with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and Its People: Position Paper, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), adopted January 21, 1995." The quotation comes from page 1 of the resolution made to the 207th General Assembly (1995), attached to the Position Paper.
[^2] Concerning the role of Jesus Christ in the Latter-day Saint faith, see Topical Guide in the LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible, 240-58. See also Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., Jesus Christ and His Gospel (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), a compilation of articles from Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., The Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 5 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1992).
[^3] See the examples in R. Scott Burton, "The Nature of God in the Psalms," in Kent P. Jackson, ed., 1 Kings to Malachi, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1993), 426-36, 441-47.
[^4] See M. Catherine Thomas, "From Malachi to John the Baptist: The Dynamics of Apostasy," in Jackson, 1 Kings to Malachi, 476-80.
[^5] See Stromata (Miscellanies), 1.5, 16.
[^6] Stromata (Miscellanies), 6.9; in Roberts and Donaldson, Ante-Nicene Fathers, 2:496.
[^7] See Frend, Rise of Christianity, 373-83. For Origen's collected works, see Roberts and Donaldson, Ante-Nicene Fathers, 4:221-669; 10:287-512.
[^8] For an introduction to Origen's thought, see Henri Crouzel, "Origen," Encyclopedia of Religion, 11:108-11.
[^9] Eusebius, History of the Church, 6.8; in Philip Schaff and Henry Wace, eds., A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, 2d series, 14 vols. (reprint, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1986), 1:254.
[^10] For a general overview of platonic thought and Christianity, see A. H. Armstrong and H. J. Blumenthal, "Platonism after Plato," Encyclopaedia Britannica, 25:899-906.
[^11] Ibid., 900-901.
[^12] Roman Catholics accept a total of twenty-one councils, spanning from the first at Nicea to the most recent, Vatican II, in the 1960s.
[^13] See Kelly, Early Christian Doctrines, rev. ed. (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978), 223-51; Frend, Rise of Christianity, 494-501.
[^14] For the creed that was produced at the council, see Henry Bettenson, ed., Documents of the Christian Church, 2d ed. (London: Oxford, 1967), 25.
[^15] See Frend, Rise of Christianity, 635-41.
[^16] Kelly, Early Christian Creeds, 297-98. Western additions are in brackets. This creed is the only one accepted by both the Roman Catholic and the Eastern Orthodox churches. It is also accepted by most Protestants.
