Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 6

The God of Revelation

We must remember that the individuals who contributed to the development of Christian theology, who participated in the debates, wrote the creeds, and defined the doctrines, were doing so many years after the apostasy of the Early Church, when Church members rebelled against the light that they had received from Jesus and the apostles. But it must also be stated frankly that those who created what the world knows today as Christianity did so without the authority to act in God's name in an age when the heavens were not open to the church. Given what they knew and did not know about the gospel, some might argue that they did the best they could in the absence of prophetic direction. Still, when we compare what resulted through the creeds and councils with what is taught in the revelations of God, we can see that at almost every turn they made decisions that took Christianity ever farther away from its revealed roots. The Church of Jesus and the apostles had become the church of the intellectuals. Because of that, it is unlikely that a Christian of the first century A.D., who had received the gospel from Jesus or his messengers, could have recognized much in the Christianity of three or four centuries later.

Are Latter-day Saints Christians?

If the definition of a Christian is one who worships God and Christ as depicted in the doctrines and creeds of historical Christianity, then Latter-day Saints are not Christians. Our views on the nature of the Father and the Son diverge irreconcilably from the inherited beliefs of other churches, because our beliefs come from a different source.

If the definition of a Christian is one whose religion has resulted from the historical processes that created modern Christianity, then Latter-day Saints are not Christians. Our roots do not go back through the centuries of Christian history: we are not part of that family tree. Our beliefs do not descend through the councils or the philosophical developments that contributed to making Christianity what it is today. Nor does the institution of our Church. Though we cherish our association with good people of all faiths, particularly those who share with us a belief in the life and mission of Jesus Christ, we confess that their doctrines are foreign to us. In many ways, we do not even share the same understanding of the Bible, since we read it in the light of modern revelation and therefore very differently from the way other churches do. And though some external forms in LDS culture are part of the broader Christian tradition—such as our church architecture, our observance of Christmas, and many of our hymns—our religion is something fundamentally different from the traditional Christian faith. [^1]

But if the definition of a Christian is one who loves and believes in Jesus Christ, recognizes his atoning sacrifice as the only means of salvation, and tries to follow his teachings, then Latter-day Saints are Christians. "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost" (Article of Faith 1). "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel" (Article of Faith 3). "We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins" (2 Ne. 25:26). Because of these beliefs, we view ourselves without reservation or hesitation as Christians. [^2]

It is not surprising that Latter-day Saints find it difficult to understand the doctrine of the Trinity and the value of the debates, councils, and philosophical developments that led to the formation of classical Christian theology. But in attempting to comprehend the idea of the Trinity, we miss its point and try to do something that is not meant to be done. The trinitarian unity of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost—three persons in one being—is considered in Christian theology to be a mystery, a principle that is beyond human ability and out of the realm of mortal understanding. Christians in the early centuries determined that God, by his very nature, must be something entirely other than anything earthly. If humans could describe, define, understand, or even imagine him, he would be finite and thus not divine. He cannot, therefore, be contained in a body, a shape, a place, or a time, nor can he have anything like human characteristics or emotions. The beauty of this doctrine, the churches believe, is that it exalts and glorifies God by seeing him as beyond anything within the grasp of human experience or human reasoning. Were it otherwise, he would not be God.

We may wonder if anyone could read the New Testament and come to the same conclusions about God that were reached in the early councils, unless one had already learned the doctrine through the official teachings of one's church. The idea of the Trinity has no biblical foundation. The idea of an indefinable, unknowable God is simply not found in the New Testament, in which Jesus speaks of the Father in the third person—as a person—repeatedly and consistently, leaving no room for misunderstanding. The Bible describes the God of the Old and New Testaments as clearly within the reach of human comprehension. He is not depicted as mysterious or distant but as one who—though perfect, all-powerful, and divine—is near, approachable, and fully endowed with the wide range of feelings and emotions that humans experience. [^3] Moreover, the Bible gives every indication that God has a body like that of humans (Gen. 1:26-27; Ex. 33:11; Deut. 4:28; Acts 7:56). Were one to read the Old and New Testaments without the teachings of the churches, one would conclude that God is a divine man.

By the time of Jesus, Jews were already beginning to explain away biblical descriptions of God's attributes. [^4] Christians followed suit, dismissing the biblical God—with his body, emotions, and other "humanlike" characteristics—as metaphor and thereby transforming the God of whom Jesus spoke in the New Testament into the very different God of the Greek intellectuals. The councils, in their turn, accelerated and confirmed both the process and the outcome through codification and creeds. Modern-day theologians have done the same. Today, the Latter-day Saint doctrines that Christian clerics and academics find most disagreeable are those that deal with the nature of God: that he is an exalted man, that he has a body, that Christ is his literal Son, and that we are his children.

Many Christians believe, both intuitively and through their Bible reading, in the God of revelation, despite the doctrines of some of their churches. When we explain the Godhead to our friends, we are frequently told, "I have always believed that." The official theologies of the churches remain to a great extent the domain of only the learned among them. But among the humble members of their flocks are many who have come to understand the God of the scriptures—a God whom they can really know. And they sense, as though instinctively, that they have a real kinship with him.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] Standard encyclopedias may be consulted for basic information on the Protestant Reformation. See also De Lamar Jensen, "Protestant Reformation," in Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., The Church and Society (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 413-15, and bibliography cited there; or in Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., The Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 5 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 1171-72.
[^2] See Rex E. Lee, "Constitutional Law," and Ralph C. Hancock, "Constitution of the United States of America," in Ludlow, Church and Society, 114-18 and 118-22; or in Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 315-17 and 317-19.
[^3] Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:3; spelling and punctuation modernized.
[^4] See Milton V. Backman Jr., Joseph Smith's First Vision: The First Vision in Its Historical Context (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1971), 53-56.
