Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 8

The First Vision

In the earliest days of the history of the Church, Joseph Smith apparently spoke less frequently about the First Vision than he did about other sacred experiences. In public addresses and publications, greater emphasis seems to have been placed on the coming of John the Baptist, which signified the restoration of authority, and on the coming of Moroni, which represented the revelation of new doctrine. Near the end of his ministry, however, the Prophet spoke of the First Vision more frequently. Undoubtedly the great care with which he treated it was out of reverence for it. And there is good reason to treat it reverently. As glorious as the later visitations of heavenly messengers were, nothing on earth could surpass the appearance of the Father and the Son. It was the crowning event of the restoration of the gospel and one of the crowning events of all human history. In fact, in all of scripture it is the only recorded instance of the Father and the Son appearing together on earth. President Ezra Taft Benson called it "the greatest event that has occurred in this world since the resurrection of the Master." [^1]

By the end of the Prophet's lifetime, he may have told the story of the First Vision on many occasions. Yet his own written accounts of it have been preserved in only five places. We will examine them all, thereby allowing Joseph Smith himself, the only mortal witness of the event, to explain it as it happened. In these accounts, the Prophet tells his story in his own words. Because the accounts were written under different circumstances and perhaps with different readers in mind, the emphasis in them varies from one to the next. And because of what they describe and the fact that the Prophet himself wrote or dictated them, each one is a precious record. [^2]

The five accounts are presented here in the order in which they were written. The Prophet's words have been preserved in each of them exactly as they were recorded, but for ease of reading, the spelling and punctuation have been modernized. Because doing that may overlay a modern shading onto the original documents, references to the unedited texts are provided in the notes. The paragraphs in the accounts are also numbered for ease of discussion. [^3]

The 1832 Draft History

The first known effort of Joseph Smith to record his sacred experiences was a document written in 1832. This history covers events from the Prophet's birth through the arrival of Oliver Cowdery to assist in the translation of the Book of Mormon. The following excerpt, which is the earliest written report of the First Vision in existence, is entirely in Joseph Smith's own hand, making it an even more remarkable document because he usually dictated his words to scribes. We could assume that his original intention was to prepare the manuscript for publication, but that is not certain. It was never completed, and it remained in rough-draft condition throughout his lifetime. [^4]

1 At about the age of twelve years, my mind became seriously impressed with regard to the all-important concerns for the welfare of my immortal soul, which led me to searching the scriptures, believing, as I was taught, that they contained the word of God.

2 Thus, applying myself to them, and my intimate acquaintance with those of different denominations, led me to marvel exceedingly, for I discovered that they did not adorn their profession by a holy walk and godly conversation [^5] agreeable to what I found contained in that sacred depository. This was a grief to my soul.

3 Thus from the age of twelve years to fifteen, I pondered many things in my heart concerning the situation of the world of mankind—the contentions and divisions, the wickedness and abominations, and the darkness which pervaded the minds of mankind.

4 My mind became exceedingly distressed, for I became convicted [^6] of my sins.

5 And by searching the scriptures I found that mankind did not come unto the Lord, but that they had apostatized from the true and living faith, and there was no society or denomination that built upon the gospel of Jesus Christ as recorded in the New Testament.

6 And I felt to mourn for my own sins and for the sins of the world, for I learned in the scriptures that God was the same yesterday, today, and forever, that he was no respecter to persons, for he was God.

7 For I looked upon the sun, the glorious luminary of the earth, and also the moon, rolling in their majesty through the heavens, and also the stars shining in their courses, and the earth also upon which I stood, and the beast of the field and the fowls of heaven and the fish of the waters, and also man walking forth upon the face of the earth in majesty and in the strength of beauty, whose power and intelligence in governing the things which are so exceeding great and marvelous [are] even in the likeness of him who created them.

8 And when I considered upon these things my heart exclaimed, "Well hath the wise man said, 'It is a fool that saith in his heart there is no God'" [Ps. 14:1].

9 My heart exclaimed, "All these bear testimony and bespeak an omnipotent and omnipresent power, a being who maketh laws and decreeth and bindeth all things in their bounds, who filleth eternity, who was and is and will be from all eternity to eternity."

10 And when I considered all these things and that that Being seeketh such to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth, therefore I cried unto the Lord for mercy, for there was none else to whom I could go and obtain mercy.

11 And the Lord heard my cry in the wilderness. And while in the attitude of calling upon the Lord in the sixteenth [^7] year of my age, a pillar of light above the brightness of the sun at noon day came down from above and rested upon me, and I was filled with the Spirit of God.

12 And the Lord opened the heavens upon me, and I saw the Lord and he spake unto me, saying, "Joseph, my son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Go thy way, walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments. Behold, I am the Lord of glory. I was crucified for the world, that all those who believe on my name may have eternal life."

13 "Behold, the world lieth in sin at this time, and none doeth good, no not one. They have turned aside from the gospel and keep not my commandments. They draw near to me with their lips, while their hearts are far from me."

14 "And mine anger is kindling against the inhabitants of the earth to visit them according to their ungodliness, and to bring to pass that which hath been spoken by the mouth of the prophets and apostles. Behold and lo, I come quickly, as it [is] written of me, in the cloud clothed in the glory of my Father."

15 And my soul was filled with love, and for many days I could rejoice with great joy, and the Lord was with me. But [I] could find none that would believe the heavenly vision. Nevertheless, I pondered these things in my heart.

The 1835 Journal Account

In November 1835, Joseph Smith was visited in Kirtland, Ohio, by a well-known religious eccentric who went by the name "Joshua the Jewish Minister." [^8] During their conversations, the Prophet related to him some of his early experiences, including the First Vision. The following is the Prophet's journal entry documenting that conversation, as recorded by his scribe. This account, too, was never published in Joseph Smith's day and thus has also been preserved in rough-draft form. [^9]

1 Being wrought up in my mind respecting the subject of religion and looking at the different systems taught the children of men, I knew not who was right or who was wrong. And I considered it of the first importance that I should be right in matters that involve eternal consequences.

2 Being thus perplexed in mind, I retired to the silent grove and bowed down before the Lord, under a realizing sense that he had said, if the Bible be true, "Ask, and you shall receive; knock and it shall be opened; seek and you shall find" [Matt. 7:7]; and again, "If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not" [James 1:5].

3 Information was what I most desired at this time, and with a fixed determination to obtain it, I called upon the Lord for the first time, in the place above stated, or in other words I made a fruitless attempt to pray.

4 My tongue seemed to be swollen in my mouth, so that I could not utter. I heard a noise behind me like some person walking towards me. I strove again to pray but could not. The noise of walking seemed to draw nearer. I sprang up on my feet and looked around but saw no person or thing that was calculated to produce the noise of walking.

5 I kneeled again. My mouth was opened and my tongue liberated, and I called on the Lord in mighty prayer.

6 A pillar of fire appeared above my head. It presently rested down upon me and filled me with joy unspeakable. A personage appeared in the midst of this pillar of flame, which was spread all around and yet nothing consumed.

7 Another personage soon appeared like unto the first. He said unto me, "Thy sins are forgiven thee." He testified unto me that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

8 And I saw many angels in this vision.

9 I was about fourteen years old when I received this first communication.

The 1838 "History of Joseph Smith" (JS-H)

The longest and best-known of the Prophet's accounts of his First Vision was dictated to a scribe in 1838 as part of his official history, which eventually became the History of the Church.10 It shows every indication of having been written with great care. It is the most deliberate, the most detailed, and the most formal of the accounts. It was first published in Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1842 and is now included in the Pearl of Great Price. [^10] Thus it is the only account that has been canonized as scripture. Today we know it as "Joseph Smith-History" ("JS-H"). The verse numbers are from the Pearl of Great Price.

9 My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of both reason and sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least, to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous in endeavoring to establish their own tenets and disprove all others.

10 In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?

11 While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

12 Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible.

13 At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture.

14 So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally.

15 After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

16 But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

17 It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!

18 My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right (for at this time it had never entered into my heart that all were wrong)—and which I should join.

19 I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

20 He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. And as I leaned up to the fireplace, mother inquired what the matter was. I replied, "Never mind, all is well—I am well enough off." I then said to my mother, "I have learned for myself that Presbyterianism is not true."

The 1842 "Church History"

John Wentworth, publisher of the Chicago Democrat, requested that Joseph Smith write for him an article about the Church, which he planned to send to a friend who was writing a book. Accordingly, what has come to be known as the "Wentworth Letter" was written. The article apparently never was published in Wentworth's newspaper or in the book, but the Prophet published it himself in the Times and Seasons in Nauvoo. [^11] It was the first of the Prophet's accounts to appear in print. [^12] The article discusses the First Vision, the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and the history of the Church. It ends with a brief sketch of some beliefs of the Church which we now call the Articles of Faith. Unlike the 1832 and 1835 accounts, this document was prepared for publication, presumably for readers who were not Latter-day Saints.

In 1843 the Prophet was asked to prepare a chapter on the Latter-day Saints for a book on various religious beliefs. It was published shortly before his death the next year. The account of the First Vision in it is almost identical to that in the 1842 "Church History." [^13]

1 When about fourteen years of age, I began to reflect upon the importance of being prepared for a future state. And upon enquiring the plan of salvation, I found that there was a great clash in religious sentiment. If I went to one society they referred me to one place, and another to another, each one pointing to his own particular creed as the summum bonum of perfection.

2 Considering that all could not be right, and that God could not be the author of so much confusion, I determined to investigate the subject more fully, believing that if God had a church it would not be split up into factions, and that if he taught one society to worship one way, and administer in one set of ordinances, he would not teach another principles which were diametrically opposed.

3 Believing the word of God, I had confidence in the declaration of James: "If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him" [James 1:5].

4 I retired to a secret place in a grove and began to call upon the Lord.

5 While fervently engaged in supplication, my mind was taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded. And I was enwrapped in a heavenly vision and saw two glorious personages who exactly resembled each other in features and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noonday.

6 They told me that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as his church and kingdom.

7 And I was expressly commanded to "go not after them," at the same time receiving a promise that the fullness of the gospel should at some future time be made known unto me.

The 1843 Pittsburgh Gazette Interview

In 1843 Joseph Smith was interviewed by a reporter from the Pittsburgh Weekly Gazette. The following is his brief account of the First Vision as it was reported in that newspaper. [^14]

1 The Lord does reveal himself to me. I know it. He revealed himself first to me when I was about fourteen years old, a mere boy. I will tell you about it.

2 There was a reformation among the different religious denominations in the neighborhood where I lived, and I became serious and was desirous to know what church to join.

3 While thinking of this matter, I opened the Testament promiscuously [^15] on these words in James: "Ask of the Lord, who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not" [James 1:5]. I just determined I'd ask him.

4 I immediately went out into the woods where my father had a clearing and went to the stump where I had stuck my axe when I had quit work. And I kneeled down and prayed, saying, "O Lord, what church shall I join?"

5 Directly I saw a light, and then a glorious personage in the light, and then another personage. And the first personage said to the second, "Behold my beloved Son, hear him."

6 I then addressed this second person, saying, "O Lord, what church shall I join?" He replied, "Don't join any of them; they are all corrupt."

7 The vision then vanished, and when I came to myself, I was sprawling on my back, and it was some time before my strength returned.

The Heavenly Vision

When we consider the importance of the restoration of the gospel, which was initiated by the First Vision, and the millions of lives that have been and will continue to be blessed by it—both on the earth and in the spirit world—we can only begin in some small way to grasp the significance of this event. It was certainly one of the greatest occurrences of all time.

The Prophet seems to have been selective regarding what he made known of the sacred event in his five known accounts of the vision. We have no idea, for example, how long it lasted, and he wrote that the Lord told him "many other things" that he was not at liberty to share with others. In answer to his mother's concerned question about what had happened to him, he responded only with the amazing understatement that he had learned for himself "that Presbyterianism is not true" (JS-H 1:20). We respect the confidentiality of what the Lord has chosen not to make public and acknowledge that we are greatly blessed to learn all that he allowed his prophet to tell us. (In the following summary and in later chapters, the citations refer to the accounts by date, followed by the paragraph or verse number). [^16]

Joseph Smith emphasized that he knew, even at a young age, that all was not right with the world and that he as well as others needed to learn how to live worthy of divine favor (1832:1-6, 10). For him, the pressing issue was to find a church whose teachings were in harmony with God's will (1835:1-2; JS-H 1:10; 1842:1-2; 1843:2). It was this question that led him eventually to a biblical verse that promises wisdom to those who earnestly seek it at the hand of God, James 1:5 1835:2-3; JS-H 1:11-13; 1842:3; 1843:3). One account also mentions another verse with the same message, Matthew 7:7 1835:2). In accordance with the scriptural promise, Joseph Smith went to the Lord and prayed in faith (1832:11; 1835:2-3; JS-H 1:14-15; 1842:4-5; 1843:4), whereupon Satan attacked him, trying to abort his prayer (1835:4-5; JS-H 1:15-16). Indescribable glory appeared with and surrounded the heavenly Personages—"a pillar of light above the brightness of the sun" (1832:11; JS-H 1:16), "a pillar of fire" (1835:6), "a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noonday" (1842:5), "a light" (1843:5). God the Father appeared to Joseph Smith (1835:6; JS-H 1:17; 1842:5; 1843:5), as did his Son Jesus Christ (1832:12; 1835:7; JS-H 1:17; 1842:5). They "exactly resembled each other in features and likeness" (1842:5). The Father bore testimony of the Son (JS-H 1:17; 1843:5), and the Son delivered the message to Joseph Smith (1832:12-14; JS-H 1:17-20; 1843:5-6).

The Prophet was informed that his own sins were forgiven (1832:12; 1835:7). He was then told, in some detail, that the world lay in sin and the fullness of truth was not to be found on earth (1832:13-14; JS-H 1:19; 1842:6; 1843:6). Thus he was expressly forbidden to join any church (JS-H 1:19-20; 1842:7; 1843:6), but he was promised that "at some future time" "the fullness of the gospel" would be made known to him (1842:7).

Only one of the accounts reveals that he "saw many angels in this vision" (1835:8), which should confirm our caution that there is much about the First Vision we do not know at the present time.

The glorious experience was accompanied by a feeling of "great joy" (1832:15), or "joy unspeakable" (1835:6), which lasted "for many days" (1832:15). And the Prophet's soul "was filled with love" (1832:15). [^17]

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1946-47), 1:207.
[^2] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), 367.
[^3] Noah Webster, An American Dictionary of the English Language (New York: S. Converse, 1828; facsimile reproduction, San Francisco: Foundation for American Christian Education, 1980), s.v. "profess." A professor is one who "makes open declaration of his sentiments or opinions; particularly, one who makes a public avowal of his belief in the Scriptures and his faith in Christ," ibid., s.v. "professor."
[^4] In his 1842 account of what Moroni told him, the Prophet said: "I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of his purposes in this glorious dispensation" (1842:11).
[^5] See M. Catherine Thomas, "From Malachi to John the Baptist: The Dynamics of Apostasy," in Kent P. Jackson, ed., 1 Kings to Malachi, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1993), 476-80.
[^6] See Chapter 23, 242-50.
[^7] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3 vols., comp. Bruce R. McConkie (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:27.
[^8] Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), 74.
[^9] The scribe was Warren Parrish. The unedited original is in Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 2:68-69.
[^10] See Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957).
[^11] See Times and Seasons 3, no. 10 (15 March 1842): 726-28; and 3, no. 11 (1 April 1842): 748-49. The heading was "History of Joseph Smith." When the Pearl of Great Price was created in 1851, it was included under the heading "Extracts from the History of Joseph Smith."
[^12] Times and Seasons 3, no. 9 (1 March 1842): 706-10. The heading was "Church History." The First Vision is discussed at 706-7.
[^13] The earliest of all published accounts of the First Vision was written by Elder Orson Pratt while he was serving a mission in Scotland. It is contained in his pamphlet Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions.
[^14] Joseph Smith, "Latter Day Saints," in I. Daniel Rupp, An Original History of the Religious Denominations at Present Existing in the United States (Philadelphia, 1844), 404-10. The text is preserved in Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:445-58. The First Vision is discussed at 1:448-49 of Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith.
[^15] "The Prairies, Nauvoo, Joe Smith, the Temple, the Mormons, etc.," Pittsburgh Weekly Gazette 58 (15 September 1843): 3. See Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:438-44. Reprinted in the 23 September 1843 New York Spectator.
[^16] That is, "without order," "indiscriminately." Webster, Dictionary, s.v. "promiscuously." According to Alexander Neibaur, the Prophet said that when he opened his Bible, "the first passage that struck him" was James 1:5. See Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:461.
[^17] For a comprehensive harmony of each recorded element of the First Vision, see Backman, Eyewitness Accounts, 201-3.
