Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 9

Lessons from the Sacred Grove

The First Vision is one of history's greatest revelations of sacred doctrine. It is the beginning of the process by which the Church was restored, but in addition it is in its own right a magnificent restoration of truths that could be found nowhere else on earth.

It is not difficult to imagine that this revelation was an overpowering experience for a fourteen-year-old boy, even one with the maturity and sensitivity that characterized young Joseph Smith. Likely the experience was so unexpected and so overpowering that he did not understand all he saw and heard in it until he had matured and learned more of the gospel through subsequent revelations. Aside from the five accounts discussed previously, we have no record in his words of his ever discussing in detail what he learned from the First Vision. Still, we can gain much through a careful study of what he recorded of the sacred event, including several important doctrines. In this discussion, the accounts are cited by date and paragraph or verse numbers.

The Reality and Nature of Satan

Even before Joseph Smith learned anything else in his First Vision, he was made aware in a dramatic way of the existence and power of Satan, who seized him and nearly overcame him. He recognized that an unseen force wanted to destroy him, and it was only through the approach of the pillar of light that he was delivered from that fate (1835:4-5; JS-H 1:15-16). From Satan's attack on the Prophet, we see that the adversary has some power to manipulate the elements to do his will, a fact that is borne out in a later revelation to Joseph Smith (D&C 61:4-5, 15-19). [^1] We do not know what the limitations on that power are, but it is clear from the Prophet's record that Satan's power is real and frighteningly potent. In fact, Joseph Smith thought that he was going to die (JS-H 1:15-16).

As a believer in the Bible, the Prophet presumably believed in the devil before he had the First Vision. But the First Vision proves Satan's existence, which is more important today than it was then because much of Christianity has now abandoned belief in the reality of the adversary. The First Vision also establishes that Satan knew Joseph Smith. Through a later revelation we learn that Satan was present with "the noble and great ones" in the premortal councils (Abr. 3:22-28), where Joseph Smith certainly was also present, where his calling was probably known, and where he was foreordained to do his great earthly work. [^2] After the First Vision the Prophet marveled that someone such as himself would attract the attention of so many "of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling" (JS-H 1:23). Those individuals were merely attempting, like many others since them, to complete the deed that Satan had failed to accomplish in the Sacred Grove. Joseph Smith was not, contrary to his own assessment at the time, "an obscure boy" (JS-H 1:22). As he learned in due time, he was one of the great ones of the Father's children, whose mission would affect the lives of millions of others.

Satan knew that. By the spring of 1820 he had enjoyed enormous power over human hearts for many centuries. Now, with the calling of Joseph Smith and the restoration of true religion to the earth, the doom of the devil's kingdom was assured.

Apostasy and Restoration

The First Vision teaches the reality of the Apostasy and the need for the Restoration. In response to Joseph Smith's question about which church he should join, the Lord told him that he should "join none of them, for they were all wrong." The Lord elaborated that "all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: 'they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof'" (JS-H 1:19).

Because these clear and straightforward statements come from a prophet reporting the words of Jesus Christ, we need to take them seriously, believe them, and understand them. We must recognize that the Lord's chastisement was directed not at honorable individuals who had been led into confusion by the wrong ideas of others but rather at false doctrine and at those who perpetrated it.

As a result of apostate forces that had existed in ancient times and had been at work continuously into Joseph Smith's day, true religion was nowhere to be found, neither in the Palmyra-Manchester area nor anywhere on earth. All religions were therefore "corrupt" (1843:6), despite the best efforts of many who were in them. The doctrines of Christianity, having been removed for many centuries from their original revealed source, were "commandments of men" and not of God. Even though some beliefs had "a form of godliness," they denied God's power (JS-H 1:19) because they were not revealed by him, acknowledged by him, nor administered under the hands of his authorized servants. As a result, even the most honorable of believers were living their lives contrary to the Lord's plan: "The world lieth in sin at this time, and none doeth good, no not one. They have turned aside from the gospel and keep not my commandments" (1832:13). The Prophet summarized the Lord's message: "They told me that all religious denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as his church and kingdom. And I was expressly commanded to 'go not after them'" (1842:6-7).

But what of those whom the Lord characterized as drawing near to him with their lips but whose hearts were far from him? (JS-H 1:19; 1832:13). Those were individuals who professed religion but were hypocrites because their hearts were not consistent with their words. To profess is "to make open declaration of; to avow or acknowledge." [^3] Those who did so dishonestly added the sin of hypocrisy to their false doctrine. Unfortunately, Joseph Smith soon had experiences with many such individuals.

These conditions demonstrate that there was a need for a restoration of gospel truth to the earth. The Prophet never told us whether he was informed at that time of his own role in the process. Perhaps his calling was explained to him then, or perhaps that message was reserved to be explained at a later date by Moroni (see JS-H 1:33, 54). [^4] His only comment was that he received "a promise that the fullness of the gospel should at some future time be made known" to him (1842:7).

The Reality and Nature of God

Certainly the greatest doctrinal contribution of the First Vision is what it teaches us about God. Its revelations concerning Deity are especially important because they follow on the heels of many centuries of confusion and misinformation on this topic since the Apostasy began. When false influences alter or supplant true religion, the first target is the nature of God, as can be seen in the teachings of the periods that followed the Old and New Testaments. [^5] The world witnessed the consequences of that in the early centuries of Christian history. The first task of the Restoration was to reestablish the true doctrine of God so individuals could know him, understand what is revealed concerning him, and worship him in righteousness. The First Vision began that process in a profound way.

First, we learn from the First Vision that God exists. Perhaps in Joseph Smith's day the revelation of this knowledge was not as significant as it is in our own era of disbelief. But even then, the assurance that there is a God in heaven, confirming the Bible's testimony of this truth, was a revelation of profound importance. That someone in modern times has spoken with God bears testimony to his reality and stands as a witness of it to all the world.

Second, from the First Vision we have evidence that God knows us and hears and answers our prayers. That may have been a new insight to the young Prophet, who had never before made an attempt to pray such as he did on that occasion (JS-H 1:14). Those who have had experience with prayer take for granted that God knows us and cares for us. But that knowledge is perhaps the single most important thing lacking in the lives of millions of people worldwide. It is sad to know that even many in the world who pray have been taught that God is so far removed from us that one cannot actually converse with him or that prayer consists of reciting set phrases rather than offering the sincere personal expressions of an honest individual's heart.

That God knew Joseph Smith is evident in that He came to him and addressed him by name (1832:12; JS-H 1:17). From the Prophet's experience we can rightly infer that God knows each of us as well.

Third, the First Vision teaches that humans are, just as the Bible says, created in the literal image of God. This truth was rejected by early Christian theologians because it clashed so fundamentally with the prevailing philosophies of the time, which had long since rejected the possibility of a bodily God. From the First Vision we learn that God is neither shapeless, indefinable, nor unknowable. Although we do not know whether Joseph Smith learned in the First Vision that God has flesh and bones, it can be stated that he learned then that God and humans are in the same form, something that many Christians had already assumed from their reading of the Bible. Later revelations taught him more (D&C 130:22), including the truth that God is our Father and the ultimate destiny of his faithful children is to become as he is. [^6]

Fourth, from the First Vision we know that God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ are two separate individuals with distinct personal identities. The New Testament clearly teaches this truth, but the ancient Christian councils rejected it. Under the influence of Greek thought, they devised in its place the nonscriptural trinitarian mystery that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one being who consists of three different persons. That has been the fundamental theology—the most basic core belief—of the Christian world since the fourth century after Christ, and it continues to be at the very foundation of Orthodox, Catholic, and Protestant Christianity today. The First Vision proves it mistaken and shows instead the separate identities of the Father and the Son.

Fifth, the Prophet also learned in the First Vision that the Father and the Son "exactly resembled each other in features and likeness" (1842:5).

Sixth, the First Vision teaches us that God is a being of awesome glory. A "pillar of light" (JS-H 1:16)—"a brilliant light which eclipsed the sun at noonday" (1842:5)—rested on Joseph Smith, driving away the power of Satan and creating an environment in which the Prophet could stand in the presence of Deity. He learned from subsequent revelations and experiences that to endure God's presence, one needs to be immersed in God's glory (Moses 1:2, 11; D&C 76:19-20). The Prophet described this glory as "above the brightness of the sun" (JS-H 1:16). From his earthbound perspective he had nothing else to which he could compare it, so his analogy drew from the brightest thing he had ever seen. The glory that accompanied the Father and the Son was far brighter than that.

Seventh, the First Vision teaches us something of the priesthood order of heaven: Christ, though divine, is subordinate to God the Father. The Father appeared first, followed by the Son (1835:6-7; 1843:5). The Father introduced and bore testimony of the Son (JS-H 1:17; 1843:5), who then delivered the message to Joseph Smith (1832:12-14; 1843:6). These matters are only briefly mentioned in the Prophet's accounts and are not discussed in any detail, but they teach us some important things. President Joseph Fielding Smith stated: "All revelation since the fall has come through Jesus Christ. . . . The Father has never dealt with man directly and personally since the fall, and he has never appeared except to introduce and bear record of the Son." [^7] That truth is consistent with the evidence from the First Vision.

Eighth, from the First Vision we gain an additional witness of the divine, redemptive mission of Jesus Christ. The Father's introduction, "This is My Beloved Son" (JS-H 1:17; cf. 1843:5), is sufficient endorsement of the Savior's work and worthiness. "He testified unto me that Jesus Christ is the Son of God" (1835:7). "I am the Lord of glory," Jesus told the Prophet, "I was crucified for the world, that all those who believe on my name may have eternal life" (1832:12). And Jesus will come again: "I come quickly, as it [is] written of me, in the cloud clothed in the glory of my Father" (1832:14).

It is not difficult to see that the First Vision responds in fundamental ways to the creeds and councils that created traditional Christian theology. By means of this supernal revelatory event, centuries of doctrinal misdirection were wiped away and replaced with eternal but long-lost truth. The Restoration is thus not a reformation of Christianity nor a refinement of its beliefs and practices. Like the First Vision itself, it is a radical departure from traditional Christianity that sets in its place a whole new system of beliefs entirely independent of past tradition. The First Vision opened a new day in the history of God's dealings with humankind.

The Reality of the First Vision

As a doctrinal revelation, the First Vision is certainly on a par with the greatest of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. Indeed, it seems safe to say that we learn more about God from it than we do from any other revelation. One cannot imagine a more profound and enlightening event to begin the return of lost truth, starting with the most fundamental principles of theology. But the First Vision did even more than reveal new light on doctrinal topics, as important as that is. It also began the historical process we call the Restoration, and as such it holds a unique and supremely significant position as an event of sacred history.

Did the First Vision actually take place? Though some may be uncomfortable with the idea of God appearing to a frontier farm boy, for Latter-day Saints the historical reality of the event is foundational and not subject to negotiation. To say that the First Vision was not an actual event—a real occurrence that took place as Joseph Smith described it—is to deny everything about it. How can one disbelieve the First Vision and believe anything else of the gospel that the Lord restored through Joseph Smith? If one rejects or modifies any part of his testimony concerning it, one is rendering it meaningless by rejecting the man who witnessed it and taught us about it. The definition of a Latter-day Saint is, among other things, one who accepts at face value the literal, historical reality of the First Vision. President Ezra Taft Benson taught: "This message constitutes the heart and the foundation of the Church. If Joseph Smith's testimony of seeing God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, is not true, then Mormonism represents a false system of belief. But if this vision was reality—and there are thousands who attest that it is by the verifying witness of God's Holy Spirit—then the Church of Jesus Christ was and is restored on earth again." [^8]

Through the power of the Holy Ghost, all who humbly seek enlightenment from God can receive an assurance that the First Vision took place. As they come to accept the Prophet's testimony of it, they can witness that it is true, that it really happened, and that their lives have been blessed immeasurably because of it.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] See H. Donl Peterson, Moroni: Ancient Prophet, Modern Messenger (Bountiful, Utah: Horizon, 1983).
[^2] Oliver Cowdery, "Letter IV. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 5 (February 1835): 77-80; "Letter VI. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 7 (April 1835): 108-12; "Letter VII. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 10 (July 1835): 156-59; Orson Pratt, Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions, and of the Late Discovery of Ancient American Records (Edinburgh: Ballantyne and Hughes, 1840), 5-11. Part of Orson Pratt's account consists of material quoted from Oliver Cowdery's accounts.
[^3] A composite text from the words of Joseph Smith and others is found in Milton V. Backman Jr., Eyewitness Accounts of the Restoration (Orem, Utah: Grandin Book, 1983), 38-56.
[^4] Only the first four words, "But after many days," are in Joseph Smith's handwriting.
[^5] The scribe was Frederick G. Williams. The unedited original is found in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:7-8.
[^6] The scribe recorded 1822 in the original draft. The correct year was 1823; see 1838:28; 1842:1.
[^7] It was dictated to Warren Parrish. The unedited original is in Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 2:69-70.
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957).
