Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 10

The Coming of Moroni

The process of restoring the gospel was not resumed until more than three years after the First Vision. Then, with the appearance of Moroni on the night of 21-22 September 1823, the Restoration was underway with a dramatic burst of interaction between heaven and earth. Even though Joseph Smith was only seventeen years old at the time, he was assuming his foreordained role as the Prophet of the Restoration. It was a role from which he would never be released, the responsibility of which he would carry with him every day of his life.

The Prophet was prepared for his life's mission under the guidance of Moroni, an ancient American prophet who was the caretaker of the Book of Mormon and who became in the latter days the mentor and tutor of young Joseph Smith. [^1] Moroni's appearance to the Prophet is described in succinct terms in Doctrine and Covenants 20:5-8:

5 After it was truly manifested unto this first elder that he had received a remission of his sins, he was entangled again in the vanities of the world;

6 But after repenting, and humbling himself sincerely, through faith, God ministered unto him by an holy angel, whose countenance was as lightning, and whose garments were pure and white above all other whiteness;

7 And gave unto him commandments which inspired him;

8 And gave him power from on high, by the means which were before prepared, to translate the Book of Mormon.

We also know of the coming of Moroni through the testimony of Joseph Smith, who experienced it, spoke of it publicly, and proclaimed its reality in conjunction with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Based on what they learned from him, both Oliver Cowdery and Orson Pratt published accounts of Moroni's appearance before the Prophet did. [^2] But we are greatly blessed that on four known occasions, Joseph Smith himself recorded on paper his eyewitness experience. Like the narratives of the First Vision, these four accounts bear testimony of the event and of the Prophet who experienced it. Following are all four accounts of Moroni's first visits in the order in which they were written. As with the Prophet's narratives of the First Vision, of which these are the continuation, his words are preserved exactly as they were recorded but with punctuation and spelling modernized. The paragraphs are numbered as well. References to the original documents are in the notes. [^3]

The 1832 Draft History

Joseph Smith's 1832 narrative of the coming of Moroni was dictated to a scribe, unlike the account of the First Vision that immediately precedes it, which was written in the Prophet's own hand. [^4] This history was not completed or edited for publication in the Prophet's lifetime. [^5]

16 But after many days, I fell into transgressions and sinned in many things, which brought a wound upon my soul. And there were many things which transpired that cannot be written, and my father's family have suffered many persecutions and afflictions.

17 And it came to pass, when I was seventeen years of age, I called again upon the Lord, and he showed unto me a heavenly vision. For behold, an angel of the Lord came and stood before me, and it was by night. And he called me by name, and he said the Lord had forgiven me my sins.

18 And he revealed unto me that in the town of Manchester, Ontario County, New York, there were plates of gold upon which there were engravings which were engraven by Moroni and his fathers, the servants of the living God in ancient days, and deposited by the commandments of God and kept by the power thereof, and that I should go and get them.

19 And he revealed unto me many things concerning the inhabitants of the earth which since have been revealed in commandments and revelations. And it was on the twenty-second day of September A.D. 1823. [^6] And thus he appeared unto me three times in one night and once on the next day.

The 1835 Journal Account

Dating from November 1835 is a diary entry that narrates the continuation of the Prophet's words to "Joshua the Jewish Minister," an eccentric religionist of the time. It too was not published while Joseph Smith was alive. [^7]

10 When I was about seventeen years old, I saw another vision of angels. In the night season after I had retired to bed, I had not been asleep but was meditating upon my past life and experience. I was very conscious that I had not kept the commandments, and I repented heartily for all my sins and transgression and humbled myself before him whose eyes are over all things.

11 All at once the room was illuminated above the brightness of the sun. An angel appeared before me. His hands and feet were naked, pure and white, and he stood between the floors of the room, clothed with purity inexpressible. He said unto me, "I am a messenger sent from God. Be faithful and keep his commandments in all things."

12 He told me of a sacred record which was written on plates of gold. I saw in the vision the place where they were deposited. He said the Indians were the literal descendants of Abraham.

13 He explained many of the prophesies to me. One I will mention, which is in Malachi, fourth chapter: "Behold the day of the Lord cometh," etc. [Mal. 4:1];

14 Also that the Urim and Thummim was hid up with the record, and that God would give me power to translate it with the assistance of this instrument. He then gradually vanished out of my sight, or the vision closed.

15 While meditating on what I had seen, the angel appeared to me again and related the same things and much more, also the third time, bearing the same tidings, and departed. During the time I was in this vision, I did not realize anything around me except what was shown me in this communication.

16 After the vision had all passed, I found that it was nearly daylight. . . .

The 1838 "History of Joseph Smith" (JS-H)

The following narrative is an excerpt from the Prophet's most formal history, which we now have as the seven-volume History of the Church. [^8] This part was first published under the Prophet's direction in the Church's newspaper in Nauvoo, Illinois, in 1842. [^9] It is now contained in the Pearl of Great Price as part of the "Joseph Smith-History," and thus it carries the added importance of being scripture. It is by far the longest and most detailed of the Prophet's accounts of Moroni's coming. The verse numbers are those of the Pearl of Great Price.

28 During the space of time which intervened between the time I had the vision and the year eighteen hundred and twenty-three—having been forbidden to join any of the religious sects of the day, and being of very tender years, and persecuted by those who ought to have been my friends and to have treated me kindly, and if they supposed me to be deluded to have endeavored in a proper and affectionate manner to have reclaimed me—I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which, I am sorry to say, led me into divers temptations, offensive in the sight of God. In making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been. But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native cheery temperament.

29 In consequence of these things, I often felt condemned for my weakness and imperfections; when, on the evening of the above-mentioned twenty-first of September, after I had retired to my bed for the night, I betook myself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God for forgiveness of all my sins and follies, and also for a manifestation to me, that I might know of my state and standing before him; for I had full confidence in obtaining a divine manifestation, as I previously had one.

30 While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor.

31 He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom.

32 Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

33 He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do; and that my name should be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues, or that it should be both good and evil spoken of among all people.

34 He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fulness of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants;

35 Also, that there were two stones in silver bows—and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim—deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones were what constituted "seers" in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book.

36 After telling me these things, he commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus:

37 For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

38 And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

39 He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming.

40 In addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled. He quoted also the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New Testament. He said that that prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when "they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people," but soon would come.

41 He also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be. And he further stated that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in. He quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here.

42 Again, he told me, that when I got those plates of which he had spoken—for the time that they should be obtained was not yet fulfilled—I should not show them to any person; neither the breastplate with the Urim and Thummim; only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them; if I did I should be destroyed. While he was conversing with me about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and distinctly that I knew the place again when I visited it.

43 After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left dark, except just around him; when, instantly I saw, as it were, a conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this heavenly light had made its appearance.

44 I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling greatly at what had been told to me by this extraordinary messenger; when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighted, and in an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by my bedside.

45 He commenced, and again related the very same things which he had done at his first visit, without the least variation; which having done, he informed me of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation. Having related these things, he again ascended as he had done before.

46 By this time, so deep were the impressions made on my mind, that sleep had fled from my eyes, and I lay overwhelmed in astonishment at what I had both seen and heard. But what was my surprise when again I beheld the same messenger at my bedside, and heard him rehearse or repeat over again to me the same things as before; and added a caution to me, telling me that Satan would try to tempt me (in consequence of the indigent circumstances of my father's family), to get the plates for the purpose of getting rich. This he forbade me, saying that I must have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building his kingdom; otherwise I could not get them.

47 After this third visit, he again ascended into heaven as before, and I was again left to ponder on the strangeness of what I had just experienced; when almost immediately after the heavenly messenger had ascended from me for the third time, the cock crowed, and I found that day was approaching, so that our interviews must have occupied the whole of that night.

The 1842 "Church History"

The following account continues Joseph Smith's history from what is sometimes called the "Wentworth Letter." It was first published in Nauvoo in 1842 and was the first of these narratives to appear in print. [^10] The Prophet published it again two years later, with only minor changes, in a book on American religions. [^11]

8 On the evening of the twenty-first of September, A.D. 1823, while I was praying unto God and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious promises of scripture, on a sudden a light like that of day, only of a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into the room.

9 Indeed, the first sight was as though the house was filled with consuming fire. The appearance produced a shock that affected the whole body. In a moment a personage stood before me, surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded.

10 This messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the Second Coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence, that the time was at hand for the gospel, in all its fulness, to be preached in power unto all nations, that a people might be prepared for the millennial reign.

11 I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of his purposes in this glorious dispensation.

12 I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this country and shown who they were and from whence they came. A brief sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments, of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being finally withdrawn from them as a people was made known unto me.

13 I was also told where there were deposited some plates on which was engraven an abridgement of the records of the ancient prophets that had existed on this continent.

14 The angel appeared to me three times the same night and unfolded the same things.

A Messenger Sent from God

In an 1838 newspaper article, Joseph Smith wrote about the angel's coming: "Moroni, the person who deposited the plates, . . . being dead, and raised again therefrom, appeared unto me, and told me where they were; and gave me directions how to obtain them." [^12] From 1820 to 1823, it appears that the work of restoration awaited only the continued maturing of the young Prophet Joseph Smith. When the time was right, the process of bringing lost truth back to earth was recommenced with the coming of Moroni, "a messenger sent from God" (1835:11).

By the time Joseph Smith was seventeen years old (1832:17; 1835:10), more than three years had passed since the First Vision. During that time, as he later related, he was subject to "the foibles of human nature" (JS-H 1:28) and felt himself unworthy, "which brought a wound upon [his] soul" (1832:16). His transgression, he stated, was that he "was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company," which he felt was "offensive in the sight of God." The Prophet himself set these comments in proper perspective by noting that he never possessed a disposition to do evil. Indeed, the issue was not that his levity and associations were bad but that they were not in harmony with how one should act who had been called of God as he had (JS-H 1:28). Still, he "repented heartily" of these things (1835:10).

As he prayed for forgiveness on the night of 21 September 1823 (JS-H 1:28-29; 1842:8), a light came into his room that was "of a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness" than the light of the sun at noonday (1842:8; JS-H 1:30). In that light, an angel of God appeared, standing in the air (1835:11; JS-H 1:30). The Prophet described the angel's manner of dress and said that even his clothing was "white and brilliant," with "a whiteness beyond anything earthly" that he had ever seen (JS-H 1:31). At first he felt fear, but that soon left him (JS-H 1:32). The angel called Joseph Smith by name (1832:17) and announced that he was a messenger from God whose name was Moroni (JS-H 1:33). He told the Prophet that his sins were forgiven (1832:17) and that God had a work for him to do (JS-H 1:33; 1842:11). He instructed him to keep himself worthy (1835:11) and informed him that his name would "be both good and evil spoken of among all people" (JS-H 1:33).

Moroni spoke about the natives of the Americas and told Joseph Smith that they were "the literal descendants of Abraham" (1835:12). He showed him "who they were and from whence they came." He learned of their ancestors in ancient times, "of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments," and of their "righteousness and iniquity" (1842:12). Moroni told the Prophet of a book that was the account of these ancient people, written by their prophets on gold plates. It had been concealed anciently and preserved to come forth in modern times (1832:18; 1835:12; 1842:13). It contained "the fulness of the everlasting Gospel" (JS-H 1:34). Joseph Smith was to translate it by means of an instrument called the Urim and Thummim, which was hidden with the record (1835:14; JS-H 1:35).

The angel taught Joseph Smith about his mission by quoting and explaining passages of scripture (1835:13; JS-H 1:36). In the Prophet's accounts of the experience, he cited specifically only a few passages (1835:13; JS-H 1:36-41), but he stated that Moroni quoted "many" others as well (JS-H 1:41). The angel revealed to him many things that were reaffirmed in subsequent revelations (1832:19).

Joseph Smith was instructed that once he received them, he was to show neither the plates nor the Urim and Thummim to anyone except those whom the Lord would designate. If he did otherwise, he would be destroyed (JS-H 1:42). He was allowed to see in vision the place where they were buried (1835:12), which was so vivid that he had no trouble finding the spot when he went there the next day (JS-H 1:42). After that, Moroni departed, and the room was dark again (1835:14; JS-H 1:43).

Moroni's mission was not complete with this one visit. Altogether he appeared three times that night, each time repeating the same message and then adding other information (1832:19; 1842:14). The next day he appeared twice more.

During the final visit of the night, he warned Joseph Smith that he should have only God's glory in mind when he dealt with the gold plates. Because of the poverty of his family, he would be tempted by Satan to consider their financial value. Moroni cautioned him that he "must not be influenced by any other motive" than that of building God's kingdom (JS-H 1:46). The consequences of disobedience to that injunction would become very real to him the following day.

During the angelic interviews, which opened and closed in succession, the Prophet was oblivious to everything but what he was shown in the visions (1835:15). That seems to have included the passage of time, for when the third appearance ended, he discovered that the night had run its course and it was morning. The visions had lasted the entire night (1835:16; JS-H 1:47).

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] For a detailed analysis of these scriptures, see Kent P. Jackson, "The Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith," in Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson, eds., The Pearl of Great Price, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 2 (Salt Lake City: Randall Book, 1985), 348-59.
[^2] The articles are in the form of letters addressed to W. W. Phelps; "Letter IV. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 5 (Feb. 1835): 77-80; "Letter VI. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 7 (April 1835): 108-12; "Letter VII. To W. W. Phelps, Esq.," Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 10 (July 1835): 156-59.
[^3] Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 10 (July 1835): 156.
[^4] In all, the angel used thirty passages according to Elder Cowdery's accounts. This list presents them in the order in which they appear in the narratives: 1 Cor. 1:27-29; Isa. 29:14; 29:13; 29:11; Ps. 100:1-2; 107:1-7; 144:11-12; Joel 2:28; Ps. 144:13; 146:10; Isa. 1:7; 1:23-24; Deut. 32:23-24; Isa. 1:25-26; Ps. 107:7; Isa. 2:1-4; 4:5-6; Jer. 31:27-28; 31:31-33; 30:18-21; 31:1; 31:8; Isa. 43:6; Jer. 50:4-5; 31:9; 31:6; Isa. 2:3; 11:15-16; Jer. 16:16; Deut. 32:43. The first four passages are from the February article (77-80), and the rest are from the April article (108-12).
[^5] In one of the two articles that contain these scriptures, Elder Cowdery used quotation marks to make it clear to the reader which were Moroni's words and which were his own. But in the other, in which most of the scriptures are cited, there are no quotation marks, and thus it is not clear which words are Elder Cowdery's and which are Moroni's. Perhaps Elder Cowdery did not feel that quotation marks were necessary; editorial customs were rather unstructured in those days. Or perhaps he wanted to alert the reader to the fact that the message was (at least in part) reconstructed and not necessarily a verbatim transcript of the event.
[^6] Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 7 (April 1835): 109.
[^7] Ibid., 112.
[^8] See Keith A. Meservy, "God Is with Us," in Kent P. Jackson, ed., 1 Kings to Malachi, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 4 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1993), 102-3.
[^9] See Jackson, "Appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith," 348-49.
[^10] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), 4:461.
[^11] See Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), 38-39.
[^12] See Joseph Smith's discussions of this passage in Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible, comp. and ed. Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), 69-74.
