Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 11

God's Work in the Last Days

One significant aspect of Moroni's appearance to Joseph Smith was the instruction he gave the young Prophet about his life's calling. Although it often does not receive as much attention as the message about the Book of Mormon, this part of the angel's visit is profoundly important in our history. Moroni introduced Joseph Smith to his mission and began to train him to assume his foreordained role to preside over the Lord's work of the last days.

The Prophet gave us only brief glimpses into what Moroni taught him. In the 1832 account he reported simply that he learned "many things concerning the inhabitants of the earth" (1832:19). In 1835 he said that Moroni "explained many of the prophecies" (1835:13). In his 1842 recitation he stated that Moroni taught him "that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the Second Coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence, that the time was at hand for the gospel, in all its fulness, to be preached in power unto all nations, that a people might be prepared for the millennial reign." He added, "I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of his purposes in this glorious dispensation" (1842:10-11).

Teaching from the Scriptures

Moroni taught Joseph Smith by quoting and discussing scripture. Through this process, the angel conveyed to him the messages and testimonies of ancient prophets who had seen and rejoiced in our day. In the 1835 account, the Prophet said that Moroni explained "many" prophecies to him, but he mentioned only one: Malachi 4. In the Joseph Smith-History (1:36-41), he mentioned five specific passages and recorded some of Moroni's comments concerning them: Malachi 3 ("part," perhaps vv. 1-4); Malachi 4:1-6; Isaiah 11:1-16; Acts 3:22-23; Joel 2:28-32. [^1] The Prophet then added: "He quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here" (JS-H 1:41).

In 1835 Oliver Cowdery wrote a series of articles in the Church's newspaper, the Messenger and Advocate, regarding Moroni's appearance to Joseph Smith. [^2] Written in Elder Cowdery's rich literary style, these articles contain lengthy discourses that represent the message conveyed by the angel Moroni. Elder Cowdery called his accounts "an outline of the conversation of the angel." [^3] As in the Prophet's accounts, Oliver Cowdery's recitation shows Moroni teaching by quoting and explaining scripture. [^4] These articles contribute a wealth of information about this sacred event and its importance. Obviously, Elder Cowdery was not with the Prophet when it happened, so the account is secondary. Yet we assume that Joseph Smith had rehearsed the event to his colleague on numerous occasions. Elder Cowdery had been the Prophet's scribe, and when he wrote the articles about Moroni he was assistant president of the Church. His intimate association with the Prophet, especially in the early part of his ministry, may have enabled him to know more about these events than anyone else except Joseph Smith. [^5]

At the beginning of one of the accounts, Elder Cowdery wrote: "I have thought best to give a farther detail of the heavenly message, and if I do not give it in the precise words, shall strictly confine myself to the facts in substance." [^6] At the end of his discussion of Moroni, "whose words I have been rehearsing," he wrote: "I have now given you a rehearsal of what was communicated to our brother. . . . I may have missed in arrangement in some instances, but the principle is preserved." He commented further: "You are aware of the fact, that to give a minute rehearsal of a lengthy interview with a heavenly messenger, is very difficult, unless one is assisted immediately with the gift of inspiration." [^7]

How well he succeeded only God, Moroni, and Joseph Smith know for sure. Keeping in mind that it was an event at which only Moroni and Joseph Smith were participants, I am inclined, in general, to trust Elder Cowdery's record because he was working closely with the Prophet when he wrote it. Moreover, almost all of the passages of scripture quoted by Moroni in his accounts deal with the same topics as the passages mentioned by Joseph Smith.

When we combine the information provided by Oliver Cowdery with that recorded by the Prophet Joseph Smith, the following scriptures emerge in Moroni's message (those mentioned by the Prophet are in italics):

Deuteronomy 32:23-24

Deuteronomy 32:43

Psalm 100:1-2

Psalm 107:1-7

Psalm 144:11-12

Psalm 144:13

Psalm 146:10

Isaiah 1:7

Isaiah 1:23-24

Isaiah 1:25-26

Isaiah 2:1-4

Isaiah 4:5-6

Isaiah 11:1-16

Isaiah 29:11

Isaiah 29:13

Isaiah 29:14

Isaiah 43:6

Jeremiah 16:16

Jeremiah 30:18-21

Jeremiah 31:1

Jeremiah 31:6

Jeremiah 31:8

Jeremiah 31:9

Jeremiah 31:27-28

Jeremiah 31:31-33

Jeremiah 50:4-5

Joel 2:28-32

Malachi 3:1-4 (?)

Malachi 4:1-6

Acts 3:22-23

1 Corinthians 1:27-29

A View of the Last Days

Joseph Smith's prayer as he went to bed that autumn night was for a "manifestation" to know of his "state and standing" before the Lord (JS-H 1:29). What he received, in addition to that and in addition to the announcement of the Book of Mormon, was a powerful lesson about the mission of God's people from his day through the Millennium. The angel's message outlined not only the work of Joseph Smith but also the continuing destiny of the Church and kingdom of God. The passages of scripture he used to convey the message were not randomly chosen. They were carefully selected to provide clear and systematic instruction of profound importance.

What do we learn from the scriptures that the angel Moroni quoted concerning God's work in the latter days? As the following summary of his message shows, it was an amazingly rich revelation that built the foundation for all the revelations that have come to the Church since then.

Scattering and apostasy. As a result of apostasy that began in Old Testament times, the Lord destroyed and scattered the house of Israel. Because they were rebellious, corrupt, and uncaring, his once-covenant people became his "adversaries" and his "enemies" (Isa. 1:23-24). Thus he heaped "mischiefs upon them" and spent his arrows on them, burning them with hunger and devouring them with heat (Deut. 32:23-24), leaving their country desolate and their cities ruined (Isa. 1:7). Even in the latter days, the world would lie in sin. "This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me," the Lord said. But they "have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men" (Isa. 29:13). These conditions set the stage for the Restoration.

The calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith. In the latter days, "God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, . . . the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty." Moroni used these words of Paul to describe the Prophet Joseph Smith, one who was despised by the world but chosen of God and worthy to stand in his divine presence (1 Cor. 1:27-29). He was the "rod out of the stem of Jesse" of whom Isaiah prophesied (Isa. 11:1), "a servant in the hands of Christ, . . . on whom there is laid much power" (D&C 113:4). He was also the "root of Jesse" whose work would stand as a rallying banner for all the world (Isa. 11:10), "unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days" (D&C 113:6). [^8] Bearing the keys of his calling, he would serve, perhaps more than any other, as the Lord's latter-day messenger, sent to prepare the way for the Savior's glorious coming (Mal. 3:1; cf. D&C 45:9). [^9]

The opening of the heavens and the gift of the Holy Ghost. With the latter-day outpouring of light and knowledge to his Saints, the Lord would perform "a marvellous work" among them, causing the "wisdom" of the world to perish and the "understanding of their prudent men" to be hid (Isa. 29:14). Moroni reminded us that God would pour out his spirit on all flesh, empowering sons and daughters, servants and handmaids, old and young to prophesy, dream dreams, and otherwise enjoy the blessings of the gift of the Holy Ghost (Joel 2:28-29). With the Restoration would come a steady flow of new revelation to the Lord's Saints, contained now in latter-day scriptures and also in the inspired teachings and practices of the Church. Spiritual gifts would be restored as well, whereby all the Saints would be edified (D&C 46:9). Foremost among these would be the gift of testimony, a divine witness available to all, that Jesus is the Christ and that his Church has been restored.

The coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Much of Moroni's visit had to do with teaching Joseph Smith about the Book of Mormon. The Prophet was told that it contained "the fulness of the everlasting Gospel" (JS-H 1:34). How miraculous it was that the Lord had prepared, many centuries in advance, a book of inspired scripture ready to come forth at the beginning of his latter-day Restoration. It is "the keystone of our religion." [^10] Sealed up to the world, it was opened to the humble young Prophet Joseph Smith and to all the humble who receive it today. It is indeed "a marvellous work" of God for our time, "a marvellous work and a wonder" (Isa. 29:11, 14).

The restoration of priesthood and keys. Part of the outpouring foretold by Joel (2:28-29) would be the restoration of the power of the priesthood. John the Baptist would appear to Joseph Smith and restore the Priesthood of Aaron. Peter, James, and John would come and bring the Melchizedek Priesthood. This restoration was vital not only because the priesthood is the power to act in God's name but also because it is the power to receive God's word by revelation and speak it on his behalf. [^11]

Moroni foretold the restoration of true temple worship when he quoted Isaiah's words that in the last days, "the mountain of the Lord's house" would be established (Isa. 2:1-3). Although the ultimate fulfillment of this revelation will be millennial (see v. 4), it is also fulfilled to a degree each time a sacred house is constructed and dedicated to the Lord.

The angel quoted the last two verses of the Old Testament, Malachi 4:5-6, with significant modifications to the text (cf. JS-H 1:38-39). This passage, foretelling the coming of Elijah, is important enough that it appears not only in the Pearl of Great Price but also separately as section 2 of the Doctrine and Covenants (see also D&C 128:17). It is one of the most important scriptures of the Restoration because it announces the creation of the links of priesthood power that bind and seal both ordinances and generations on earth and in heaven. The prophecy was fulfilled on 3 April 1836, when Elijah, the ancient prophet who held the keys of the sealing power, appeared to Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple to restore those keys to earth (D&C 110:13-16). [^12]

The gathering and restoration of Israel. Moroni quoted: "O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy" (Ps. 107:1-2). The cause of this rejoicing would be the restoration of the house of Israel and their gathering back to the covenant fold, expressed in the language of promised lands (Ps. 107:3-7; Jer. 31:8-9). From their dispersed and scattered condition, they would respond to the voice of their Good Shepherd and the call of his earthly servants, "the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim," who would say, "Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion, unto the holy Mount of the Lord our God" (Jer. 31:6). [^13] Joseph Smith would be the "root of Jesse," the Lord's Ephraimite servant who would announce Israel's return (Isa. 11:10; D&C 113:6). [^14] By means of the keys that he would hold (D&C 110:11), the Lord would send out "fishers" and "hunters" (Jer. 16:16) to find them in the places of their scattering throughout the nations of the world. They would be gathered "from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea" (Isa. 11:11), or in other words, "from the east, and from the west, from the north, and from the south" (Ps. 107:3; Isa. 43:6; Jer. 31:8). From their bondage in sin and ignorance there would be a divinely prepared means of return—a "highway"—just as there had been when their ancestors returned from their bondage in Egypt (Isa. 11:16).

Moroni taught that this gathering would also be the restoration of the house of Israel, for the remnants of the two divided kingdoms—the "outcasts of Israel" and the "dispersed of Judah"—would set aside their enmity and become one (Isa. 11:12-13; Jer. 50:4). As we read elsewhere, in gathering to the covenants they would no longer be two kingdoms but one, under the kingship of Jehovah himself (Ezek. 37:15-22).

But with the gathering of only Israel and Judah, the Lord's work would not yet be complete. Moroni quoted scriptures that show that the gathering must also include the Gentiles, those who are not of the house of Israel by lineage but become so by covenant. The latter-day "ensign"—the restored gospel of Jesus Christ—would be the rallying standard to them as well as to the descendants of God's ancient people (Isa. 11:10). Gentiles, Israel, and Judah would come together "from the four corners of the earth" (Isa. 11:12). They would follow the path that leads to Zion and would say, "Let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten" (Jer. 50:5).

Destruction and purification of the earth. Moroni quoted Malachi's prophecy: "For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble," leaving them "neither root nor branch" (JS-H 1:37; Mal. 4:1). When the Lord prepares the world for his millennial reign, all that is unholy and impure in it must be removed. This process will be God's great act of universal judgment, in which the wicked will at long last receive the harvest of their evil and the righteous will enjoy the fruits of their worthiness. It will be the "great and dreadful day of the Lord" (Mal. 4:5), in which nations and individuals alike will be recompensed according to their behavior. Moroni quoted Malachi's words that Christ's appearance will be "like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap." Among those who will be purified at that time will be the sons of Levi, ancient Israel's Aaronic priesthood, whose purification will symbolize the restoration of Levi and Judah to the covenant fold of Israel, making them ready to present again "an offering in righteousness" to the Lord (Mal. 3:2-4). Truly, he will purge away all the impurities of those who wish to worship him, making them worthy to stand when he appears (Isa. 1:25; Mal. 3:2).

God's latter-day cleansing will be the event for which all earlier acts of judgment were types (e.g., Deut. 32:23-24). As we learn in modern revelation, it will begin at the Lord's own house (D&C 112:24-25), but it will soon involve all the nations of the world (e.g., Isa. 11:14-15). In some way that we do not understand, the Lord's Saints will be participants in this work (Isa. 11:14; Mal. 4:3), as will the angels, who will be sent to harvest the world (Mal. 4:1; D&C 86:4-7). Joseph Smith learned from Moroni that it will be accompanied by "wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood" (Joel 2:30-31). And all who reject Jesus Christ will be found unworthy to remain when he comes (Acts 3:22-23; Deut. 18:15, 18-19).

The deliverance of the faithful. Scripture, both ancient and modern, assures us that the Lord will protect and deliver his covenant people from the calamities of the last days. Though not all will be spared from sickness, sorrow, and death—because our physical bodies are subject to these things—there will be a real and powerful force that will provide countless acts of divine deliverance for the Saints. [^15] "Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered," Moroni quoted, "for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call" (Joel 2:32).

The Second Coming. Joseph Smith learned that Christ will come again, as the scriptures have foretold. Moroni affirmed this truth by quoting Malachi's words that the Lord, whom we seek, will "suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come" (Mal. 3:1). The coming of Christ to his temple may represent an appearance in one of the sacred buildings set apart to his name. But in that day, all the world will be his temple, for the entire planet and everything in it will be dedicated and consecrated. It will all be "holiness unto the Lord of hosts" (Zech. 14:20-21).

The blessings of the Saints. Several of the prophecies quoted by Moroni foretell the blessings that will come to the Lord's Saints as a result of God's latter-day work and especially as a result of Jesus' second coming. These things will be a cause of great happiness: "Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands. Serve the Lord with gladness: come before his presence with singing" (Ps. 100:1-2; cf. Deut. 32:43; Jer. 30:19). Moroni quoted the psalmist: "The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord" (Ps. 146:10).

Christ's reign will be a source of unimaginable blessing to all the world. Moroni quoted Isaiah's prophecy that the Saints in that day will be taught by him and walk in his ways. When Jesus is the judge of the nations, his law and his word will go forth from Zion and Jerusalem (Isa. 2:3-4). "And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. . . . And he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears: but with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth. . . . And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins" (Isa. 11:2-5; cf. D&C 113:1-2).

Quoting Isaiah, Moroni taught that Christ's righteous rule will establish peace in the hearts of all who dwell on earth. The Prophet learned that people will "beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more" (Isa. 2:4). This peace will extend to all flesh, both animal and human. "The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them" (Isa. 11:6, 7-8; D&C 101:26). Indeed, the very nature of life will be changed such that predators and prey will live together in harmony. "They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain" (Isa. 11:9).

Christ's coming will reestablish Israel's covenant with Jehovah and bring about the restoration of all that they have ever been promised (e.g., Isa. 1:26). That will include the continued gathering of Israel (Isa. 11:11-13), a process which began in the days of Joseph Smith but which will not be complete until "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" (Isa. 11:9). Purified from sin, Israel's worship will again be acceptable to God (Mal. 3:4). Just as he had earlier broken and scattered them, he will now watch over them, build them, and plant them (Jer. 31:27-28; 30:18). And they will join with him in a "new covenant," "not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake. . . . But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people" (Jer. 31:31-33; cf. 31:1).

Moroni cited passages that show the outpouring of spiritual blessings in that day. With the "mountain of the Lord's house" established, people will flow from all nations to learn of God and his ways (Isa. 2:1-3). With his Spirit poured out on them in abundance, they will prophesy, dream dreams, and see visions (Joel 2:28-29).

Moroni showed that material blessings will also be their inheritance. They will grow like well-fed cattle (Mal. 4:2). Their sons will be like healthy plants, their daughters like polished stones. Their storehouses will be full of produce, and their flocks will increase beyond measure (Ps. 144:12-13). The Lord's power will overshadow them as it did ancient Israel—with a pillar of smoke by day and a pillar of fire by night. From heat, from storm, and from rain, the Lord will protect his people (Isa. 4:5-6), who will sing hymns of thanksgiving to him to celebrate the restoration of their nation, their prosperity, and their peace. "I will multiply them," he said, "and they shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and they shall not be small" (Jer. 30:18-21; cf. 31:27-28). In short, for all who will reverence Jehovah's name in that day, "the Sun of Righteousness" will rise, "with healing in his wings" (Mal. 4:2).

An Instrument in God's Hands

From Moroni, Joseph Smith received a breathtaking revelation of what the Lord had prepared for the last days, including his own work and that of the Church that would be established through his ministry. The message was meant to be learned and understood, not just heard. That became apparent when Moroni repeated it and reinforced it again and again. This was to be the mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the Prophet needed to know it well.

When Joseph Smith was informed that he was called "to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about some of his purposes" (1842:11), he could scarcely have imagined what the Lord had in store for him. But as he came to understand, over the next twenty-one years, who he was and where his work fit into the Lord's whole plan, he learned that his calling was something extraordinary. "You don't know me; you never will," he said in the last year of his life. "I don't blame you for not believing my history. Had I not experienced it, I could not believe it myself." [^16]

But in September 1823, his ministry to the world was yet to commence, and he still had much to learn. On the night of the angel's first appearance, he was presented with an overview, as we have seen in the summary of the scriptures that Moroni quoted. Details would follow later in dozens of revelations. But for now, the young Prophet was in a "missionary training center" for the next few years, until the time was right for his work to begin.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The scribe was Frederick G. Williams. The unedited original is found in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:8-9.
[^2] Dictated to Warren Parrish. The unedited original is in Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 2:70-71.
[^3] See "History of Joseph Smith," Times and Seasons 3, no. 12 (15 April 1842): 754; 3, no. 13 (2 May 1842): 771-72.
[^4] A long, detailed description of the plates follows. See "Church History," Times and Seasons 3, no. 9 (1 March 1842): 707. Also published in Joseph Smith, "Latter Day Saints," in I. Daniel Rupp, An Original History of the Religious Denominations at Present Existing in the United States (Philadelphia, 1844), 404. See Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:450.
[^5] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 10 (July 1835): 157.
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Messenger and Advocate 2, no. 1 (October 1835): 198.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] Ibid., 199.
[^11] Note the opening lines of Joseph Smith-History: "Owing to the many reports which have been put in circulation by evil-disposed and designing persons . . . , all of which have been designed by the authors thereof to militate against its character as a Church and its progress in the world—I have been induced to write this history, to disabuse the public mind, and put all inquirers after truth in possession of the facts" (JS-H 1:1).
[^12] Messenger and Advocate 2, no. 1 (October 1835): 199.
[^13] For Moroni's contributions to the Restoration, see H. Donl Peterson, Moroni: Ancient Prophet, Modern Messenger (Salt Lake City: Horizon, 1983).
[^14] See Messenger and Advocate 2, no. 1 (October 1835): 200-202.
[^15] Early reminiscences of the obtaining of the plates are found in Lucy Mack Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and His Progenitors for Many Generations (Liverpool: S. W. Richards, 1853), 99-106; and Dean C. Jessee, ed., "Joseph Knight's Recollections of Early Mormon History," BYU Studies 17, no. 1 (autumn 1976): 32-34.
[^16] Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 343; punctuation modernized.
