Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 12

Obtaining the Ancient Record

Seventeen-year-old Joseph Smith had spent the night of 21-22 September 1823 in the company of a heavenly messenger, the angel Moroni, who taught him of God's purposes in the last days and introduced him to the Book of Mormon. The Prophet recounted that experience at four different times of which we have his written record. The following passages from those four accounts continue the narrative from the early morning of 22 September to the time at which he received the plates. As with the accounts given earlier, his words are preserved exactly as they were recorded but with punctuation and spelling modernized. The paragraphs are numbered as well, and references to the original documents are in the notes.

The 1832 Draft History

19 . . . And thus he appeared unto me three times in one night and once on the next day.

20 And then I immediately went to the place and found where the plates were deposited, as the angel of the Lord had commanded me, and straightway made three attempts to get them. And then, being exceedingly frightened, I supposed it had been a dream or vision, but when I considered, I knew that it was not. Therefore I cried unto the Lord in the agony of my soul, "Why can I not obtain them?"

21 Behold, the angel appeared unto me again and said unto me, "You have not kept the commandments of the Lord which I gave unto you. Therefore you cannot now obtain them, for the time is not yet fulfilled. Therefore thou wast left unto temptation, that thou mightest be made acquainted with the power of the adversary. Therefore repent and call on the Lord. Thou shalt be forgiven, and in his own due time thou shalt obtain them."

22 For now I had been tempted of the adversary and sought the plates to obtain riches, and kept not the commandment that I should have an eye single to the glory of God.

23 Therefore I was chastened and sought diligently to obtain the plates, and obtained them not until I was twenty-one years of age. [^1]

The 1835 Journal Account

16 After the vision had all passed, I found that it was nearly daylight. The family soon arose; I got up also. On that day while in the field at work with my father, he asked me if I was sick. I replied, I had but little strength. He told me to go to the house. I started and went part way and was finally deprived of my strength and fell, but how long I remained I do not know.

17 The angel came to me again and commanded me to go and tell my father what I had seen and heard. I did so. He wept and told me that it was a vision from God [and] to attend to it.

18 I went and found the place where the plates were, according to the direction of the angel. [I] also saw them, and the angel as before.

19 The powers of darkness strove hard against me. I called on God. The angel told me that the reason why I could not obtain the plates at this time was because I was under transgression, but to come again in one year from that time. I did so but did not obtain them, also the third and the fourth year, at which time I obtained them and translated them into the English language by the gift and power of God. [^2]

The 1838 "History of Joseph Smith" (JS-H)

47 . . . Almost immediately after the heavenly messenger had ascended from me for the third time, the cock crowed, and I found that day was approaching, so that our interviews must have occupied the whole of that night.

48 I shortly after arose from my bed, and, as usual, went to the necessary labors of the day; but, in attempting to work as at other times, I found my strength so exhausted as to render me entirely unable. My father, who was laboring along with me, discovered something to be wrong with me, and told me to go home. I started with the intention of going to the house; but, in attempting to cross the fence out of the field where we were, my strength entirely failed me, and I fell helpless on the ground, and for a time was quite unconscious of anything.

49 The first thing that I can recollect was a voice speaking unto me, calling me by name. I looked up, and beheld the same messenger standing over my head, surrounded by light as before. He then again related unto me all that he had related to me the previous night, and commanded me to go to my father and tell him of the vision and commandments which I had received.

50 I obeyed; I returned to my father in the field, and rehearsed the whole matter to him. He replied to me that it was of God, and told me to go and do as commanded by the messenger. I left the field, and went to the place where the messenger had told me the plates were deposited; and owing to the distinctness of the vision which I had had concerning it, I knew the place the instant that I arrived there.

51 Convenient to the village of Manchester, Ontario county, New York, stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of any in the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle on the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle part of it was visible above the ground, but the edge all around was covered with earth.

52 Having removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed under the edge of the stone, and with a little exertion raised it up. I looked in, and there indeed did I behold the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate, as stated by the messenger. The box in which they lay was formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement. In the bottom of the box were laid two stones crossways of the box, and on these stones lay the plates and the other things with them.

53 I made an attempt to take them out, but was forbidden by the messenger, and was again informed that the time for bringing them forth had not yet arrived, neither would it, until four years from that time; but he told me that I should come to that place precisely in one year from that time, and that he would there meet with me, and that I should continue to do so until the time should come for obtaining the plates.

54 Accordingly, as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days. . . .

59 At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate. On the twenty-second day of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-seven, having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected.

60 I soon found out the reason why I had received such strict charges to keep them safe, and why it was that the messenger had said that when I had done what was required at my hand, he would call for them. For no sooner was it known that I had them, than the most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me. Every stratagem that could be invented was resorted to for that purpose. The persecution became more bitter and severe than before, and multitudes were on the alert continually to get them from me if possible. But by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. When, according to arrangements, the messenger called for them, I delivered them up to him; and he has them in his charge until this day, being the second day of May, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight. [^3]

The 1842 "Church History"

15 After having received many visits from the angels of God unfolding the majesty and glory of the events that should transpire in the last days, on the morning of the twenty-second of September A.D. 1827, the angel of the Lord delivered the records into my hands. [^4]

At the Hill Cumorah

When the morning of 22 September 1823 dawned, Joseph Smith set out to perform his daily labors, despite his having been awake all night in the company of a heavenly messenger. But he soon found he had no strength to work. His father, seeing the young man's weakness, sent him back to the house. He fell unconscious on the way (1835:16; JS-H 1:48), remaining unaware of anything until he heard the angel's voice speaking to him again (1832:19; 1835:17; JS-H 1:49). Moroni related to Joseph Smith the same message that he had conveyed the night before, thereafter instructing him to go to his father and tell him of the vision and the commandments that he had been given (1835:17; JS-H 1:49). Father Smith's response was typical of how the Prophet's parents always received the revelatory experiences of their son. He told his young namesake that the vision was of God and that he should act in accordance with the angel's instructions (1835:17; JS-H 1:50).

The hill known as Cumorah is situated only three miles away from the Smith family farm, in the northern part of Manchester Township, New York. It is of course likely that the young Prophet had seen the hill many times, but from now on it would have a new significance in his life. He went to the hill, knowing it was the repository of the sacred record of which Moroni had spoken (1832:20; 1835:18; JS-H 1:50). He recognized instantly the spot where the book was buried, so vivid had the vision been of its location (1835:12; JS-H 1:42, 50). The gold plates were in a stone box on the west side of the hill, near the top (JS-H 1:51-52).

But obtaining the plates was not as easy as the young man may have thought. He stated that when he saw them, "the powers of darkness strove hard" against him (1835:19). He tried three times to lift the plates out of the box but was unsuccessful (1832:20). Calling upon God, he asked why he could not obtain them (1832:20; 1835:19). In response, the Lord taught him some important principles.

When Moroni had appeared to Joseph Smith the night before, he warned him solemnly that Satan would seek to tempt him with the plates. The Prophet's family was of very modest means. Their every exertion was required to put food on the table through working their farm and hiring out as laborers for others. Because of these realities, the Prophet was warned that he must "have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building his kingdom" (JS-H 1:46). Needless to say, that would be a challenge for anyone, perhaps especially a seventeen-year-old boy. Oliver Cowdery reported that when the Prophet approached the hill he struggled within himself, as "a thought would start across the mind" [^5] concerning the needs of his family and what such a treasure as the gold plates could do to alleviate their want (1832:21-22). "To use his own words it seemed as though two invisible powers were influencing, or striving to influence his mind," Elder Cowdery wrote. [^6] Thus when the Prophet arrived at the hill and tried to lift the plates, Moroni appeared (1832:21; 1835:18) and forbade him to remove them (JS-H 1:53), telling him that he needed to repent. He would be forgiven in due time and would receive the record (1832:21), but for now the time was not right. Elder Cowdery added: "At that instant he looked to the Lord in prayer, and as he prayed darkness began to disperse from his mind and his soul was lit up as it was the evening before, and he was filled with the Holy Spirit; and again did the Lord manifest his condescension and mercy: the heavens were opened and the glory of the Lord shone round about and rested upon him." [^7]

This event was an important experience in the training of Joseph Smith, and we too can learn much from it. First, the Lord's servants work according to the Lord's timetable, not their own. "The time is not yet fulfilled," Moroni said (1832:21; cf. JS-H 1:53), nor would it be until the Lord decreed that the Prophet was ready to obtain and translate the plates. Second, the Prophet was reminded of the power of Satan and of his continuing opposition to God's latter-day work. Moroni told him, "Therefore thou wast left unto temptation, that thou mightest be made acquainted with the power of the Adversary" (1832:21). He had felt the devil's power before, and he would continue to be reminded that satanic opposition would be an unrelenting reality through all of his ministry. According to Oliver Cowdery, the angel emphasized this point by showing the Prophet a vision of "the prince of darkness, surrounded by his innumerable train of associates." [^8] Moroni said, "All this is shown, the good and the evil, the holy and impure, the glory of God and the power of darkness, that you may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one." [^9] Finally, the Prophet learned a lesson that all who serve God should learn. When we are on the Lord's errand, we must have no object in mind but to glorify him, and we must not be influenced by any motive but to build his kingdom (JS-H 1:46). Not even the most fleeting thought of personal profit or praise is acceptable for those who are in the Lord's service.

The Preparatory Years

Moroni told Joseph Smith that he would not receive the plates for another four years but that he was to return to the hill the following year on the same date and each year thereafter until the appointed time (1835:19; JS-H 1:53). Accordingly, on 22 September of each of the following four years, the Prophet went to the Hill Cumorah, where each time he was instructed by Moroni in preparation for his life's calling (1835:19; JS-H 1:54).

Oliver Cowdery wrote that Moroni gave the Prophet a "sign"—an irrefutable proof by which he would know that this was the Lord's work and that he would fulfill his promises. The sign was both sad and prophetic: "When it is known that the Lord has shown you these things, the workers of iniquity will seek your overthrow: they will circulate falsehoods to destroy your reputation, and also will seek to take your life." [^10] The falsehoods intended to destroy Joseph Smith's reputation began almost immediately, continued throughout his life, and still circulate today. Some, no doubt, have made their way into the historical sources and are taken for granted to be true. [^11] Given Moroni's statement that this would be a sign of the divinity of the Prophet's calling, it seems that we should view with caution and suspicion any and all information that seeks to disparage Joseph Smith's good name. "But remember this," Moroni continued, "if you are faithful, and shall hereafter continue to keep the commandments of the Lord, you shall be preserved to bring these things forth." [^12]

During the years from 1823 to 1827, from Moroni's first appearance until the reception of the plates, the Prophet grew to manhood under angelic guidance. Each year the two met at the appointed time and place, and Moroni, his prophetic predecessor and tutor, trained him for his life's work. The Prophet recorded that through this process he "received instruction and intelligence . . . respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days" (JS-H 1:54). Thus were unfolded to him "the majesty and glory of the events that should transpire in the last days" (1842:15). And we, enjoying the light and knowledge made known through the Restoration, are the beneficiaries of what he learned. [^13]

The Prophet's education also included the schooling he received from life's experiences. In 1825 he hired on as a laborer with a Mr. Josiah Stoal of Chenango County, New York—an experience that was important, among other reasons, because it led to the kind of character assassination of which Moroni had warned him (JS-H 1:55-56). [^14] During the time of his employment he boarded at the home of the Hale family in Harmony, Pennsylvania. There he met and fell in love with their daughter, Emma. The two were married in January 1827 and moved thereafter into the home of the Smith family in Manchester, New York (JS-H 1:57-58). It was there that they were living when the time came for the Prophet to obtain the plates.

Early in the morning of 22 September 1827, twenty-one-year-old Joseph Smith went to the Hill Cumorah for his annual visit. But this visit was unlike any other, because the time had come for the Prophet to receive the ancient record. When Moroni met with him on this, the last of their annual meetings at that place, the angel warned him that he would be "cut off" if he did not safeguard the plates, "but that if [he] would use all [his] endeavors to preserve them, . . . they should be protected" (JS-H 1:59). Predictably, "every stratagem that could be invented" was used to wrest the plates from his care, necessitating his constant vigilance and exertion. "But by the wisdom of God" they were preserved (JS-H 1:60), and the Prophet was able to keep them secure until he finished the translation. [^15]

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), 4:461.
[^2] Lucy Mack Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and His Progenitors for Many Generations (Liverpool: S. W. Richards, 1853), 112-13. Significant primary sources for this period include Biographical Sketches, by the Prophet's mother, Lucy Mack Smith; Joseph Smith's history in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:283-301; and "Joseph Knight's Recollections of Early Mormon History," ed. Dean C. Jessee, BYU Studies 17, no. 1 (autumn 1976): 33-36.
[^3] Book of Mormon, 1830 edition, preface.
[^4] Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:10.
[^5] Ibid.
[^6] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 1 (October 1834): 14; JS-H, footnote at verse 71; emphasis in the original.
[^7] "Joseph Knight's Recollections," 36.
[^8] See Lyndon W. Cook, ed., David Whitmer Interviews: A Restoration Witness (Orem, Utah: Grandin, 1991), 63-64.
[^9] Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:295-96.
[^10] The Saints' Herald 29 (1 March 1882); in Cook, David Whitmer Interviews, 86.
[^11] Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:296.
[^12] Smith, Biographical Sketches, 139.
[^13] Hiram Page was married to a Whitmer daughter. Oliver Cowdery later married another Whitmer daughter.
[^14] "The Testimony of Three Witnesses," Book of Mormon.
[^15] See Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981).
