Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 13

Bringing Forth the Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon is one of the most profound miracles of all time. As the "keystone of our religion," [^1] it plays a role in our lives that is not surpassed by any other book. The story of how it came to be is one of small things with great implications. Together those small things combined to become one of the great events in all of God's dealings with his children. The historicity of that event is in itself one of the cornerstones of our faith.

Translation

When it was learned that Joseph Smith had the gold plates, the persecutions and accusations of which Moroni had warned him began. In December 1827, just three months after he obtained the plates, those persecutions made it necessary for him to move from his family's home in Manchester, New York, to Harmony, Pennsylvania, where Emma's parents lived. They were able to make the journey through the generosity of a prosperous farmer of Palmyra, Martin Harris, who gave them fifty dollars. [^2] Martin had been one of the earliest believers in Joseph Smith's calling, and this act of generosity characterized his commitment to the Lord's work. The young couple soon took up residence in a small frame home, twenty-six by eighteen feet in size, on the Hale family property.

It soon became apparent that a full-time scribe would be necessary to facilitate the translation of the plates. In February 1828 Martin Harris went to Harmony and took a transcript of characters from the plates to the East, as recounted in the Prophet's history (JS-H 1:63-65). He then worked as the Prophet's scribe from April until mid-June. Together they made good progress that resulted in 116 pages of translation—the book of Lehi. [^3]

We can understand the frustrations Martin's wife felt about her husband's being away from home for months, working on a strange religious project in which she did not share his belief. To satisfy her interests, as well as his own, Martin persuaded the Prophet to seek, and finally to obtain, permission from the Lord for him to take the manuscript back to Palmyra and show it to his wife and a few other specified individuals. It was during June or July that the manuscript was lost, to the terrible grief and suffering of Joseph Smith and the divine condemnation of Martin Harris, whom the Lord in revelation called a "wicked man" (D&C 3:12; 10:1). Moroni took the plates and the Urim and Thummim from the Prophet, telling him that he too needed to repent (D&C 3:1-11). In September they were returned, but Martin was no longer requested to serve as scribe.

It is not difficult to imagine the Prophet's anguish over his lack of progress in translating the Book of Mormon. By the time the plates were returned to him, it had been a year since he first received them, and he had nothing to show for his time. During the remainder of that year and into the spring of the next, very little was accomplished, though Emma and the Prophet's brother Samuel assisted him somewhat as scribes. [^4] But it was a full year and a half after the plates were received before real progress would be made on the translation. The Lord still had some miracles to perform.

During the fall of 1828 and the winter of 1829, a young schoolteacher named Oliver Cowdery taught in the Manchester-Palmyra area. Among his pupils were children of the Smith family. As part of his pay, Oliver boarded with the Smiths, who in time came to trust him and confided in him about the work in which their son Joseph was engaged. Oliver received a divine manifestation that the work was of God and that he was to be part of it. [^5] Accordingly, at the end of the school year he went to Harmony, where on 5 April 1829 he introduced himself to the Prophet and told him that he had come to assist in the work. The translation began two days later and continued with miraculous vigor until the work was accomplished.

"These were days never to be forgotten," Elder Cowdery later wrote, "to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened the utmost gratitude of this bosom! Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his mouth, as he translated, with the Urim and Thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, 'Interpreters,' the history, or record, called 'The Book of Mormon.'" [^6] The two labored together in Harmony through April and May of 1829, during which time most of the translation was completed. They were supported in their work by the generosity of Joseph Knight Sr., a farmer from nearby Colesville, New York. Brother Knight had come to believe in the divinity of the work some time earlier and provided food so the Prophet and Oliver would not be obliged to leave their calling to secure the necessities of life. [^7] The Knights remained some of the Prophet's most faithful friends.

During those "days never to be forgotten," something extraordinary was taking place. "A marvelous work and a wonder" was being performed (Isa. 29:14), the importance of which we cannot overstate. The translation of the Book of Mormon was being revealed, an event that would influence eternally the lives of millions of persons by helping them return to the presence of God. Also, revelations were being received that would become the early sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. In a tiny village in a most remote and obscure corner of the earth, God was bringing to pass a miracle of unparalleled greatness. The little home in which the work was being done was the meeting place between heaven and earth, the most important building in the world.

Near the first day of June the Prophet and his scribe found it necessary to move to Fayette, New York. Persecution in the Harmony area had made it difficult to complete the translation there, so they asked the Whitmer family to allow them to continue the work at their Fayette home. The Whitmers were friends of Oliver Cowdery who had learned to trust his testimony of the Prophet's calling. They helped in the work by making available their house, where the translation was completed at the end of June 1829. Members of the Whitmer family also assisted as scribes.

The Witnesses

At about the time the translation was finished, the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses were shown the gold plates, as proclaimed in their testimonies published in every copy of the Book of Mormon. [^8] When it was learned from the translation that there would be witnesses called to see the plates, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris went to the Prophet to ask that he ascertain through revelation whether they might be the witnesses. The Prophet inquired of the Lord, and a revelation to the three was received which told them they would indeed fill that role (D&C 17:1-9). Not long after the revelation came, they went with the Prophet into a wooded area near the Whitmer home in Fayette, where they knelt and prayed in succession. Martin Harris, believing that his presence was the reason no response was received, withdrew from the group. [^9]

David Whitmer recalled: "All at once a light came down from above us and encircled us for quite a little distance around; and the angel stood before us. . . . A table was set before us and on it the records were placed. The Records of the Nephites, from which the Book of Mormon was translated, the brass plates, the Ball of Directors, the sword of Laban and other plates. While we were viewing them the voice of God spoke out of heaven saying that the Book was true and the translation correct." [^10]

The Prophet recorded that the angel "turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly." A voice from above said, "I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear." [^11] Joseph Smith then withdrew from the others and found Martin Harris some distance away. As they prayed together, the manifestation was repeated to them.

Lucy Mack Smith, Joseph Smith's mother, remembered the reaction of the Prophet and the witnesses when they returned to the house: "On coming in, Joseph threw himself down beside me, and exclaimed, 'Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am; the Lord has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself. . . . I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world.' Upon this, Martin Harris came in: he seemed almost overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding, that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts, and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard." [^12]

Not long after the experience of the Three Witnesses, the Eight Witnesses saw and handled the plates.

With the exception of Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, the witnesses were all members of the Smith and Whitmer families, [^13] individuals who already believed in Joseph Smith's work and were called to receive a manifestation and testify thereof to the world. Their testimonies are an important part of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, because now there were others who could state with Joseph Smith: "We . . . have seen the plates. . . . And we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us. . . . And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates." [^14]

In the revelation in which the Lord designated the Three Witnesses, he told them that they would see, in addition to the plates, "the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face, and the miraculous directors which were given to Lehi while in the wilderness, on the borders of the Red Sea" (D&C 17:1). The significance of these items is that they are all objects mentioned in the account in the Book of Mormon text itself—artifacts from the history in the book. This means that the Three Witnesses saw evidence not only that there was a divinely revealed book but also that the events described in it actually took place.

Since the beginning of the Restoration, the testimonies of the witnesses have been a problem for those who reject Joseph Smith. The lives of those men are well documented. They were respected in their communities and considered by their contemporaries to be not only of sound character but also of sound mind. Sadly, in the late 1830s each of the Three Witnesses left the Church, becoming disillusioned with Joseph Smith personally over matters of policy and beliefs. Two later were rebaptized, yet all three continued to maintain, even in their days of disassociation from the Church, that their published testimony was a true account of an actual supernatural event in which they had been participants. [^15] Ironically, the disaffection of the witnesses adds to the credibility of their testimonies. Had the experience been fraudulent, the witnesses no doubt would have seized the opportunity to expose the Prophet as an impostor. But they remained true to their statements, even when they felt personal animosity toward Joseph Smith.

Today there are some who say that the Book of Mormon is true in the sense that its message is meaningful but propose that neither it nor the account of its origin is historical. The testimonies of the witnesses expose this point of view as nonsense by providing evidence that cannot be explained away. Reasonable men claimed throughout their lives that they saw an angel, handled the plates, and heard the voice of God. It is no wonder that the witnesses were foreknown by revelation and prepared by the Lord to perform their important calling to bear testimony of his work (D&C 17:1-9; Ether 5:1-4). The Book of Mormon still contains their "words of soberness," which are as valid today as they were in 1830 when the book first came off the press.

Publication

By the end of June 1829, Joseph Smith had completed the translation of the Book of Mormon into the English language. He had secured the copyright and now set out to hire a printer. [^16] But he soon learned how intense the local sentiment was against the book. Religious leaders had warned their congregations against it and conspired to discourage them from buying it. As a result, printers in the area were reluctant to take on the project, for fear of sustaining financial loss. The Prophet was finally able to persuade a Palmyra printer and bookseller, Egbert B. Grandin, to publish the book. But Grandin agreed to do so only on the condition that he receive a guarantee for the money and not be dependent on sales. By doing that he would secure himself against losing a substantial investment. The agreement was made to print five thousand copies at a cost of three thousand dollars.

That was an enormous sum of money—far beyond the resources of the Smith family and of most other families of the day. But even for this, the Lord had made preparation. Martin Harris had inherited about half his farm from his father, who had settled in Palmyra more than thirty years earlier. The rest he had acquired through his labors. By 1829 the farm had enjoyed years of success to the point that Martin was, by contemporary standards, a prosperous man. Again he used his resources to help the cause of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. He took out an eighteen-month mortgage with Grandin to guarantee the costs of printing the book. Money from its sales would be used to pay Grandin his three thousand dollars within the specified time. If the book did not raise enough money, part of the Harris farm would be sold to pay the debt.

Joseph Smith now had the translation, a printer, and the financial resources to publish the book. But he also had the memory of what had happened the last time he let the translation out of his hands. To be sure that no part of the manuscript would be lost, he instructed Oliver Cowdery to create a copy to take to the printer; the original would remain in a secure place. In our day, in which the copying of documents is quick and convenient, we can appreciate the tremendous amount of work expended by Oliver Cowdery (with some limited help from others) in transcribing, by hand, a copy of the Book of Mormon. But to do so assured the Prophet that the translation would not be lost. The "printer's manuscript" was not made all at once but was written as needed over the months of the typesetting. [^17] The process of production extended from August 1829 into the spring of 1830. [^18]

As the publication neared completion, Martin Harris became increasingly apprehensive. He was willing to do what the Lord required, but knowing the animosity against Joseph Smith in the area, he had reservations about whether the book would sell and whether he would lose his property if it did not. The Lord's response was not to be misunderstood: "Thou shalt not covet thine own property, but impart it freely to the printing of the Book of Mormon, which contains the truth and the word of God. . . . Impart a portion of thy property, yea, even part of thy lands, and all save the support of thy family. Pay the debt thou hast contracted with the printer. Release thyself from bondage" (D&C 19:26, 34-35). The blessings that would result from Martin's efforts would be of greater value than his farm or any other earthly things: "Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing—yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of earth" (D&C 19:38). [^19]

As it turned out, Martin's concerns were well-founded. The Book of Mormon did not sell well enough for him to pay off Grandin from its profits, and eventually he had to sell 151 acres of his farm to settle the debt. That was a great sacrifice, and Martin Harris rightly deserves to be honored for his contribution to this important part of the Restoration. It was a sacrifice that made the publication of the Book of Mormon possible.

On 26 March 1830, the Book of Mormon was finally available for public sale, containing "a record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also; which was given by inspiration, and is confirmed to others by the ministering of angels, and is declared unto the world by them—proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old; thereby showing that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever" (D&C 20:9-12).

The publication of the book culminated a sanctified work of preparation that had started twenty-four centuries earlier when Nephi began his record. Now the work of ancient prophets, the protecting watch of Moroni, the committed service of Joseph and Emma Smith, and the varied contributions of Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, the Smiths, the Knights, and the Whitmers had all come together through the attending grace of a loving Heavenly Father to produce a great miracle—the Book of Mormon. With the book now in print and available for the instruction of the honest in heart, the Lord could bring about the next aspect of his work of restoration: the Church was organized eleven days later.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] See, for example, Augustine's thoughts on the Fall, in Chapter 5, 46-48.
[^2] Lucy Mack Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and His Progenitors for Many Generations (Liverpool: S. W. Richards, 1853), 112-13. Significant primary sources for this period include Biographical Sketches, by the Prophet's mother, Lucy Mack Smith; Joseph Smith's history in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:283-301; and "Joseph Knight's Recollections of Early Mormon History," ed. Dean C. Jessee, BYU Studies 17, no. 1 (autumn 1976): 33-36.
[^3] Book of Mormon, 1830 edition, preface.
[^4] Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:10.
[^5] Ibid.
[^6] Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 1 (October 1834): 14; JS-H, footnote at verse 71; emphasis in the original.
[^7] "Joseph Knight's Recollections," 36.
[^8] See Lyndon W. Cook, ed., David Whitmer Interviews: A Restoration Witness (Orem, Utah: Grandin, 1991), 63-64.
[^9] Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:295-96.
[^10] The Saints' Herald 29 (1 March 1882); in Cook, David Whitmer Interviews, 86.
[^11] Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:296.
[^12] Smith, Biographical Sketches, 139.
[^13] Hiram Page was married to a Whitmer daughter. Oliver Cowdery later married another Whitmer daughter.
[^14] "The Testimony of Three Witnesses," Book of Mormon.
[^15] See Richard Lloyd Anderson, Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981).
[^16] The copyright was obtained on 11 June 1829.
[^17] According to Professor Royal Skousen, about seventy pages of the original manuscript were used by the typesetters, perhaps because the copying was outpaced for a while by the typesetting.
[^18] The original manuscript is only about 25 to 30 percent extant today. Most fragments are housed in the LDS Church Archives in Salt Lake City. The printer's manuscript is in an excellent state of preservation and is virtually intact. It is housed in the RLDS Archives in Independence, Missouri.
[^19] See Milton V. Backman Jr. and Richard O. Cowan, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), 24-25.
