Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 14

The Book of Mormon in the Restoration

The Book of Mormon was destined to be not only the most important conversion tool for the last days (title page) but also the great, tangible sign of the Restoration (3 Ne. 21:1-7). It seems significant that before we had the Church, we had the Book of Mormon. Most religions in world history have produced their significant holy books long after the religion came into existence. Ours began with our holy book already in place. It defines our religion, rather than being an outgrowth of it. The Book of Mormon was a package of pure gospel that had been prepared many centuries in advance so the Church could begin on a sure doctrinal footing free of past traditions. Its content makes us independent of the creeds of medieval Christianity. But so also does its very existence, which shows that the latter-day Church and its teachings would not be a legacy inherited through the centuries.

Restoring Plain and Precious Truths

The Book of Mormon is a doctrinal keystone of the Restoration. In its pages, important truths are revealed that are central to the gospel in any age but that have been lost to the world over the centuries. The following is a brief survey of some of the important doctrinal concepts that the Book of Mormon brings into the world as part of its unique contribution to the Restoration.

The atoning mission of Jesus Christ. The Atonement is the very message of the Book of Mormon. It is the theme that binds together its historical narratives, its sermons, and its inspired commentary. "We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, [and] we prophesy of Christ," Nephi recorded. "And we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins" (2 Ne. 25:26). The Book of Mormon has its focus in proclaiming and explaining the first principles and ordinances of Christ's gospel—faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost (e.g., 3 Ne. 27:13-21). Nowhere are they presented better than in the Book of Mormon. Perhaps the greatest contribution of this "other testament of Jesus Christ" is the power and clarity with which it teaches us of Jesus and his work. Specific examples of unique contributions the Book of Mormon makes to our understanding of Christ's redemptive power might include the discussions of salvation through the merits of Christ (2 Ne. 2:8), the relationship between grace and works (2 Ne. 25:23; 31:19), and the salvation of little children (Moro. 8:8-22). In the Book of Mormon we are taught what it means to be a disciple of Christ (Mosiah 18:9-10), and we are instructed in the importance, the process, and the ultimate blessings of spiritual birth (Mosiah 5:6-9).

The nature and goals of Satan. In the Bible, the few references to Satan and his work tell us only little of his character and objectives but nothing of his origin. When we turn to the Book of Mormon, we learn something of where he came from, and we view his work and his objectives in clearer focus. Lehi learned from the plates of brass that the adversary was once "an angel of God" who fell from heaven. "Wherefore, he became a devil, having sought that which was evil before God. And because he had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind." This obsession drives his perverse cruelty and his insatiable appetite for human sorrow. "For he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself" (2 Ne. 2:17-18, 27).

The fall of Adam. The account in Genesis of Adam and Eve gives us very few insights into the Fall. Thanks to Paul, however, the New Testament enables us to understand its association with the gospel. But even so, the message, as preserved in the Bible today, is unclear. Overlaid with centuries of misinterpretation as the result of ancient and medieval speculation, the doctrine of the Fall was in need of a complete and radical restoration in the latter days. [^1] The Book of Mormon teaches the Fall better than does any other book. The words of Lehi are illustrative:

And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.

And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin. (2 Ne. 2:22-23)

The Book of Mormon thus teaches that the Fall, despite its immediate consequences, was a positive step in the progress of humankind. Without it, Adam and Eve would not have brought the human family into the world. Not knowing the natural opposites of life, they could not have experienced joy, nor could they have done good. But "all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things. Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:24-25).

The Book of Mormon emphasizes Christ's atonement as the solution to the consequences of the Fall—death and sin (2 Ne. 9:6-10; Alma 11:40-42). "Since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins" (Alma 22:14). As Lehi taught, "the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall" (2 Ne. 2:26).

The antiquity of the gospel. Traditional Christianity holds that the gospel was revealed to the world with Jesus Christ and that those who preceded his coming did not have available to them its blessings. The Book of Mormon, however, begins with a colony of Christians six hundred years before Jesus' birth. Later in its pages we read of another Christian group who lived perhaps two thousand years earlier than that. Those groups had Christianity revealed to them in plainness, and they knew, centuries before Christ's coming (Jacob 4:4-5), that his gospel was the only way to salvation and that "there is no other name given whereby salvation cometh" (Mosiah 5:8). The Book of Mormon teaches that this is true for those who lived before his mortal ministry as well as for those who lived afterward. Jesus' gospel was so immediate to the Book of Mormon prophets, even for those who lived long before his birth, that some of them spoke of his redeeming work in the past tense, "speaking of things to come as though they had already come" (Mosiah 16:6).

The role of prophets and the nature of revelation. Although the prophetic books in the Bible are marvelous collections of revelations, they tell us very little about the prophets themselves, their lives, and their struggles to fulfill the Lord's commands. The book of Jeremiah is a notable exception, recording details about the prophet's life and the challenges he faced. Jeremiah's contemporaries Lehi and Nephi set the pattern for the Book of Mormon prophets who followed them in giving us both a record of their prophecies and a narrative of their labors in the Lord's service. In the pages of the Book of Mormon we learn much about the nature of prophets and prophecy, about the feelings of the Lord's servants regarding their missions, and about their dedicated efforts to do what was required of them. No other book brings us closer to these things than does the Book of Mormon.

In the Book of Mormon we also see the processes by which revelation is received. Through appearances (Alma 8:14-18), dreams (1 Ne. 2:1), visions (1 Ne. 11-14), and quiet promptings (2 Ne. 32:7; Alma 14:11), the Lord's will was made known to his servants. Alma, struggling with a difficult issue in the Church, inquired of the Lord, received instructions, and wrote them down (Mosiah 26:13-33). Mormon, needing the answer to a doctrinal question, inquired of God and received knowledge (3 Ne. 28:37).

The Book of Mormon gives us a glimpse into the use of sacred instruments to facilitate revelation (1 Ne. 16:10, 26-29; Mosiah 8:13), concerning which we learn even more from the experiences of Joseph Smith.

Finally, in the Book of Mormon we learn that the central message of all of God's prophets has been Jesus Christ (Jacob 4:4; 3 Ne. 20:24).

The purpose and process of keeping sacred records. The Book of Mormon gives us not only a record of God's revelations and the history of a people but also the history of its own writing and the intent for which the book was written: "To show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord . . .—And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations."

The Book of Mormon describes the revelations that led to its composition over the course of many centuries (e.g., 1 Ne. 19:1-6; W of M), and it focuses throughout its pages on its intended latter-day readers and their needs. Its authors expressed the clear awareness of mission that directed them to prepare the book, which in turn gives it a sense of destiny not always apparent in the Bible. This sense of destiny is one of the Book of Mormon's greatest contributions to our understanding of the Bible. From it we see why God commands his prophets in any age to write his words and what the value of those sacred records is to their contemporaries and to future generations.

The history and destiny of the Bible. In addition to establishing and clarifying points of doctrine that relate to biblical teachings, the Book of Mormon tells us much concerning the Bible itself. Nephi learned in a vision that the Bible would contain "the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel" and "the fulness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record" (1 Ne. 13:23, 24). But "many plain and precious things" would be "taken away from the book," and "after these plain and precious things were taken away it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles," many of whom would "stumble" and be in an "awful state of blindness" because of the omissions (1 Ne. 13:28-29, 32). The plates of brass obtained by Nephi recorded the equivalent of the Old Testament to his time, before it went through the censoring process of what he called the "great and abominable church." Our Bible (the Old and New Testaments) would be smaller than the Old Testament record on those brass plates (1 Ne. 13:23).

The Book of Mormon foretells its own future as well. In it would be written "my gospel, saith the Lamb, and my rock and my salvation" (1 Ne. 13:36). Along with other books, it would come forth "by the power of the Lamb," and together those books would restore "the plain and precious things which have been taken away" from the Bible (1 Ne. 13:39-40). The Nephite record and the Bible would "be established in one" (1 Ne. 13:41), giving us "the testimony of two nations" (2 Ne. 29:8).

The Book of Mormon proves that the Christian tradition of a closed biblical canon is false—both by its own existence as well as by its teachings. The Lord told Nephi:

And because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man, neither from that time henceforth and forever.

Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written. . . .

For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it.

And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews. (2 Ne. 29:9-10, 12-13)

The intent of the Book of Mormon is not to denigrate the Bible but to contribute to the restoration of what had once been "the fulness of the gospel of the Lord" that it contained (1 Ne. 13:24). One of its chief purposes is to testify of the truth of the Bible to Lehi's descendants, to the Gentiles, and to the Jews (1 Ne. 13:39-40; Morm. 7:8-9). The Book of Mormon thus stands as a witness for the Bible, "proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true" (D&C 20:11).

The destiny of the house of Israel. The writings of biblical prophets teach us much concerning the house of Israel, but nowhere are its mission and destiny explained better than in the Book of Mormon. Lehi and Nephi had deep sensitivities concerning the status of their family as a branch of Israel removed from the mother plant (1 Ne. 10:14; 15:12-16). It was a theme of great importance in their teachings and in those of their successors. In the words of the Book of Mormon from its beginning to its end, we gain a clearer understanding of the house of Israel and its role in God's plan than we do in any other book. Among its special contributions is the knowledge that God's covenant with Israel includes the promise of the gospel of Jesus Christ (3 Ne. 5:24-26), that Israel's restoration includes the restoration of the knowledge that Jesus is Israel's Redeemer (1 Ne. 10:14; 22:11-12), that the promised gathering of the Jews to Palestine will follow their conversion to Christ (2 Ne. 10:7-8; 3 Ne. 20:30-33), and that the Gentiles will save scattered Israel in the last days by bringing them Christ's gospel (1 Ne. 13:38-40; 15:13-14).

Apostasy and restoration. Near the beginning of the Book of Mormon, Nephi foresaw the destiny of his own people. In their land of promise, despite the personal coming of Christ and many other blessings, they would fall prey to their pride and the temptations of the devil, eventually to "dwindle in unbelief" (1 Ne. 12:19-23; see 1-23). The authors of the Book of Mormon recorded the process as it took place.

The Book of Mormon foretells the apostasy of early Christianity as well. Nephi foresaw that among the nations of the world, where the gospel will have been taught by Jesus and his apostles, a "great and abominable church" would arise. In addition to tampering with the Bible, it would take away "from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious," as well as "many covenants of the Lord." It would do all this "that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men" (1 Ne. 13:26-27; see 4-32). The "great and abominable church" in this context seems to represent the apostate forces within the Lord's own Church, led by those in it who rejected the authority of the Twelve and sought to pattern their church after the image of the world.

The Book of Mormon also prophesies of the Restoration. Nephi wrote of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and of other scriptures (1 Ne. 13:34-41). He foretold the Lord's restored Church in the latter days and the "marvelous work" that God would undertake to bring forth its truths. He wrote of "the power of the Lamb of God," which would be found among the Lord's Saints in that day (1 Ne. 14:7-14).

Lehi's teachings include a prophecy from the plates of brass that foretells the latter-day restoration. A "choice seer," whom we know to be Joseph Smith, would bring forth God's word, including the Book of Mormon, to the salvation of his people (2 Ne. 3:5-21).

The meaning of the law of Moses. Although the Old Testament preserves for us the law of Moses, it is to the New Testament that Bible readers must turn to understand the law's purpose. It was a "schoolmaster" to prepare Israel for the gospel (Gal. 3:24). But nowhere is its meaning explained better than in the Book of Mormon, whose authors understood that the law was "pointing [their] souls" to Christ (Jacob 4:5). The Nephite writers before Jesus' coming lived under the dispensation of Moses and were subject to the law of that dispensation. Yet they knew the gospel of Christ and had a clear perspective of the relationship between the gospel and the law of Moses. Amulek taught:

Therefore, it is expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice, and then shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away.

And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal.

And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance. (Alma 34:13-15)

But the ancient Israelites to whom the law had been revealed apparently lost its meaning and did not understand its purpose. For them, as the Book of Mormon prophet Abinadi taught, God revealed a system of "performances and ordinances" to keep them in remembrance of him:

And now I say unto you that it was expedient that there should be a law given to the children of Israel, yea, even a very strict law; for they were a stiffnecked people, quick to do iniquity, and slow to remember the Lord their God;

Therefore there was a law given them, yea, a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him. (Mosiah 13:29-30)

But even "all these things were types of things to come" (Mosiah 13:31), a truth that is not taught in the Old Testament but is clear in the words of the Book of Mormon.

Proving to the World

With its emphasis on the most fundamental principles of the gospel—the mission of Christ, the nature of human existence, and the function of revelation and scripture—the Book of Mormon laid the foundation for the continuing doctrinal restoration that followed it. In rapid sequence, revelations now contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, and the Pearl of Great Price added to the magnificent revelation that we call the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon is indeed the great sign of the Restoration. Its very existence challenges the world to test its credibility and the truthfulness of the story of its origin. It is thus no wonder that it, more than anything else in the Church's history, has been the target of critics of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his work. But those critics can do it no harm. It was, after all, "given by inspiration," "confirmed . . . by the ministering of angels" (D&C 20:10), and endorsed by the voice of Jesus Christ, saying, "As your Lord and your God liveth it is true" (D&C 17:6).

In proclaiming the Restoration and the Lord's work of the latter days, the Book of Mormon continues today the mission it began with its publication in March of 1830, "proving to the world . . . that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old" (D&C 20:11). The Book of Mormon stands as an ensign of the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith, held up to the world as evidence of God's love for his children today, bearing testimony that he is at work in our time and that those who carry the book to the nations of the earth are his true messengers.

Note

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] Oliver Cowdery, Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 1, no. 1 (October 1834): 15; see JS-H, footnote at verse 71.
