Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 15

The Restoration of the Priesthood

During the process of translating the Book of Mormon at his small home in Harmony, Pennsylvania, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery for the first time began to learn what the Lord called "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ," which was contained within the book's pages (D&C 20:9). While reading of the gospel among the ancient descendants of Lehi, they undoubtedly learned many new things concerning doctrines and procedures that are part of the Lord's work in every age. One topic of special interest to them was baptism. "No men in their sober senses," Oliver Cowdery recalled, "could translate and write the directions given to the Nephites, from the mouth of the Savior, of the precise manner in which men should build up his church, . . . without desiring a privilege of showing the willingness of the heart by being buried in the liquid grave." He continued: "We only waited for the commandment to be given, 'Arise and be baptized.'" [^1]

The Aaronic Priesthood

That privilege came on 15 May 1829. Joseph Smith recorded that he and his scribe "went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins" (JS-H 1:68). "On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the vail was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance!" [^2] The Prophet later recalled, "He laid his hands upon my head and ordained me to be a priest after the order of Aaron and to hold the keys of this priesthood, which office was to preach repentance and baptism for the remission of sins and also to baptize." [^3] The heavenly messenger stated: "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" (JS-H 1:69; D&C 13). Oliver Cowdery reported the angel's words as follows: "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer this priesthood and this authority, which shall remain upon earth, that the sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness!" [^4]

The messenger identified himself as John the Baptist (JS-H 1:72). He commanded the two men to be baptized, giving instructions that Joseph Smith should first baptize Oliver Cowdery and that thereafter the scribe should baptize the Prophet. Joseph Smith next ordained Oliver Cowdery, after which the process was reversed, all in accordance with angelic instruction (JS-H 1:70-71). Through these actions, the priesthood of Aaron was restored to the world.

When Latter-day Saints speak of the Aaronic Priesthood, we speak of the same authority that Moses, under divine investiture, conferred on his brother Aaron (Ex. 28:1) and which was continued through Aaron's descendants to John the Baptist. This authority, sometimes also called the Levitical Priesthood, is the authority under which the law of Moses was administered in Old Testament times and by virtue of which John baptized Jesus Christ. As John stated, it encompasses the power of "the ministering of angels," "the gospel of repentance," and "baptism by immersion for the remission of sins" (JS-H 1:69). Joseph Smith received from him not only the priesthood but also the keys of that priesthood, meaning the power to preside over it, to pass it on to others, and to authorize others to use it.

John the Baptist, the son of Zacharias, was uniquely qualified to be the agent of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. Joseph Smith taught that John was the "lawful heir" [^5] to this authority, who "held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood." [^6] "He, having received the holy anointing, was the only lawful administrator." [^7] "All the power and authority and anointing," the Prophet said, "descended upon the head of John the Baptist." [^8] Thus the angelic visitor was not a randomly selected Levite sent to reveal the priesthood. He was the lawful heir to that authority by his descent from his ancestor Aaron. And because he was the last to hold the keys of the priesthood in ancient times, there could be no one more appropriate to bring those keys back to earth as part of the latter-day Restoration.

The Melchizedek Priesthood

John told Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery that the priesthood which he gave them did not include the authority to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost; that would come later (JS-H 1:70). [^9] He also told them that he was acting under the direction of the ancient apostles Peter, James, and John, who held the keys of the priesthood of Melchizedek. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery would receive that authority "in due time" (JS-H 1:72). The Melchizedek Priesthood is the highest order of priesthood that God grants to his children on earth. In a later revelation, Joseph Smith learned that its original name was "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood" (D&C 107:3-4). This priesthood encompasses every authority in the Church, presides over all of its functions, and empowers men to speak and act in the name of God.

We do not know the date when Peter, James, and John appeared on the earth to restore the Melchizedek Priesthood. The Prophet's writings and sermons are silent concerning the exact date, as also are the records of Oliver Cowdery. We do know that the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood happened after 15 May 1829 and before the Church was organized on 6 April 1830 (D&C 20:2-3, 38). Circumstantial evidence places the event within two weeks of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. On 1 June 1829, the Prophet and his scribe arrived in Fayette, New York, to complete the translation of the Book of Mormon at the Whitmer home. It appears that the restoration of the higher priesthood had happened before that date. [^10] In 1842 Joseph Smith stated that the event took place "in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county [Pennsylvania], and Colesville, Broome county [New York], on the Susquehanna river" (D&C 128:20). That would place the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood near the Pennsylvania-New York border, some miles upstream from the place where the Aaronic Priesthood had been restored.

With the restoration of the higher priesthood by those who held it anciently came also the restoration of the keys to preside over the Lord's work on earth. The keys of the priesthood belong to the apostleship. They are the "keys of the kingdom" (D&C 128:20) which Jesus had given his Twelve anciently and by which they, and now Joseph Smith and his successors, were authorized to speak and act in the name of Christ. The restoration of the apostleship also restored the keys of revelation. Joseph Smith taught that the Melchizedek Priesthood "is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven." It is "the channel through which . . . he has continued to reveal himself to the children of men to the present time and through which he will make known his purposes to the end of time." [^11] "The apostles in ancient times held the keys of this priesthood—of the mysteries of the kingdom of God, and consequently were enabled to unlock, and unravel all things pertaining to the government of the church, the welfare of society, the future destiny of men, and the agency, power, and influence of spirits." [^12] This priesthood "administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God." In its ordinances, "the power of godliness is manifest" (D&C 84:19-20). Now those powers were restored to earth, into the hands of men who, like their fellow apostles anciently, would carry on the work of Christ.

One great blessing of the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood was the restoration of the gift of the Holy Ghost. Perhaps before the Prophet fully knew what it was, he was told about this gift by John the Baptist (JS-H 1:70). The gift of the Holy Ghost is a special blessing for those who through the covenant of baptism have taken upon themselves the name of Christ. It is their promise of the constant companionship of the Holy Spirit, provided they live their lives worthy of it. Many good persons outside Christ's church have received the influence of the Spirit in their efforts to serve the Lord according to the knowledge they have possessed. That influence is especially present among those who are searching for truth, and missionaries can attest that it is that influence of the Spirit and not their own skill that brings people to conversion. But the gift of the Holy Ghost promises more than the sometimes temporary promptings felt by seekers after truth. As Joseph Smith taught:

"There is a difference between the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Cornelius [a convert in Acts 10] received the Holy Ghost before he was baptized, which was the convincing power of God unto him of the truth of the gospel. But he could not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost until after he was baptized. And had he not taken this sign [or] ordinances upon him, the Holy Ghost, which convinced him of the truth of God, would have left him until he obeyed those ordinances and received the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, according to the order of God." [^13]

Thus the gift of the Holy Ghost is not only a special blessing but also a saving ordinance that signifies a covenant between God and individual Saints. Like baptism, it is required of those who would inherit the celestial kingdom (D&C 76:51-52). It gives them the assurance that God's latter-day work is true and that prophets guide his Church. And it enables them to retain that testimony in the face of life's challenges. Those who use this gift wisely and worthily are empowered to overcome the world by faith and to be sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise (D&C 76:53).

"I Have Chosen You"

Without the priesthood, sacred ordinances cannot be performed with legitimacy and are not recognized by God as binding, regardless of the motives of those who might seek to act in God's name. Because of this, a few months after the restoration of the priesthood the Lord revealed the truth that the Saints' previous baptisms were not valid and thus they would need to be baptized again under the authority of the newly restored priesthood (D&C 22:1-4). Joseph Smith taught that "all the ordinances, systems, and administrations on the earth are of no use to the children of men unless they are ordained and authorized of God." They must be performed by "a legal administrator. For none others will be acknowledged, either by God or angels." [^14] This is a fundamental principle of true Christianity. Because of the importance of the priesthood, the coming of Peter, James, and John is one of the key events in the Lord's work of the last days, an indispensable part of the restoration of the gospel.

Having received the authority of God, Joseph Smith stood in the same position that was occupied by Peter in the ancient Church. Thus empowered, his works were authorized by heaven and were binding and valid. The same is true for all those who have received those same keys in succession from Joseph Smith to the present moment.

This authority is not a legacy inherited through the centuries of Christian history. The chain of priesthood that binds the restored Church to the primitive Church does not pass through the medieval church, the Reformation church, or the churches of Joseph Smith's day. The priesthood authority of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a new, undiluted revelation of the power that was held anciently by Jesus' apostolic witnesses. It was brought back by the very men who held it before, so that the priesthood in the last days would continue an unbroken succession of ordination from those who received it under the hands of Jesus Christ. "How have we come at the priesthood in the last days?" Joseph Smith asked. "It came down, down in regular succession. Peter, James, and John had it given to them, and they gave it up [to us]." [^15]

When the Savior set apart his Twelve he told them, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you" (John 15:16). In saying that, he established the truth that divine authority is vested in men only by deliberate selection from God and only on God's terms. True authority cannot come in any other way—whether by believing in the Holy Bible, by receiving educational degrees, or by feeling sincerely that one has been called.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints asserts its claim to being Christ's church because, among other reasons, its authority is not of men. It was revealed from God:

". . . Peter, and James, and John, whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry and of the same things which I revealed unto them;

"Unto whom I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth" (D&C 27:12-13).

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:239-41, 300; and Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), 1:64-72.
[^2] Smith, History of the Church, 1:64; Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:300.
[^3] For a discussion of the location and related issues, see John K. Carmack, "Fayette: The Place the Church Was Organized," Ensign, February 1989, 14-19. In anticipation of the one-hundred-fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of the Church in 1980, a replica of the Whitmer home was built on the original location in Fayette, using original foundation stones.
[^4] Edward Stevenson to Orson Pratt, 23 December 1877; Edward Stevenson to John Taylor, 7 January 1878; Lyndon W. Cook, ed., David Whitmer Interviews: A Restoration Witness (Orem, Utah: Grandin, 1991), 14, 17.
[^5] The six were probably Joseph Smith Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, David Whitmer, and Peter Whitmer Jr. See Richard L. Anderson, "Who Were the Six Who Organized the Church on 6 April 1830?" Ensign, June 1980, 44-45; and October 1980, 71.
[^6] Smith, History of the Church, 1:78; cf. Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:303.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] In the mid-1830s the Church was frequently called the "Church of the Latter Day Saints." See Richard L. Anderson, "What Changes Have Been Made in the Name of the Church?" Ensign, January 1979, 13-14.
[^9] Millennial Star 1, no. 1 (1841): 8.
[^10] See Robert J. Woodford, "The Historical Development of the Doctrine and Covenants," 4 vols. (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1974), 1:299-353.
[^11] Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 38-39.
[^12] Times and Seasons 3, no. 11 (1 April 1842): 745.
[^13] Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 108.
[^14] Ibid., 158.
[^15] Ibid, 9.
