Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 16

The Church of Jesus Christ

After his ordination by heavenly messengers in the spring of 1829, Joseph Smith had sufficient priesthood authority to organize the Church of Jesus Christ. But the time was not yet right. It seems the Lord's timetable required that the Book of Mormon be published before the organization would take place. By the next spring, the time was right: the Book of Mormon was published on 26 March, and the Church was organized on 6 April.

Establishing the Church

The divine communication we call section 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants was given to accompany the organization of the Church and provide the framework for its character. Although that communication was established as a founding document on the day the Church was organized, it was received sometime before that date. The Prophet's history places it, undated, between section 18 (June 1829) and section 19 (March 1830). [^1] Much of this document reads as if it were a general handbook of instruction for the Church, and indeed that is what it is. It may well have been recorded over an extended period of time, as the Lord revealed administrative matters to his prophet in preparing for the establishment of the Church. We know also that parts of it were added some time after the Church was organized, as the Restoration continued. But by 6 April 1830, enough of the document was in place that it could serve as the "constitution" of the new Church. That it was a revelation from heaven is confirmed in the Prophet's preface to it, contained in his history: "In this manner did the Lord continue to give us instructions from time to time, concerning the duties which now devolved upon us; and among many other things of the kind, we obtained of Him the following, by the spirit of prophecy and revelation; which not only gave us much information, but also pointed out to us the precise day upon which, according to His will and commandment, we should proceed to organize His Church once more here upon the earth." [^2] The revelation set the pattern for all things to follow: in the Lord's Church, both the substance and the timing are determined by the Lord's will.

At the time of its formal organization, the Church consisted of three congregations in three locations in New York: the Manchester-Palmyra members were mainly the Smith family, the Colesville group was primarily the Knight family, and the Whitmers were most of the group in Fayette. It was decided that the formal organization would take place at the Whitmer home in Fayette, the same home in which the last part of the Book of Mormon was translated. [^3] In obedience to the Lord's will, the Prophet set the date as 6 April 1830. According to David Whitmer, about forty or fifty people were in attendance, [^4] but for the purpose of the legal incorporation of the Church, six were designated as original, founding members. [^5] The Prophet's history records that after prayer, the congregation was invited to sustain him and Oliver Cowdery to preside over the Church. Joseph Smith then ordained Oliver Cowdery as an Elder of the Church, after which Oliver Cowdery similarly ordained Joseph Smith. "We then took bread, blessed it, and brake it with them; also wine, blessed it, and drank it with them. We then laid our hands on each individual member of the Church present, that they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be confirmed members of the Church of Christ." [^6] When John the Baptist had appeared in May 1829, he said that the Aaronic Priesthood did not include the power to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that they would receive that authority thereafter (JS-H 1:70). Because that ordinance was performed on the day the Church was organized, it is evident that the Melchizedek Priesthood had already been restored by then.

The Prophet continued: "The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree—some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly." [^7] The new church was called "the Church of Christ" (D&C 20:1). In 1838 its full name was revealed: "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" (D&C 115:4). [^8]

At this founding meeting and in its accompanying revelation, Joseph Smith's early visions were acknowledged (D&C 20:5-8), and the content and historicity of the Book of Mormon were confirmed (vv. 8-12). Several basic beliefs were announced as the doctrinal foundation of the Church of Christ. These included latter-day revelation and the necessity of accepting it (vv. 11-15), the reality of God (v. 17), the Creation (v. 18), the Fall (v. 20), the mission of Christ (vv. 21-25), the universality of the plan of salvation (vv. 26-27), the unity of the Godhead (v. 28), the first principles and ordinances of the gospel (vv. 25, 29), the doctrines of justification and sanctification (vv. 30-31), and the possibility of falling from grace (vv. 32-34). As the Restoration continued, later revelations confirmed and developed each of these important points.

Because of the Bible, many of the theological principles mentioned in Doctrine and Covenants 20 were common to the churches of the time, and thus our belief in them was not unique. But the revelation establishes two significant points that place our Church in a category by itself and show its independence from the ideas of the world.

First, all that we know of the gospel we learn through what was revealed to Joseph Smith. "The Lord God has spoken," the Prophet recorded, "and we, the elders of the church, have heard and bear witness" (v. 16). "By these things"—that is, by the revelations of Joseph Smith—"we know that there is a God in heaven," and so forth (v. 17), confirming that latter-day revelation is the true source of the teachings of the Church.

Second, the revelations of the Restoration prove "to the world that the holy scriptures are true" (v. 11). It does not work the other way around. We do not use the Bible to prove to the world that our beliefs are true, but we use the restored gospel to prove what is in the Bible and to evaluate every manifestation of Christianity that derives from it (1 Ne. 13:39-40). To the extent that other churches' beliefs are based on the Bible, they will concur to some degree with our own. We welcome those points of convergence. Yet as much as we love the Bible, we acknowledge that our doctrine comes from modern revelation found only in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Thus there will always be profound differences between our Church and the other denominations of Christianity.

Ordinances and Offices

"We wish it to be understood distinctly," wrote Elder Parley P. Pratt of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in 1841, "that the organization of this Church came by express commandment and revelation from the Almighty—that all its offices, ordinances, and principles, were given by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, by the voice of God, or by the ministering of angels." [^9] Like the doctrine, the policies and procedures of the new Church were established by divine command.

The instructional focus of Doctrine and Covenants 20 is on the sacred ordinances and priesthood offices of the Church. Ordinances are actions that symbolize and activate spiritual processes. When performed by holders of the Lord's priesthood, they are acknowledged by him as binding and legitimate. The instructions on baptism specify qualifications for membership. Those who are humble, desire to be baptized, have "broken hearts and contrite spirits," repent, "and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church" (v. 37). Instructions for the ordinance itself were specified (vv. 71-74), and the words of the prayer were given.

In a series of brief verses that gave direction to the new Church, the revelation announced additional policies. Priesthood ordinations and the setting apart to offices were outlined (vv. 60, 65-67), and the principle of common consent was established (vv. 63, 65). The blessing of babies was enjoined (v. 70), and the ordinance of the sacrament was set forth (vv. 75-79), including the same prayers over the bread and the wine that had been published already in the Book of Mormon (Moro. 4-5). That the translated Nephite prayers are the same as those in the Doctrine and Covenants is a further testimony that our Church today continues the Lord's work from other periods of history. A revelation in August 1830 gave additional instructions concerning the sacrament (D&C 27:2-4).

Some regulatory and administrative procedures were established on the day the Church was organized, including guidelines for ordination certificates (v. 64), expectations for the behavior of new members (vv. 68-69), guidelines for dealing with transgressors (v. 80), guidelines for conferences (vv. 61-62, 81), and the need for record keeping (vv. 82-84).

Organizational matters too were set in place, including the offices of the priesthood that would govern the Church. At the time, those offices included elders (vv. 38-45), priests (vv. 46-52), teachers (vv. 53-59), and deacons (vv. 57-59).

Although the apostleship had already been restored, as is confirmed in verses 2, 3, and 38, it is easy to see that on the day of the Church's establishment, its organization was very simple, and much more was to come. Indeed, the Church was "restored" on 6 April 1830, but "the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church" (Article of Faith 6) came later, as the growing needs of the Church warranted the continued development of its structure. The organizational document itself was updated with the later revelation of new administrative information. [^10] For example, the material in verses 66 and 67, which mentions "traveling bishops," "high councilors," and "high priests," was not part of the original document but was added by the Prophet in preparing the 1835 Doctrine and Covenants. Further organizational revelations were received as the Church continued to grow, creating more structure and more priesthood offices.

From our vantage point many years after the founding of the Church, we can see that its dramatic growth has necessitated additional inspired changes in its structure and organization. The Prophet's successors have continued and will yet continue to adjust the organization and policies of the Church to meet the changing needs of its members. We who believe in the divinity of the Church and in the Lord's guidance of its leaders gladly receive all that he sees fit to reveal for it, according to his own timetable. The important thing is that regardless of specific details of the Church's structure or procedures, the fundamental principle of its existence in any generation is that it is acknowledged of God and possesses the keys of his priesthood in the apostleship, including the keys of continuing revelation.

The Blessing of the Church

Some in the world believe that organized religion is a hindrance to individual freedom and religious expression. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is one of the most organized and structured of religions, possessing a well-defined system of authority and accountability. But far from being a hindrance, its structure is one of its greatest strengths and provides an abundance of blessings for its members.

The Church is the delivery system of the gospel. It is the mechanism by which the full benefits of the Lord's plan are carried into the lives of those who have taken upon themselves Christ's name. Because of the Restoration, we can see the authority of the priesthood at work in the Church. Because the priesthood is a power that can be passed on only by those who already possess it—under the direction of those who hold its keys—the Church as an institution safeguards the purity of the priesthood and the integrity of the process by which it is conveyed. Because of the institution of the Church, we know the only channels through which the Lord's authority is exercised, and we are not deceived by counterfeits. Priesthood ordinations, baptisms, the sacrament, callings to service, and temple ordinances are among the blessings of the Church that are watched over carefully by those who have been called to do so. And these blessings are dispensed freely to those whom they serve.

In the same way that the institution of the Church safeguards the priesthood, it also assures the purity of gospel doctrine. To the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors, the Lord has given "the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of [Christ's] coming" (D&C 35:18). Because they possess the keys of revelation, it is the prerogative of prophets, seers, and revelators to interpret doctrine in behalf of the Church and to teach that doctrine to us. The organization of the Church provides the carefully maintained channels through which the Lord's message is conducted into the lives of individual members. General and local conferences, ward meetings, Church magazines, teachers' manuals, the Church Educational System, broadcasts, films, and publications all provide the means whereby Latter-day Saints can hear the gospel taught with one inspired voice, through the mouths of those who have been called of God to teach it.

The Church's structure also blesses us by providing us the opportunity to help meet the needs of others. Through missionary work and other callings, members accept the privilege of caring for others and blessing their lives through service. Through channels of accountability, the cares and concerns of individuals are passed on to priesthood leaders, who can make available the impressive human resources of the Church. The gospel inspires us to seek occasions for service, and the Church provides opportunities. When those who have callings at any level do their duty, no individual member is far from the blessings of the gospel. Those who have been served by their brothers and sisters in the Church, as well as those who have been privileged to render service, can be thankful for the restoration of the Church of Jesus Christ.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Richard L. Anderson, "The Organization Revelations," in Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson, eds., The Doctrine and Covenants, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 109-10.
[^2] Section 20, section 22, and part of section 27 were published in the (non-LDS) Painesville Telegraph, 19 April 1831.
[^3] For the history of the Doctrine and Covenants, see Robert J. Woodford, "Doctrine and Covenants Editions," in Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., Scriptures of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1995), 280-84; or Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., The Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 5 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 425-27; and "The Doctrine and Covenants: A Historical Overview," in Millet and Jackson, Doctrine and Covenants, 3-22.
[^4] The last revelation is numbered 102, but erroneously two revelations had been numbered 66.
[^5] This testimony is found in the "Explanatory Introduction" of modern editions of the Doctrine and Covenants.
[^6] See Larry E. Dahl, "Lectures on Faith," in Ludlow, Scriptures of the Church, 410-16; or Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 818-21.
[^7] The introduction to the 1921 edition states: "Certain lessons, entitled 'Lectures on Faith,' which were bound in with the Doctrine and Covenants in some of its former issues, are not included in this edition. These lessons were prepared for use in the School of the Elders, conducted in Kirtland, Ohio, during the winter of 1834-1835; but they were never presented to nor accepted by the Church as being otherwise than theological lectures or lessons."
[^8] See Robert J. Matthews, "The New Publication of the Standard Works—1979, 1981," BYU Studies 22, no. 4 (fall 1982): 387-424.
[^9] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), 2:122-23.
[^10] See headnotes to sections 81 and 90; see also Lyndon W. Cook, The Revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Seventy's Mission Bookstore, 1981), 170-72, 192.
