Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 17

Revelations to Guide the Church

When the Lord opened the heavens with the First Vision in 1820, he began a process that has remained in his Church to the present day—the process of continuing revelation to his chosen servants. God's communication to his prophets is one of the foremost characteristics of true religion, and it is an aspect of the Church that has been a profound blessing to its members.

Joseph Smith was called to lay the foundation for the Lord's kingdom in the last days. To bring about that work, the Lord directed his prophet's actions and enlightened his mind, granting him the companionship of the Holy Ghost and a wisdom beyond his natural abilities. On occasion the Prophet also received revelations of a more formal kind, in which the voice of the Lord came to his mind in actual words.

Even before the Church was established, the Prophet recognized the importance of recording the revelations he received. The Church of Jesus Christ was to be a church founded on and directed by communication from God, and Joseph Smith knew that the revelations would be the standard that would regulate both its doctrine and its practice.

About twenty revelations had been recorded by 6 April 1830. The revelation that accompanied the organization of the Church, which is now section 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants, was viewed as the foundational latter-day revelation. It was sustained by the vote of the members as the "Articles and Covenants" of the Church in a conference in June 1830 and on some similar occasions thereafter. [^1] The sustaining of that important document was the latter-day beginning of canonization, the process by which members of the Church formally accept a revelation and acknowledge it as binding, authoritative, and scripture. Perhaps because the Bible and the Book of Mormon predated the establishment of the Church and had already been pronounced true by revelation (D&C 17:6; 20:8-11), they were accepted as scripture from the start and did not need to be canonized by the Saints.

The Book of Commandments

At a conference of the Church in the fall of 1831, the decision was made to publish in a book the revelations that had been received to that date. The Lord revealed a "preface" to the book (now D&C 1) as well as an "appendix" (now D&C 133) in conjunction with the conference. About seventy revelations had been recorded by that time. Only a few of them had been published, [^2] but others were circulating in handwritten copies, which created the likelihood that different versions would evolve. Oliver Cowdery, the second elder of the Church, and W. W. Phelps, the Church's printer, were assigned to prepare the revelations for publication. The book was to be printed in Independence, Missouri, where Brother Phelps would soon set up a printing establishment. It would be called the Book of Commandments.

By the summer of 1833, the long process of typesetting had been underway for some months and was almost complete. Most of the pages had been printed. But on 20 July a mob broke into the printing shop, destroyed the press, and burned most of what had been printed. Church members rescued as many of the pages as they could, and from those pages about one hundred incomplete copies of the Book of Commandments were bound and published. It contained sixty-five of the revelations.

The Book of Commandments was never reprinted. As revelations continued to come to the Prophet, some were published in the Church's newspaper, the Messenger and Advocate, and thus received a measure of circulation among members of the Church. In time, however, it was decided that a new published collection was needed.

The Doctrine and Covenants

The first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants was published in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1835. [^3] It contained 103 revelations. [^4] At a conference in August that year, the revelations were canonized by the sustaining vote of the Church. The original members of the Quorum of the Twelve affixed their testimony to the collection of revelations and stated, in part: "We, therefore, feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of the earth, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men and are verily true." [^5]

The 1835 Doctrine and Covenants was in effect two books bound together in one cover. Included with the collection of revelations was another item called the "Lectures on Faith." These were doctrinal lessons presented by Church leaders in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1834 and 1835 at what was called the School of the Elders. [^6] In a sense, they might be viewed as the equivalent of the Melchizedek Priesthood manual or the missionary training doctrinal manual of that day.

In 1844 a new edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, containing 111 sections, was published in Nauvoo, Illinois. The next edition was published in Salt Lake City, Utah, in 1876. It contained 136 sections and was divided for the first time into verses. It added more than twenty revelations that had been received in Joseph Smith's lifetime but had not been included in the Doctrine and Covenants before his death. The new Doctrine and Covenants was canonized at the general conference of the Church in October 1880. Official Declaration 1, the Manifesto on plural marriage, was canonized in 1890 and was printed with the Doctrine and Covenants beginning in 1908.

The 1921 edition was in use in the Church for sixty years. It introduced the familiar double columns, along with revised headings and footnotes. Beginning with the 1921 edition, the "Lectures on Faith" were no longer included in the Doctrine and Covenants. [^7]

In 1981 another edition of the Doctrine and Covenants was published with new headings, footnotes, maps, and index. [^8] Sections 137 and 138 were added with that publication. Those two revelations had been known in the Church since they were received, but they had not been canonized until 1976. Official Declaration 2, the announcement of the revelation on priesthood, had been canonized in 1978 and was also included for the first time in the 1981 edition.

Perfecting the Church

Ecclesiastical matters became increasingly important after the Church was established formally on 6 April 1830. Organizational and administrative revelations came at the appropriate moments to meet the needs of Church growth and the changing circumstances of the Saints.

The first bishop was appointed early in 1831 (D&C 41:9). His calling began the process of revealing the duties of both the bishop over the whole Church, whom we now call the presiding bishop, and the bishops of local congregations (D&C 68:14-15; 72:10-12; 107:68-75, 87-88). Wards were first known in the Church in the 1840s in Nauvoo, where they were administrative divisions of the city. Over the course of time, they developed into the ecclesiastical units of the local level. Since the days of Joseph Smith, inspired prophets and apostles have continued to refine the bishops' role and the nature of the units over which they preside.

In 1831 the first high priests of the Church were ordained. An 1835 revelation designated the offices of elder and high priest as the two primary divisions of the Melchizedek Priesthood (see D&C 107:10-12).

The concept of the stake was revealed gradually, beginning in 1831, as the Church began dividing geographically between Zion, in Missouri, and Kirtland, Ohio. There would be a center place, and other organized areas would be the stakes of the tent of Zion (D&C 82:13-14; 101:21; 115:17-18). The first high council was called in 1834 to serve the Saints in the Kirtland area (D&C 102). Joseph Smith and his counselors in the First Presidency presided there. A presidency away from Church headquarters was called later that year, when David Whitmer, W. W. Phelps, and John Whitmer were called to preside over the Church in Missouri. [^9] The term stake was not applied to these geographical areas until a few years later.

While these developments were taking place with local units, the general organization of the Church was being set in place. The role of the First Presidency unfolded in stages in 1832 and 1833, with Joseph Smith as president and Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams as counselors (D&C 81:1-2; 90:1-3, 6). [^10] The calling and organization of the Twelve and the Seventy were made known in 1835 (D&C 107:22-27, 33-34, 38, 58, 93-98). Over the years, the Lord revealed more about their functions and the nature of their authority.

Although the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods had been restored in 1829, the duties of those priesthoods and the organization of their quorums were made known gradually in later years. A revelation in 1835 explained the structure of the quorums and their presidencies (D&C 107:10-14, 85-89).

For all those called to the Lord's priesthood, whether locally (as deacons, teachers, priests, elders, and high priests) or in the presiding quorums of general authorities (the Seventy, the Twelve, and the First Presidency), the Lord's message in the Doctrine and Covenants is the same, and it applies as well to each member of the Church in each calling: "Let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence" (D&C 107:99).

In the years that have passed since the time of Joseph Smith, his successors in the presiding quorums of the Church have continued to perfect its organization and its function. The roles of each priesthood office have been refined as further experience and inspiration have guided God's servants. Continued growth and changing circumstances have brought about developments that were not needed in Joseph Smith's day but are vital parts of the Church today. Missions, auxiliary organizations, units larger than stakes, and other administrative elements of the Church have all come in their due time, according to the Lord's wisdom. One of the hallmarks of Christ's Church is that as its needs change, he will inspire his chosen servants to refine it appropriately. The Doctrine and Covenants is a witness to that taking place in the early days of the Restoration.

Channels of Revelation

The Apostasy brought not only a cessation of revelation to the Church but also a loss of clear understanding concerning how persons can obtain revelation for the guidance of their own lives. Despite the scores of biblical examples of real prayer, many people have been taught that prayer consists of reciting memorized verses or that all the answers they would ever need are found in the pages of the Bible. Just as the Restoration establishes the Church and the priesthood as God's authorized channel for revealing his will to his people collectively, so it also gives all believers the keys by which they have access to the same divine source for their individual needs. The Restoration teaches us how to approach God and receive revelation for the conduct of our own lives.

Before moving to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to help Joseph Smith with the Book of Mormon translation, Oliver Cowdery had received a witness that Joseph Smith's work was of God and that he should assist with it. [^11] But like many who have felt the influence of the Holy Ghost, he needed to be reassured of it, and he needed to learn the principles upon which inspiration would continue to be part of his life. The Lord said to him: "As often as thou hast inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit . . . I did enlighten thy mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been enlightened by the Spirit of truth" (D&C 6:14-15). Oliver was told, "Cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things. Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter?" (D&C 6:22-23).

As the Lord trained his disciples, he taught them that inspiration is neither easy nor automatic. His words to Oliver Cowdery concerning the Book of Mormon translation apply to all personal revelation: "You have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right" (D&C 9:7-8).

It is instructive to note from the Lord's words that personal inspiration, following the necessary effort in study, prayer, and faith, would produce enlightenment, peace, and a feeling that something is right. These calm manifestations of the Spirit contrast sharply with some of the demonstrations of religiosity that were current in Joseph Smith's day and still remain in some branches of Christianity.

With respect to revelation for the Saints collectively, early sections of the Doctrine and Covenants teach that the only authorized channel is the head of the Lord's Church. "This generation shall have my word through you," the Lord said to Joseph Smith (D&C 5:10). "And this ye shall know assuredly—that there is none other appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations until he be taken, if he abide in me" (D&C 43:3).

Just a few months after the Church was organized, one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, Hiram Page, stated that he had received a revelation concerning an important doctrinal matter. The Lord reminded the Church that the keys of revelation on such matters are in the hands of him who has been called to preside (D&C 28:1-7, 11-13). The Lord said concerning Hiram Page or anyone else who might feel called to reveal God's thoughts, "Behold, these things have not been appointed unto him" (D&C 28:12).

In a revelation a few months later, the Lord made the principle very clear: "It shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church" (D&C 42:11). This statement provided a foolproof safeguard for the purity of the new Church and protected its members against confusion about the true source of revelation and doctrinal authority. If a person is not called, sustained, and ordained by those who have been called, sustained, and ordained by the heads of the Church, that person has no authority to speak for God or for the Church (D&C 43:5-6).

Revelation to individuals through the gift of the Holy Ghost includes guidance concerning important personal decisions that affect their well-being. Foremost is a testimony of the gospel—a divinely revealed knowledge that God lives, that Jesus' atoning sacrifice has the power to save us from sin and death, and that the Church of Jesus Christ has been restored and is acknowledged of God.

The testimony of the Saints helps hold the Church together. Around the world, millions of Latter-day Saints have become active participants in the Restoration by receiving a testimony of its truthfulness. Because of that testimony, they acknowledge the authority and the inspiration of those who have been called of God to lead the Church, and they are willing to receive at their hands all that God has revealed in the past, all that he reveals now, and all that he will yet reveal in the future (Article of Faith 9). Such revelation has and will come through the president of the Church. As the Lord taught the Saints in 1830, others may enjoy the full benefits of the Holy Ghost to understand and teach what has been revealed for the Church already. But revelations to the Church will come through the Lord's prophets (D&C 28:1-2).

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] The phrase "fight against Zion," used by Book of Mormon authors, may have been borrowed from Isaiah 29:8.
[^2] See Richard O. Cowan, The Doctrine and Covenants: Our Modern Scripture (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984), 73-76; and Lyndon W. Cook, Joseph Smith and the Law of Consecration (Provo, Utah: Grandin Books, 1985).
[^3] See Spencer W. Kimball, "Becoming the Pure in Heart," Ensign, May 1978, 81.
[^4] See Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), 308-9.
[^5] For a survey of some of the prophesied judgments, see Kent P. Jackson, "Prophecies of the Last Days in the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price," in The Heavens Are Open: The 1992 Sperry Symposium on the Doctrine and Covenants and Church History (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1993), 168-71.
[^6] Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:372.
[^7] "In an evangelical sense, righteous; religious; influenced by a regard to the laws of God; or living in exact conformity to the divine will"; Noah Webster, An American Dictionary of the English Language (New York: S. Converse, 1828; facsimile reproduction, San Francisco: Foundation for American Christian Education, 1980), s.v. "just."
[^8] The phrase "died without law" (D&C 76:72) seems to imply an unwillingness to accept the law, not a lack of opportunity. An 1836 revelation makes it clear that lack of opportunity in this life will not be a hindrance to an inheritance in the celestial kingdom (D&C 137:5-9).
[^9] The primary meaning of receive in Joseph Smith's day was "to accept." Webster, Dictionary, s.v. "receive."
[^10] See headnotes to sections 81 and 90; see also Lyndon W. Cook, The Revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Provo, Utah: Seventy's Mission Bookstore, 1981), 170-72, 192.
[^11] Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), 1:10; Lucy Mack Smith, Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and His Progenitors for Many Generations (Liverpool: S. W. Richards, 1853), 128-29.
