Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 20

The Book of Abraham

The book of Abraham first came to light as a result of the purchase by the Church of some ancient Egyptian papyrus documents in 1835. [^1] The documents consisted of "two papyrus rolls, besides some other ancient Egyptian writings with them." [^2] During the latter half of that year, the Prophet Joseph Smith labored intermittently to translate the documents and publish their content to the world. His history states: "Much to our joy [we] found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt." [^3]

The ongoing drama of the early days of the Church, combined with the press of Joseph Smith's other responsibilities, made it impossible for him to finish the translation as soon as he had hoped. But in the early part of 1842, in Nauvoo, he was able to devote his attention again to the records and finally publish the text of what we now call the book of Abraham. [^4] It appeared in print in the 1 March and 15 March issues of the Church's newspaper, the Times and Seasons. [^5] More material than we have now from the book of Abraham was anticipated after the first installments were published. [^6] But the hope of receiving the remainder of Abraham's record, as well as that of Joseph, has not yet been realized.

The Prophet did not describe the revelatory process that produced the book of Abraham. Thus we do not have all the answers concerning the history of the papyrus documents that the Prophet possessed, their relationship to his published translation, the possibility that more documents once existed, the possibility of other extant but as yet undiscovered documents, and the connection between the extant fragments and the published text. [^7] But what we know is sufficient for the present—that the book of Abraham is a revelation from God and that its translation was revealed to bless the world with gospel light.

The book of Abraham was included in Elder Franklin D. Richards's British mission booklet, The Pearl of Great Price, when it was first compiled in 1851. With the rest of that book, it was canonized as scripture by the sustaining vote of the Church in 1880.

A Doctrinal Restoration

As a major contributor to the restoration of the gospel, the profound effect of the book of Abraham on our religion comes from the unique material that it contains. The following items are some that add significantly to our understanding by revealing things that were misunderstood or entirely unknown to the world in 1835.

God and the order of the universe. Joseph Smith made reference to the "the system of astronomy" contained in Abraham's record. [^8] The book of Abraham teaches us that there is order in the cosmos as manifested in stars, planets, and moons. But more important than any astronomical lesson is the lesson that the stars, planets, and moons teach us about things unseen. Abraham's great vision reveals the order of the universe's citizens, with God the Father in his position as the greatest of all the countless beings:

"And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all. . . . My wisdom excelleth them all, for I rule in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath, in all wisdom and prudence, over all the intelligences thine eyes have seen from the beginning" (Abr. 3:19, 21; see also 1-24).

Later in the vision, Abraham saw Jehovah, or Jesus Christ. Though Christ was among "the intelligences that were organized before the world was" (Abr. 3:22), already in that premortal setting he was a transcendent being who was "like unto God" (Abr. 3:24). These truths counter centuries of Christian tradition about the origin and nature of God and Christ and lay the groundwork for other revelations to come.

The premortality of humankind. The book of Abraham gives us our best scriptural view into our premortal existence (Abr. 3:22-28). We learn, first of all, that we lived as intelligent beings before our earthly birth, which is a doctrine that was rejected by the Christian church of late antiquity. We were in the presence of the Father and the Son and received instruction from them concerning the course of our eternal existence. That we had agency—

the capacity to make rational choices and be accountable for them—is shown in the fact that even then we could be obedient or rebellious. From the book of Abraham we learn about what the Prophet Joseph Smith called the "Grand Council" in heaven. [^9] We read of "noble and great ones" who were instructed by the Father and the Son in that setting.

The reason for life on earth. It is in Abraham's account of the Grand Council that we have the clearest statement in the scriptures concerning the purpose of humankind's mortal existence. The Father had a plan for us, to be carried out by the Son, that would bless the lives of those who would follow it. We would be tested on earth to see if we would "do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God shall command [us]." If we would remain faithful in our premortal life, we would advance to mortality. If we would be faithful in that second, mortal, estate, we would "have glory added upon [our] heads for ever and ever" (Abr. 3:25-26). Joseph Smith later explained the principle that underlies this process: "All mind[s] and spirit[s] God ever sent into the world are susceptible of enlargement." [^10] "The relationship we have with God places us in a situation to advance in knowledge. God has power to institute laws to instruct the weaker intelligences that they may be exalted with himself," [^11] "that they might have one glory upon another in all that knowledge, power, and glory. And so [he] took in hand to save the world of spirits." [^12]

Satan's rebellion. In the Grand Council in heaven, as depicted in the book of Abraham, significant information concerning the origin of Satan is revealed. He was with those "noble and great ones" who were in the Father's presence before the creation of the earth. The book of Abraham teaches us that because God chose Christ instead of him, Satan became "angry, and kept not his first estate," meaning that he did not remain faithful in his premortal existence. He fell, and "many followed after him" (Abr. 3:27-28). None of this important information, which gives us insights into the character of the adversary, was available before the Restoration.

The Creation. The contribution of the book of Abraham includes new truths about the Creation. In the Abrahamic account, the Creation is accomplished by "the Gods." This reference continues the emphasis from the discussion of the premortal council. Christ said, "We will go down, . . . and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereupon these may dwell" (Abr. 3:24, emphasis added; see Abr. 4-5). In contrast to the doctrines of medieval Christianity, the book of Abraham teaches that the earth would be made of already existing "materials," a subject on which Joseph Smith provided additional information: "The word create came from the word bara'. [It] doesn't mean so; it means to organize, same as [a] man would use to build a ship. Hence we infer that God had materials to organize from—chaos, chaotic matter. Element had an existence from the time [God] had. The pure principles of element are principles that never can be destroyed; they may be organized and reorganized, but not destroyed." [^13]

Abraham's life and priesthood. The book of Abraham contains historical material that is not found in the Bible, including important information about Abraham's family background. His "fathers" turned from their righteousness and became worshipers of pagan gods. The account of their efforts to sacrifice Abraham to their gods helps us view his history in the Bible in an entirely new light (see Gen. 22:1-18; Abr. 1:5-15). From the book of Abraham, we learn the reality and eternity of the priesthood and that it has been on the earth since the beginning. As "a follower of righteousness," Abraham sought and received the priesthood. He "became a rightful heir, a High Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers." His priesthood "came down from the fathers, from the beginning of time, yea, even from the beginning, or before the foundation of the earth" (Abr. 1:2-4).

The Abrahamic covenant. The book of Abraham gives us information in just a few verses that broadens our understanding of the Abrahamic covenant. We learn important things about the mission of Abraham's descendants, the future of the house of Israel, the principle of adoption, and Israel's relationship to the other nations of the earth. The Lord said to Abraham: "I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations. And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father" (Abr. 2:9-10).

The Abundance of Peace and Truth

Because there is much we do not know about how we received the book of Abraham, it has been a frequent target of critics of the Church. But those who read its text in faith, with the intent of being taught the things of God, will respond as did the early Saints when they first understood its value: "Truly we can say, the Lord is beginning to reveal the abundance of peace and truth." [^14]

The book of Abraham was brought forth to be one of the primary tools of the Restoration, revealing much about the nature of God, the nature of human existence, the nature of God's eternal plan for his children, and the power of the covenants and ordinances by which we become his heirs. It ties us with our premortal existence and thus also with our eternity.

It may be that only the temple brings us nearer to our roots. It seems perhaps significant that the records of Abraham and Joseph came to light and were on the Prophet's mind while the Kirtland Temple was under construction, in preparation for the revelation of its blessings. Perhaps it is also noteworthy that the Prophet published what we have of the book of Abraham while the Nauvoo Temple was being built, in the months that preceded the first endowment ordinances of modern times. The records of Abraham and Joseph may have played a part in the restoration of these sublime things. Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggested that the temple ordinances "were given in modern times to the Prophet Joseph Smith by revelation, many things connected with them being translated by the Prophet from the papyrus on which the book of Abraham was recorded." [^15]

We do not know the content of the rest of the Abrahamic record, but we look forward to receiving it when the time is right. Nor do we know what is contained in the record of ancient Joseph. We can be certain, however, that in the Lord's time, all things will be revealed that are of importance to his children—either while the world continues or after the coming of Christ.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] For a review of the events that led up to these manifestations, see Milton V. Backman Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), 284-308.
[^2] These blessings are discussed in Chapter 22, 230-34.
[^3] Joseph Smith, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible, comp. and ed. Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), 69-74.
[^4] See Charles R. Harrell, "Turning the Hearts of the Fathers and the Children," in Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson, eds., The Doctrine and Covenants, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 57-63.
[^5] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), 242; emphasis added.
[^6] Ibid., 241; emphasis added.
[^7] Ibid., 336; emphasis added.
[^8] Ibid., 43.
[^9] Ibid., 329.
[^10] Times and Seasons 1, no. 12 (October 1840): 178.
[^11] Millennial Star 51 (1889): 546-47; see also Times and Seasons 5, no. 20 (1 November 1844): 698-70.
[^12] In Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1855-86), 13:164 (12 December 1869).
[^13] Ibid., 359.
[^14] Smith, History of the Church, 2:236.
[^15] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 779.
