Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 21

The Restoration of Keys

Joseph Smith received both the Aaronic and the Melchizedek Priesthoods some months before the Church was organized. With those priesthoods, he also received the keys—the right to preside in them and to pass them on to others. But those were not the only keys the Prophet would receive. In due time, the Restoration brought back to earth other keys, which empowered him and his successors to carry on specific priesthood responsibilities.

In December 1830, only eight months after the organization of the Church, the Lord instructed his Saints in New York to migrate to Ohio (D&C 37:3). "There I will give unto you my law," he said, "and there you shall be endowed with power from on high" (D&C 38:31-32). The law that they received in Ohio was section 42 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which revealed information on Church government, moral behavior, the establishment of Zion, and the law of consecration.

The endowment "with power from on high" began to come a few years later when the Kirtland Temple was built. On 3 April 1836, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, the president and assistant president of the Church, were praying in the newly dedicated Kirtland Temple. The Prophet reported, "The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened" (D&C 110:1). Jesus Christ came to acknowledge and receive his holy house (D&C 110:2-10). Then three others appeared in succession—Moses, Elias, and Elijah—each bringing spiritual blessings to the Church. [^1]

Moses and the Gathering of Israel

Joseph Smith recorded the coming of Moses: "The heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north" (D&C 110:11). Moses' earthly career was a mission of great importance to the house of Israel. Through his service, God made a people out of the spiritually scattered and lost Israelites, restored to them the knowledge of who they were, delivered them from bondage, revealed a law to them, established their government under priesthood and prophetic authority, bound them to him under sacred covenants, and set them on a course that would lead them to their promised land.

All of those blessings constituted the gathering and the restoration of Israel. Moses was the bearer of the keys associated with those events, and his name will be forever associated with that mission. It is fitting that as part of the latter-day restoration of the gospel, he conferred them on his modern counterpart Joseph Smith, whose calling was to continue that work in our time.

It is not difficult to see close parallels between the mission of Moses and that of Joseph Smith (JST, Gen. 50:24-36). Through the work of Joseph Smith, God would make a people out of those who were spiritually scattered and lost, restore to them the knowledge of who they were, deliver them from spiritual bondage, reveal a law to them, establish their government under priesthood and prophetic authority, bind them to him under sacred covenants, and set them on a course that would lead to the establishment of Zion. In the work of Joseph Smith and his successors, we see the fruit of the keys that were restored by Moses.

Moses' keys are the keys of missionary work for Israel but also for those whom the scriptures call the Gentiles, who become members of the covenant family when they accept the gospel. The mission of the Church in the latter days, assisted by the keys that Moses restored, is to all: "The voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days. And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them" (D&C 1:4-5).

Missionary work had been underway since the beginning of the Restoration. Moses' keys put the seal on that labor and enabled the work of gathering to continue at an even greater pace. A year after he appeared, the restored gospel was taken for the first time to countries outside North America, resulting ultimately in the conversion of thousands. The gathering to the covenants of the gospel has continued since the days of Joseph Smith. The millions who are now members of the Lord's Church are testimony to the power of the keys that Moses restored.

Elias and the Abrahamic Covenant

After Moses departed from Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, "Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:12). Though the identity of the messenger is not clear, the nature of his keys seems to be more certain. Elias brought to the Church "the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham." The words "in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" are reminiscent of biblical promises pertaining to God's covenant with the ancient Patriarchs (e.g., Gen. 22:18) and reflect the promises that were revealed in the book of Abraham only months before Elias's coming (Abr. 2:9-11). It appears, then, that the messenger Elias restored keys pertaining to the covenant of Abraham, keys through which worthy men and women join in that covenant to create eternal family units.

Faithful Saints, by virtue of those keys, are married not only for time but also for eternity. Their children are sealed to them, as they are to their faithful ancestors before them (D&C 132:19-20, 30-31). In ways that have not been revealed, their exaltation brings them "a continuation of the seeds forever and ever" that will "continue as innumerable as the stars" (D&C 132:19, 30). [^2]

Because the name Elias is often used in scripture as a title to represent a forerunner—a messenger who goes ahead to prepare the way for a greater revelation—we do not know if the name is used as a title of the messenger in this manifestation, or if the angelic visitor who appeared in the Kirtland Temple was a man by that name. Perhaps the Elias who restored the keys of the Abrahamic covenant was Abraham himself, or a contemporary of Abraham, or someone of his lineage who held the keys.

Elijah and the Sealing Keys

The final angelic key holder who appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on that occasion was Elijah. He said: "Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors" (D&C 110:14-16).

This was not the first time Joseph Smith had been instructed concerning the mission of Elijah. When Moroni appeared to him on 21-22 September 1823, Moroni taught him by quoting Malachi 4:5-6, which foretells Elijah's coming (JS-H 1:38-39; D&C 2:1-3). Moroni's version changes the verses from those in the Bible to emphasize Elijah as a restorer of priesthood power. The resurrected Christ quoted the same verses to Lehi's children (3 Ne. 25:5-6), and Joseph Smith discussed them on several occasions. [^3]

Elijah restored the keys of the sealing power. [^4] Most often we consider this power in the context of the redemptive work for the dead and the "welding link" that temple work creates "between the fathers and the children" (D&C 128:18; see also 17). According to Joseph Smith, Elijah's keys "turn the hearts of the children to the covenant made with their fathers," [^5] they "reveal the covenants of the fathers to the children and of the children to the fathers, that they may enter into covenant with each other," [^6] and they "seal the hearts of the fathers to the children—and the children to the parents." [^7]

But Elijah's keys do even more; they seal and validate all ordinances of the priesthood so that ordinances performed on earth are binding in heaven as well. Joseph Smith taught: "Elijah was the last prophet that held the keys of this priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of this priesthood in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. . . . Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the priesthood. And without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." [^8] Moreover, "the spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is that ye have power to hold the keys of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers, and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth, and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God." [^9]

The appearance of Moses, Elias, and Elijah in the Kirtland Temple repeated in many ways the similar event that the ancient apostles Peter, James, and John experienced, as recorded in the New Testament (Matt. 17:1-9). At that time, as in 1836, the Lord was beginning a new dispensation of his Church, and ancient holders of priesthood power came to pass on the keys of their ministry to enable the Lord's work to be carried forward. In the latter days, this transmittal of keys was an indispensable step in the process of the Restoration.

Keys, Honors, Majesty, and Glory

Because the Prophet Joseph Smith was very circumspect regarding spiritual events, we are not privileged to know everything he knew and experienced. We know, however, that other ancient prophets appeared to him and conveyed to him the keys of their callings so the Church in our day would be able to fulfill its divinely appointed role: "Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. . . . And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood" (D&C 128:19, 21).

The Restoration would be comprehensive, because in this, the final dispensation of the gospel, "all things which are in Christ Jesus, whether in heaven or on the earth, shall be gathered together in him, and . . . all things shall be restored, as spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began: for in it will take place the glorious fulfillment of the promises made to the fathers, while the displays of the power of the Most High will be great, glorious, and sublime." [^10]

In the spring of 1844, a few weeks before his death, Joseph Smith passed on the keys that he had received to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. President Wilford Woodruff, who was there, remembered the Prophet's words as follows: "I have sealed upon your heads all the keys of the kingdom of God. I have sealed upon you every key, power, principle that the God of heaven has revealed to me. Now, no matter where I may go or what I may do, the kingdom rests upon you. . . . But, ye apostles of the Lamb of God, my brethren, upon your shoulders this kingdom rests; now you have got to round up your shoulders and bear off the kingdom." [^11]

"Said he, during that period, 'I now rejoice. I have lived until I have seen this burden, which has rested on my shoulders, rolled on to the shoulders of other men; now the keys of the kingdom are planted on the earth to be taken away no more for ever.' But until he had done this, they remained with him; and had he been taken away they would have had to be restored by messengers out of heaven. But he lived until every key, power and principle of the holy Priesthood was sealed on the Twelve and on President Young, as their President." [^12]

Fully empowered with all the keys of the priesthood, the Twelve were able to go forward in the work that God had begun through Joseph Smith. Though all who have been ordained to the Quorum of the Twelve bear all the keys, they are fully activated in the person of the senior apostle, who is the president of the Church. As new members of the Twelve are called, they receive those same keys, and thus the Lord's power is continued in his Church in the fifteen men who compose the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve. The latter-day Church has never been without the keys since they were first restored.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Milton V. Backman Jr., The Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), 294-300. See Elder Orson Pratt's recollections in Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1855-86), 18:132.
[^2] Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed. rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), 2:379-80, 382.
[^3] Elders' Journal 1, no. 3 (July 1838): 43.
[^4] Smith, History of the Church, 4:231; Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), 49 n. 1 (15 August 1840).
[^5] Joseph Smith, Joseph Smith's Commentary on the Bible, comp. and ed. Kent P. Jackson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), 69-73, 169-70, 195, 201-4.
[^6] The doctrine of the redemption of the dead was revealed clearly in the days of Joseph Smith. But in 1918 a marvelous vision to President Joseph F. Smith provided additional details on the process; see D&C 138.
[^7] Times and Seasons 3, no. 12 (15 April 1842): 760.
[^8] "The Things of Eternity—Stand We in Jeopardy?" Ensign, January 1977, 6; see also James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord, rev. ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1969), 83-84.
[^9] Ezra Taft Benson, The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 251.
[^10] Smith, History of the Church, 5:2.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Promises Made to the Fathers," in Kent P. Jackson and Robert L. Millet, eds., Genesis to 2 Samuel, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 3 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 55.
[^12] See Robert L. Millet, "A New and Everlasting Covenant," in Robert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson, eds., The Doctrine and Covenants, Studies in Scripture Series, vol. 1 (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 512-26.
