Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 22

The Holy Temple

The revelation of God's house and its sacred activities did not come to Joseph Smith all at once but rather in stages, beginning in 1831 with the command to build a temple in Independence, Missouri (D&C 57:3; 58:57). In time, the Lord enlightened his prophet with other insights, including an understanding of the construction and purpose of the temple in Kirtland. The temple revelations culminated in Nauvoo in the knowledge of vicarious work for the dead, the endowment, and sealings.

The idea of the temple was something completely foreign to the religious culture of Joseph Smith's day, entirely unknown to the Christian world and its traditions. Today it still sets us apart profoundly from all other Christian churches. It was a revelation of divine truth that is one of the greatest contributions of the Restoration.

The Kirtland Temple

The commandment to build a temple in Kirtland, Ohio, was received in late 1832 (D&C 88:119-21). Construction was begun in June the following year. It is not clear what the Prophet knew about temple work when the construction started, but he and the Saints labored with energy and commitment, knowing that it was the Lord's will and having the assurance that great blessings lay in store for them when it was completed. An 1833 revelation provided the basics of its design (D&C 95:11-17). The temple, which still stands today, has two large meeting rooms, one on the main floor and one directly above it. In each of those rooms, the east and west sides contain a series of pulpits—for the Aaronic Priesthood on the east end of the room and for the Melchizedek Priesthood on the west end. On the third floor are several smaller rooms.

The temple was dedicated on 27 March 1836, accompanied by a tremendous spiritual outpouring. [^1] The dedicatory prayer was offered by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It was prepared and written in advance, having been given by revelation. We have it now as section 109 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

One week later, on 3 April, while Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were praying in the Melchizedek Priesthood pulpit area in the main-floor room of the temple, the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to them:

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: . . .

Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name.

For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house. . . .

Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house.

And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people. (D&C 110:3, 6-7, 9-10)

After the Savior appeared, the three ancient prophets—Moses, Elias, and Elijah—came and restored their keys to Joseph Smith and the Church (D&C 110:11-16).

The Kirtland Temple's primary function was as a meetinghouse. But it was there that the Lord began to make known in small measure the purposes of temples and the sacred ordinances that pertain to them. Some ordinances were revealed and administered in the process of its preparation and construction. [^2] The spiritual experiences and the restoration of the keys at Kirtland played a significant role in the Saints' preparation for greater things, but the temple blessings that we know today were not revealed in their fulness until some years later, after the Church had relocated to Nauvoo, Illinois.

During the turbulent 1830s, the Saints understood the need for temples to be built wherever God's kingdom was established. A site was dedicated at Independence in 1831, but because of persecution, the Saints were unable to build the Lord's house there (D&C 124:49, 51, 53). After Joseph Smith and most of the Church had left Kirtland and its temple in 1838, a site was dedicated at Far West, Missouri. But the Saints did not find enough peace from persecution to build another temple until they had become established in Nauvoo.

The Redemption of the Dead

In January 1836 in the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet learned in a vision that "all who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God" (D&C 137:7). Two and one-half years later in Far West, the Prophet stated: "All those who have not had an opportunity of hearing the gospel, and being administered to by an inspired man in the flesh, must have it hereafter, before they can be finally judged." [^3]

We do not know when the Lord revealed the doctrine of the redemption of the dead. Perhaps like some other doctrines it came gradually over the course of time. Joseph Smith's first public discourse on the topic was on 15 August 1840, a year after the Saints had settled in Nauvoo. [^4] After that he spoke about it frequently, originally in the context of baptism but later, after the endowment had been made known, in the context of the higher ordinances as well. [^5]

True religion teaches that all who will be heirs of the celestial kingdom must accept the doctrines of Christ and submit themselves to the sacred ordinances of his gospel (e.g., Mark 16:15-16; John 3:3-5). Those who did not have the opportunity in life to know the Lord and his Church will be given every opportunity to hear the saving message and accept it in the world of spirits after death. The Lord's missionaries there are the spirits of departed Saints. They are teaching the gospel in the spirit world as other missionaries are here. On earth, faithful Saints have the privilege of officiating vicariously for departed persons by receiving for them the ordinances, including baptism and the ordinances of the temple. A tremendous power that accompanied the restoration of Elijah's keys turns the hearts of the children to identify their departed ancestors and provide the ordinances in their behalf (D&C 27:9). Conversion takes place in the spirit world, but the ordinances are performed vicariously on earth among mortals. The sealing power of Elijah's keys makes those ordinances binding both on earth and in heaven. [^6]

Joseph Smith taught: "[God] knows the situation of both the living, and the dead, and has made ample provision for their redemption, according to their several circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this world, or in the world to come. . . .

"When speaking about the blessing pertaining to the gospel, and the consequences connected with disobedience to its requirements, we are frequently asked the question, what has become of our Fathers? will they all be damned for not obeying the gospel, when they never heard it? certainly not. But they will possess the same privilege that we here enjoy, through the medium of the everlasting priesthood, which not only administers on earth but in heaven." [^7]

"Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel," Joseph Smith wrote, "who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free" (D&C 128:22).

The first baptisms for the dead were performed in the Mississippi River in the late summer of 1840. By the end of the next year, a temporary font was constructed in the Nauvoo Temple and the baptisms were being administered there—even though the building remained under construction for more than four more years.

Endowments and Sealings

The word endowment denotes an extraordinary gift or blessing. In modern contexts, the word is used often with reference to gifts that continue to produce benefits long after the initial giving is finished. What we call the temple endowment or endowment of the holy priesthood is precisely such a gift, as it provides blessings that reach far beyond the initial experience.

Because the service of the Lord's house is sacred, it is not discussed outside the temples except in the most general of terms. Modern prophets have taught us that the endowment is both an instructional session and a series of ordinances. President Spencer W. Kimball stated that it "comprises a course of instruction relating to the eternal journey of man and woman from the preearthly existence through the earthly experience and on to the exaltation each may attain." [^8] President Ezra Taft Benson elaborated: "In the course of our visits to the temple, we are given insights into the meaning of the eternal journey of man. We see beautiful and impressive symbolisms of the most important events—past, present, and future—symbolizing man's mission in relationship to God. We are reminded of our obligations as we make solemn covenants pertaining to obedience, consecration, sacrifice, and dedicated service to our Heavenly Father." [^9]

The first endowments were administered on 4 May 1842 to members of the Twelve and other faithful persons. Because the Nauvoo Temple was still under construction, Joseph Smith conducted the ordinances in the upstairs room of his red brick store, which served as his office and the headquarters of the Church. In revealing and administering the sacred temple ordinances "for the first time in these last days," the Prophet set forth "all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds." [^10] The sacred endowment ceremony was now restored and made available to the Church. Its ordinances were administered and validated by the keys that Elijah restored, binding not only on earth but in heaven.

On 12 July 1843, the Prophet dictated to a scribe a revelation that he had received, at least in part, more than a decade earlier. It is now section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The revelation probably came during the course of his work on the new translation of the Bible early in 1831, when he read with prophetic eyes the accounts of the Patriarchs in the book of Genesis. As a recent apostle has stated, the focus of those accounts is "family, family, family; and not only family, it is celestial marriage and the continuation of the family unit in eternity. You have to understand the gospel to catch that vision." [^11] Those biblical narratives emphasize the profound significance of marrying within the covenant. But more importantly, they set forth repeatedly the blessings that come to a faithful woman and man who stand in a covenant relationship with each other and with God.

In responding to questions asked by Joseph Smith, the Lord stated: "Prepare thy heart to receive and obey the instructions which I am about to give unto you" (D&C 132:3). [^12] In one of the most far-reaching of revelations ever dispensed from heaven, the Lord set forth the doctrine of the eternity of the marriage covenant as well as the nature of plural marriage. It appears that the legitimacy of polygamous marriages in the Bible was the Prophet's foremost question (see D&C 132:1), but a large part of the revelation deals with the eternity of marriage, the eternity of the relationship between parents and children, and the conditions and covenants that make those blessings possible.

The Lord stated:

If a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not by me nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead. . . .

If a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood; . . . it shall be done unto them in all things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in time and through all eternity; and shall be of full force when they are out of the world; and they shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever.

Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. . . .

Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins—from whose loins ye are, namely, my servant Joseph—which were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his seed, out of the world they should continue; both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them.

This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham; and by this law is the continuation of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself. (D&C 132:15, 19-20, 30-31)

This was a revelation of such importance that its consequences stretch into the eternities, touching the lives of an infinite number of souls. The keys of these Abrahamic blessings, including eternal marriage and eternal increase, were restored by Elias on 3 April 1836 in the Kirtland Temple. With those keys and with the sealing keys restored by Elijah at the same time, Joseph Smith and others who would hold them would have the power to create eternal families, sealing upon worthy couples all the blessings of exaltation that God ever promised.

This was the capstone of the Restoration—the crowning doctrine and the crowning power dispensed by a loving God to his weak and humble children. Through his immeasurable grace and mercy, brought to bear in the atonement of Christ, he has promised his faithful children joint heirship with his perfect Son Jesus. To those who remain true and faithful to the ordinances and covenants that they receive, he has promised all that he has (D&C 84:37-38).

In response to the revelation, the Prophet and others to whom he gave authority began sealing worthy, endowed couples in the "new and everlasting covenant" of marriage. Elder Wilford Woodruff of the Twelve recorded his own experience in the fall of 1843. He and his wife were visiting at the home of Elder John Taylor, a fellow apostle, "conversing about the principle[s] of the celestial world, or some of them. Brother Hyrum Smith was in with us and presented some ideas of much interest to me concerning baptism for the dead, the resurrection, redemption, and exaltation in the new and everlasting covenant that reacheth into the eternal world. He sealed the marriage covenant between me and my wife, Phebe W. Carter, for time and eternity." [^13]

The Nauvoo Temple

During the time that the Lord's house was under construction in Nauvoo, the Prophet Joseph Smith prepared the Saints in a variety of ways not only for temple ordinances but also for the greater commitment to discipleship that would be required by future developments. During the early part of 1842, for example, the book of Abraham was published in the Church's Nauvoo newspaper, the Times and Seasons. [^14] "Church History" was published at about the same time, [^15] as was the "History of Joseph Smith." [^16] The first of these, sometimes called the "Wentworth Letter," includes an account by Joseph Smith of the First Vision and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. The second is the Prophet's fuller account of those early experiences that we now have as Joseph Smith-History in the Pearl of Great Price. Also during those Nauvoo years, the Prophet's great public sermons extended the Saints' doctrinal horizons.

One significant development during this period was the establishment of the Nauvoo Relief Society for the women of the Church. In the spring of 1842 at a meeting in the upper room of his red brick store, Joseph Smith met with a group of women who had organized to assist with the building of the temple by providing clothing and provisions for construction workers. The Prophet established them as an organization of the Church and redefined their mission to include looking out for the poor, helping to strengthen the virtue of the community, and saving souls. "I now turn the key to you in the name of God," he said, "and this Society shall rejoice and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time." [^17] Beginning as a small group in Nauvoo and then being reestablished in Utah in the 1860s, the Relief Society is now a worldwide organization that includes all the women of the Church. It continues true to its calling to bless the lives of Latter-day Saints through service.

Construction on the Nauvoo Temple was begun in the fall of 1840, and the ceremonial laying of the cornerstones took place on 6 April 1841. Joseph Smith moved the work forward despite continued persecution, expanded administrative obligations, explosive population growth (fueled by the arrival of thousands of European converts), and other developments and concerns that occupied him. When he was killed in June 1844, the temple was still two years from completion.

Sensing the shortness of his own mission and knowing the importance of the sacred ordinances, Joseph Smith passed on to the Twelve the ministry of the temple. The apostles received their endowments and their sealings with their wives, and they were instructed, prepared, and empowered so they could administer the ordinances as God's authorized servants. Less than three months after the Prophet's martyrdom, Elder Orson Hyde of the Twelve stated: "We were in council with Brother Joseph almost every day for weeks. . . . He conducted us through every ordinance of the holy priesthood, and when he had gone through with all the ordinances, he rejoiced very much and says, 'Now if they kill me, you have got all the keys and all the ordinances, and you can confer them upon others.'" [^18] President Wilford Woodruff later recalled: "In the winter of 1843-4, Joseph Smith, the Prophet of God, called the Twelve Apostles together in the City of Nauvoo, and spent many days with us in giving us our endowments, and teaching us those glorious principles which God had revealed to him." [^19]

As sections of the temple were finished after the Prophet's death, they were made available for the ordinances. By the time the main body of the Church evacuated Nauvoo in February 1846, bound for a new home in the West, more than five thousand had received their endowments from the apostles in the temple. The Lord had been true to his promise given in 1841: "I grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me" (D&C 124:31). Three months after the main exodus from Nauvoo, the temple was finally dedicated—on 1 May 1846. Two and one-half years later it was in ruins, the result of abandonment, vandalism, and arson.

The highest, the noblest, and the best of our religion are embodied in the temple and its ordinances and covenants. That is true not only because the highest priesthood ordinances are performed there but also because the highest yearnings of our souls find fulfilment there—our yearnings for oneness with God and with those whom we love, whether living or departed. Thus it should not be surprising that wherever the Saints have been established, temples have been established as well. Just four days after President Brigham Young arrived in the Salt Lake Valley with the first of the pioneers, he designated a site for the construction of a temple. And so it has continued all over the world since then.

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), 215; spelling and punctuation modernized in some quotations.
[^2] Joseph Smith diary, 8 February 1843; see Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Papers of Joseph Smith, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989-97), vol. 3; spelling and punctuation modernized in some quotations.
[^3] "I told them I was but a man, and they must not expect me to be perfect; if they expected perfection from me, I should expect it from them; but if they would bear with my infirmities and the infirmities of the brethren, I would likewise bear with their infirmities." Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 132; see also 130, 369.
[^4] Ibid., 369.
[^5] Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:175.
[^6] Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 363.
[^7] Ibid., 196.
[^8] Most of the Prophet's written legacy is collected in Joseph Smith, History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 2d ed., rev., 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957). In this important work, which was compiled mostly after Joseph Smith's death, his diaries were supplemented with his letters, his other writings, transcripts of his sermons, and diary entries from others to fill gaps in his record. See Dean C. Jessee, "The Writing of Joseph Smith's History," BYU Studies 11, no. 4 (summer 1971): 439-73. Most of the important doctrinal material from Smith, History of the Church was collected in Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938).
[^9] The original diaries are collected in Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, vols. 2 and 3.
[^10] The Prophet's letters, those preserved in his own hand or dictated by him to scribes, are collected in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1984), 227-615.
[^11] It is not certain where or to what extent he may have used the assistance of other writers when preparing items for publication. See his comments in "To Subscribers," Times and Seasons 3, no. 9 (15 March 1842), 710.
[^12] President Rigdon's contributions to the Church diminished substantially during the Nauvoo years, and the Prophet was no longer able to rely on him as a spokesman, as reflected in D&C 124:103-4.
[^13] Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, identified more than 170 sermons by Joseph Smith in Nauvoo in contemporary documents. Most transcripts are very fragmentary, but some are quite extensive. Some were recorded by persons with no official calling as scribes, such as Martha Jane Coray and James Burgess. But many were recorded by such official scribes as Willard Richards and William Clayton. Multiple transcripts of some discourses provide checks on accuracy.
[^14] Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 238.
[^15] William Rowley diary, 12 November 1843, ibid., 258.
[^16] Mercy R. Thompson, ibid., xx.
[^17] Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 343-44.
[^18] Ibid., 340.
[^19] See Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 340-62, 378-83; Donald Q. Cannon and Larry E. Dahl, The Prophet Joseph Smith's King Follett Discourse: A Six-Column Comparison of Original Notes and Amalgamations (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1983); and Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 342-61, 369-76.
