Kent P. Jackson, From Apostasy to Restoration (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996)

Chapter 24

The Continuing Restoration

Like the Prophet Joseph Smith, we recognize the doctrine of the Restoration to be "good doctrine," [^1] and we too desire to embrace it and "hug it to [our] bosom." [^2] We Latter-day Saints have much reason to be thankful, being among the most blessed of any who have ever lived on earth. In our time we enjoy the gospel's fulness—revealed in these last days to prepare the way for the coming of our Savior. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the Lord's church, having been built on the sure and indispensable foundation of true authority and true doctrine, both revealed from God. To our Father in Heaven and his beloved Son Jesus Christ we give all honor, praise, and love for the infinite goodness of their plan for our happiness and for their never-ending work to share its blessings with us. Through the witness of the Holy Ghost, we know that it is their work. It originates with them and not with men, and to them we freely give our worshipful praise and thanks.

It is not inappropriate for us to praise also the memory of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the prophet of the Restoration, the messenger of Christ who revealed Him to us and taught us His gospel. As Elder John Taylor wrote in words later canonized as scripture, "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it" (D&C 135:3). By reflecting both the character and the message of Jesus Christ, the Prophet Joseph Smith and his ministry of revelation have opened the way for us to know our Savior and to return to his presence. For his contributions as a servant in God's work "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), we can freely exclaim, "Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah!" [^3]

President Brigham Young said of Joseph Smith: "When I first heard him preach, he brought heaven and earth together. . . . He took heaven, figuratively speaking, and brought it down to earth; and he took the earth, brought it up, and opened up, in plainness and simplicity, the things of God." [^4] On another occasion President Young said:

I want to think of matters that will make my heart light, like the roe on the mountains—to reflect that the Lord Almighty has given me my birth on the land where He raised up a Prophet, and revealed the everlasting Gospel through him, and that I had the privilege of hearing it—of knowing and understanding it—of embracing and enjoying it. I feel like shouting hallelujah, all the time, when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet whom the Lord raised up and ordained, and to whom He gave keys and power to build up the kingdom of God on earth and sustain it. These keys are committed to this people, and we have power to continue the work that Joseph commenced, until everything is prepared for the coming of the Son of Man. This is the business of the Latter-day Saints, and it is all the business we have on hand. [^5]

Joseph Smith had a clear and perfect vision of what it would take to build Zion on earth in preparation for the Lord's coming and the Millennium. His untiring efforts to organize communities, build homes and other buildings, educate minds, and encourage collective industry and prosperity illustrate his interest in the Saints' temporal well-being and the spiritual blessings that would flow from it. But he also knew that the building of Zion involved the strengthening of human souls through spiritual learning, personal revelation, priesthood ordinances, and temple covenants. The Prophet understood that these combined efforts would lead to the establishment of Zion. And he knew the significance of his role in that process, as well as that of the faithful Saints who worked with him to accomplish it. As he wrote in 1842, it would be a labor in behalf of all humanity that would involve the efforts of individuals on both sides of the veil:

The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age. It is a theme upon which prophets, priests, and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight. They have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live, and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung, and written, and prophesied of this our day. But they died without the sight. We are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the latter-day glory. It is left for us to see, participate in, and help to roll forward the latter-day glory, "the dispensation of the fulness of times," when God will "gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that are upon the earth, even in one" [Eph. 1:10], when the Saints of God will be gathered in one from every nation, and kindred, and people, and tongue, when the Jews will be gathered together into one, and the wicked will also be gathered together to be destroyed, as spoken of by the prophets. The spirit of God will also dwell with his people and be withdrawn from the rest of the nations. And all things, whether in heaven or on earth, will be in one, even in Christ.

The heavenly priesthood will unite with the earthly to bring about those great purposes. And whilst we are thus united in the one common cause to roll forth the kingdom of God, the heavenly priesthood are not idle spectators. The spirit of God will be showered down from above; it will dwell in our midst. The blessings of the Most High will rest upon our tabernacles, and our name will be handed down to future ages. Our children will rise up and call us blessed, and generations yet unborn will dwell with peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the privations that we have endured, the untiring zeal that we have manifested, the insurmountable difficulties that we have overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the glory and blessings which they will realize, a work that God and angels have contemplated with delight for generations past, that fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets, a work that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the salvation of the human family. [^6]

Joseph Smith knew that the Church would go on after him and build on what had been done in his time. We who live in a later generation, who harvest abundantly from the seeds planted in his day, gladly fulfill his prophecy: we do indeed call him and his noble contemporaries "blessed" and "dwell with peculiar delight" on the work they performed "in laying the foundation" for the blessings which we realize today.

The Prophet said that he was laying "a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world." [^7] Yet he understood that after his time there would still be much to be done, and the work of the Restoration would continue. As long as the earth would stand, God's plan would be carried forth by others, and its effect on humanity would be enormous: "The standard of truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing. Persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished and the great Jehovah shall say, 'The work is done.'" [^8]

Through the ministry of Joseph Smith, the Lord revealed all the priesthood and keys that would be necessary to carry the Church forward to the time of Jesus' second coming. The sure foundation of doctrine was likewise revealed, with enough scripture and gospel knowledge to more than meet the needs of the latter-day Saints. But the work of the Restoration is a continuing process that will always require the service of men who hold the keys of apostolic authority, including the prophetic gifts that were so clearly manifested in the ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was not the last of the latter-day prophets but the first, and those who have succeeded him have carried on the Lord's work that he commenced, following the same course with the same vision and the same authority that he possessed. As Elder Spencer W. Kimball reminded us in 1960, "Never again will the sun go down. . . . Revelation is here to remain. Prophets will follow each other in a never-ending succession, and the secrets of the Lord will be revealed without measure." [^9]

"This is the dispensation of the fulness of times. It is the greatest of all gospel dispensations, when all that was revealed in past generations has been revealed anew." So said another great successor to Joseph Smith, President Gordon B. Hinckley. "And from this time forth it will move forward to cover the earth, in the due time of the Lord, and touch the lives and hearts of good people everywhere. There is nothing like this work anywhere else on earth." [^10]

As the kingdom of God rolls forth with the spread of the gospel message and the growth of the Lord's Church, we appreciate more than ever the foundation laid through the ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith. We love him for his service, as we also love his successors who have been called of God to serve since the Restoration began. It is a continuing restoration because revelation remains the great hallmark of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And so it will continue as the Church prepares the world for the return of its Lord and Master, Jesus Christ. Perhaps these words of President Gordon B. Hinckley best express the spirit of hope and joy that Latter-day Saints everywhere feel as they contemplate the Lord's great work of the latter days: "How glorious is the past of this great cause. It is filled with heroism, courage, boldness, and faith. How wondrous is the present as we move forward to bless the lives of people wherever they will hearken to the message of the servants of the Lord. How magnificent will be the future as the Almighty rolls on His glorious work touching for good all who will accept and live His gospel. . . . I invite every one of you, wherever you may be as members of this Church, to stand on your feet and with a song in your heart move forward, living the gospel, loving the Lord, and building the kingdom. Together we shall stay the course and keep the faith, the Almighty being our strength." [^11]

Notes

1996 Deseret Book Co.

---
Notas:
[^1] Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1980), 346, spelling modernized.
[^2] Ibid., 381.
[^3] Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 27.
[^4] In Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1855-86), 5:332 (7 October 1857).
[^5] Ibid., 3:51 (6 October 1855).
[^6] Times and Seasons 3, no. 13 (2 May 1842): 776; grammar and punctuation modernized.
[^7] Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 367.
[^8] "Church History," Times and Seasons 3, no. 9 (1 March 1842): 709; punctuation modernized.
[^9] "To His Servants the Prophets," Instructor, August 1960, 256-57.
[^10] Remarks in Crawley, England, 26 August 1995; Ensign, August 1996, 60.
[^11] Ensign, November 1995, 72.
