Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

Preface

On the Sunday afternoon of April 7, 1985, as a newly called General Authority, I stood petrified at the pulpit in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. I had received my call forty-eight hours earlier and had completed my talk forty-eight seconds earlier. Among more important things, I said:

"Several years ago, I made a covenant with the Lord. I promised to give him anything he should require of me, and prayed this gesture might warrant forgiveness of my transgressions. Yesterday I gave the only thing I had left. It was something I cherished. I held onto it until the very last moment. I never thought of it as a selfish possession. That of which I speak flew out the window of my home when I turned on the television to watch the news and saw my picture on the television screen. I speak of my prized remaining possession—anonymity.

"How I love not to be noticed! I don't want to sit with the General Authorities in the 'fishbowl' at the BYU football games in my dark blue suit! I want to sit in the stands with my father, wearing an obnoxious T-shirt that reads: 'BYU #1. Enough said!' I have license and credentials to be obnoxious! I was born and raised in Provo, Utah. I attended school at Provo High School. I received my bachelor's and master's degrees from BYU. I'm a member of the Church, and I even work for the Church. My credentials are impeccable. I want to go berserk in the upper tier of the San Diego Stadium as I have the last four years at the Holiday Bowl—with the exception of Ohio State (which soundly beat BYU's team in the bowl game), when I went into deep depression. . . . Nevertheless, I give up my prized anonymity, just as I will give up my life if it is required of me. . . .

"I express my deepest loyalty to Bishop [Robert D.] Hales and his First Counselor, Bishop [Henry B.] Eyring. I will not betray their trust. I express my love and loyalty to the First Presidency, the Council of the Twelve Apostles, the First Quorum of the Seventy, and those I love most—the rank-and-file members of the Church.

"I thank God I was born of goodly parents. I begged my mother not to stand and take my picture as I came to the stand for the first time yesterday morning! But what would I have done if, during my formative years, she had not demonstrated that same pride and enthusiasm for everything I accomplished, however small. My father, Bishop Kenneth L. Pace, was the bishop of the Bonneville Ward in the East Provo Stake during my teens. He remains uppermost in my mind as exemplifying the pure love of Christ throughout his life." (Conference Report, April 1985, pp. 100-101.)

I was not prepared for the response that moment of complete honesty would bring from the average member of the Church. I love to communicate with the "common folks" because that is who I am, and it is such Saints for whom I have a special love.

This book is dedicated to the rank-and-file members of the Church, the majority of whom have not been a bishop, stake president, Relief Society president, Primary president, Young Women president, regional representative, mission president, or temple president or matron. I personally had never served in any of those positions when I was set apart as second counselor in the Presiding Bishopric. However, I, like you, have a great love for our Heavenly Father, for the Savior, for the gospel, for the Brethren, and for all of my brothers and sisters in the gospel who are out there in the trenches slugging it out with the adversary and dealing with the challenges of life.

Over the past few years, as I have visited informally with the Saints in places ranging from stake conferences to shopping malls, I have recognized two common problems. The first has to do with a lack of spiritual self-confidence. I hear many beautiful testimonies immediately followed by, "I'm not doing too well. I'm not sure I can make it."

The second is closely related and sometimes springs forth from a lack of self-confidence. When people doubt they can make it, rather than going faster they begin to coast. As I meet with stake presidencies prior to stake conferences, I always ask, "What is the biggest problem facing your stake?" The answer in many cases is, "Apathy and lack of commitment." I am convinced that one big reason for such apathy is a lack of self-confidence and a lack of vision as to one's own spiritual potential.

The objective of this "love letter to the Saints" is to awaken each individual to his or her spiritual potential. The spiritual plateaus described in this book are available to every Latter-day Saint who lives the laws upon which the blessings are predicated. These blessings have absolutely nothing to do with a person's position in the Church, but everything to do with a person's purity in the gospel.
