Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

Introduction

In April 1979, President Spencer W. Kimball said: "This impression weighs upon me—that the Church is at a point in its growth and maturity when we are at last ready to move forward in a major way. . . . The basic decisions needed for us to move forward, as a people, must be made by the individual members of the Church. The major strides which must be made by the Church will follow upon the major strides to be made by us as individuals. We have paused on some plateaus long enough. Let us resume our journey forward and upward." (Conference Report, April 1979, p. 114.)

Think back to 1979. How old were you? Where were you living? How many children, or brothers and sisters, did you have? What grade in school were you in, or where were you employed? Once you have set a benchmark in your life, see if you can remember where you were spiritually, especially as it compares to your spirituality today.

President Kimball told us we had paused on some plateaus long enough. Have you moved on to a higher spiritual plateau? Are you still stuck on the same one? Perhaps you've fallen off a cliff and at the present moment see no way back.

Our family has a tradition of taking an annual hike to the top of Mount Timpanogos, a high peak north of Provo, Utah. We divide the hike into three segments. Our first plateau is at about five miles. All along the trail we see beautiful wildflowers, but at the end of five miles is a huge bowl where the flowers are brilliant. There we eat a snack and lie down to rest. While resting there we can look up to a higher plateau and see what we call the "saddle," which is over two miles away. Because the trail there is above the timberline, we can see other hikers laboring upward, and we are tempted to stay in our present comfort zone. The trail ahead of us is steeper, we'll have to cross some snowfields, and the air is becoming thinner as we climb toward that 10,000-foot level.

However, our goal is to make it to the top, and after a reasonable rest, we find the energy required to make it to the second plateau, the "saddle." There, a steady, cool breeze greets us, and for the first time on the hike we can see out over Utah Valley and Utah Lake to the west, the Salt Lake Valley to the north, Kennecott's open-pit copper mine in the mountains to the northwest, and Mount Nebo many miles to the south. While for some time it has been hard to breathe in the thin air, now we feel refreshed and exhilarated. We can look back at the beautiful bowl filled with flowers and say, "We made it this far, and it was worth the effort."

From this resting place, we can see that the final plateau is about a mile away at the 12,000-foot altitude. From where we are sitting, it looks like it is straight up. Our muscles tighten, our eyelids become heavy, and our resolve to put forth more effort wanes as we contemplate what lies ahead. However, our goal is the top of that peak, which means we'll have to leave the comfort zone once more to move on to the highest plateau.

Our goal here in mortality is to keep our second estate and return to the presence of our Father in Heaven. The gospel has been restored to the earth to provide all that is needed to accomplish that objective. I don't know what spiritual plateaus President Kimball had in mind, but I would like to suggest three. Let me hasten to say that this is merely one way of looking at our spiritual development, and not the only way of looking at it. Any one of the plateaus I suggest might be broken down into many parts, and there might be hundreds of plateaus along the way, but for the purposes of this discussion, I have tried to keep the analogy simple.

The three plateaus I would like to suggest are (1) testimony, (2) sanctification, and (3) spiritual graduate school.

The diagram below illustrates our goals and our progress toward each of these plateaus. In the diagram, note how far down the path the testimony plateau is. Many Latter-day Saints look upon a testimony as the pinnacle of spiritual progress rather than as the beginning of the trail. In the diagram, I have shown testimony as a long plateau just barely out of the world. A testimony that the gospel is true does bring us out of the world, but unless we do something about that testimony, we are barely out, and the world's magnetic pull will tug forcefully on us. If we are not extremely careful, we can find ourselves living in the world and of the world. In Section 1, I discuss how we can strengthen and nourish our testimonies so that we will then move on toward the next plateau.

When we let the principles of the gospel take root in our lives and conduct ourselves in such a way that the Holy Ghost brings about a literal change in us, we begin to progress toward the next plateau, sanctification. In Section 2 we will discuss what sanctification is and how one goes about receiving it. We will learn that it has much to do with receiving the ordinances of the gospel and remaining true to our covenants. We will also review, from a practical standpoint, how the process works. Basically, the way we face our individual trials and tribulations determines to a large degree the velocity at which we travel along this line. Note the distance between the first and second plateaus. It is long and takes most of our time and energy as we sojourn on this earth. It is a process that occurs over a period of time. We could describe the journey as coming unto Christ. Once individuals are sanctified and purified, a mighty change has occurred and they have been born again. This is a literal metamorphosis of the spirit.

The third plateau, spiritual graduate school, is available to those who have become purified to the extent necessary to receive this training. In Section 3 we will talk about mysteries, miracles, and signs and their appropriate roles in our spiritual development. There is a difference between delving into mysteries and having mysteries revealed to us. We will also discuss the reasons for the chronology of the plateaus that I have suggested, and discover that a testimony must be built upon our learning to recognize the still small voice. Without this base, we can be misled by Satan's own miracles, mysteries, and signs. As we take

this hike together, I hope to give you a desire to make it to the top as well as the confidence that you can. The Lord loves each of us, and He stands at the top of the trail beckoning us. He also comes to assist and encourage us even when—and perhaps especially when—we may have fallen, sometimes due to our own foolishness. He says to us, as I said to each of our children on their first attempt to climb to the top of Mount Timpanogos, "You can make it. I know it because I know you."
