Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

First Plateau:

Testimony

1

Gaining a Testimony

The first spiritual plateau of our journey is that of testimony. As in my example of the hike to the top of Mount Timpanogos, a testimony is like the field of flowers that is five miles into the hike. A testimony is beautiful like the flowers. Many Latter-day Saints make it to this point but, because it is so beautiful and comfortable, they cease their effort and never experience the deeper joys of higher plateaus. On the other hand, too many Saints don't even make it this far. They are so busy searching out and hiking every little side trail, often made by sage hens, deer, or rabbits, that they lose their way; and though they may walk a thousand miles, they will never reach the destination of a testimony.

Some members of the Church spend their entire lives exploring every single intellectual side trail rather than staying with the well-marked path. Once atop the first plateau of a testimony, it is easy to look down on all the side trails and see that they lead nowhere. The real path is sometimes narrow, but it is always well marked. Even though the Lord has placed caution signs at forks on the trail, and warned against getting off the trail, many insist on seeing for themselves. Sometimes the result is tragic.

When I use the word testimony, I refer to having received a spiritual witness that (1) Jesus is the Christ; (2) Joseph Smith is a prophet of God and was the vehicle through whom the Lord restored the fulness of the gospel and delivered a second witness to Christ known as the Book of Mormon; (3) succeeding prophets received and continue to receive revelation from the Lord relative to our current challenges and the establishment of the kingdom of God on earth; and (4) each of us is entitled to personal revelation in the regulation of our own lives as we live the gospel.

In our most honest moments, many of us question how strong our testimony really is. How does it feel to have the Spirit? Are some of our feelings just wishes, hopes, and desires as opposed to confirmation of the Spirit? How can we be sure? Why can't we testify with the same certainty as others testify?

These questions are particularly troublesome to teenagers and young adults who have grown up in the Church. Converts have a "before" and "after" with which they can compare, but members who have been raised in the Church have not experienced what it is like to be without the Spirit. Many young men and women who are old enough to be called on missions bear their testimonies along this line: "I believe the Church is true, but I'm not really sure. I hope while on my mission I will receive the same testimony many of you have."

Young people often go through their early life leaning on the testimony of parents, grandparents, older brothers and sisters, and the converts who moved in next door. They don't think that anything spectacular has happened to them personally, and so they wait for a feeling of the Spirit that is more powerful than and different from anything they have ever felt before. Then they receive a mission call and realize that they are going to be testifying to people and must be able to stand on their own spiritual feet. They ask themselves, "Do I have a testimony or not?"

Those who pay the price of studying, praying, and living the gospel soon discover a simple truth. They go into the exercise looking for some spectacular spiritual feelings, different from those ever experienced, only to find out they have felt that same familiar spirit all of their life.

The witness a convert receives is the same witness a person born in the Church receives. One reason it is so spectacular to a convert is that it is new. Those who were born in the Church have had these feelings since birth. They have felt them in sacrament meetings, at youth testimony meetings, during family home evenings, while being administered to during an illness, while reading the Book of Mormon, while listening to inspiring stories from their parents, at the airport while seeing brothers or sisters off on missions, while visiting grounds of a temple, when hearing the Joseph Smith story, and so forth. Spiritual witnesses come at a young age to those who are exposed to experiences of a spiritual nature.

I remember vividly something that happened to me at age ten. I grew up in Provo, Utah. Once or twice a year my parents would take my sisters and me to Salt Lake City to visit Temple Square. To entice me to make the pilgrimage, instead of asking if I wanted to go to Temple Square, they would ask, "Do you want to go to the museum where the mummies are?" For readers under forty years of age, I will explain.

In the 1950s there was, on Temple Square, a museum that displayed mummies (among more important things). That was my favorite display. I also enjoyed a display of locks of hair from some of the past prophets, and seeing the watch that President John Taylor was wearing in Carthage Jail when a mob broke in and killed the Prophet Joseph Smith. The watch blocked a bullet that possibly could have taken John Taylor's life—and I could see the bullet hole on that watch. I also enjoyed looking at the death masks of Joseph and his brother Hyrum, who was martyred at the same time as the Prophet. In short, at ten years of age I enjoyed all the gruesome stuff.

On a more positive note, I loved to read the comments that visitors, many of whom were not Latter-day Saints, wrote in the guest register, and I was an enthusiastic collector of all of the free stuff, such as missionary tracts and pamphlets, temple schedules, and calendars, that I could get there. I would go from counter to counter and ask, "Is this free?" When the answer was "Yes," I would take one and carry it with me to the next counter. Sometimes the nice person at the counter would say, "No, I'm sorry, but these cost a nickel." For these occasions, I had perfected a beaten-puppy look of bowing my head and saying, "Oh, I've always wanted to read that pamphlet, but I don't have a nickel." Sigh, sniff, sigh, sniff. More times than not the person would say, "Well, that's all right—I'm sure we won't miss one nickel," and would give me a pamphlet, which I would add to my fistful of free stuff. When I got home, I would proudly and carefully place these things in a neat stack next to the free stuff collected on previous visits.

On this particular occasion we parked across the street from Temple Square at a parking meter in front of what used to be a Walgreen's Drugstore (it is now a bank). At the completion of our tour, my parents made the announcement I had learned to dread: "Glenn, we need to do some shopping. Why don't you stay in the car? We won't be gone long." Then they handed me enough change to feed the parking meter for eight hours.

I tried to busy myself with meaningful activities. I practiced "driving" for a while, until I'm certain the car was flooded. Then I watched the people come out of the drugstore with ice cream cones. Soon I began to keep a tally of how many had bought single cones compared to how many had purchased double cones. When I tired of that, I started keeping track of which flavor was the most popular. Vanilla won. I was appalled.

All of the above may have lasted forty-five minutes, after which I found myself inescapably, critically ill from boredom. Just as I was about to break the cardinal rule of not getting out of the car, I glanced down and saw my stack of free stuff. On the top was a pamphlet that was larger than the others, with a black and white picture of Joseph Smith on the cover and the title "Joseph Smith Tells His Own Story." Ten years later I would distribute copies of that same pamphlet in the mission field.

I was so bored that I decided I might as well read the pamphlet. It was at this point that I had a most memorable experience. I hadn't been reading the pamphlet more than sixty seconds before I became entranced and lost all consciousness of what was going on around me. I became so absorbed that the minutes sped by. When I was approximately halfway through it, something from the outside interrupted my concentration. I looked out the window and then into the rearview mirror. Shocked, I saw that tears were streaming down my cheeks. I couldn't understand what was happening, but I resumed reading and finished the pamphlet without further interruption. However, the tears were still there.

At this point my parents came back and, seeing me in tears, apologized for having been gone so long. They thought I was afraid. As hard as it was for me to let them think my tears resulted from fear, it was easier than to try to explain what had happened. I didn't know what had happened.

It was a long time before I comprehended that I had received an undeniable testimony, at ten years of age, that the Joseph Smith story was true. I didn't hear voices, see angels, or anything like that. What I felt was much stronger. A sixth sense had been touched. I felt elation springing forth from the most inner part of my being, a source protected from the onslaught of deceiving and contriving men—a source that resonates only when touched by the vibration of the Holy Ghost.

Ever since this experience, I have not accepted the enticing, intellectual, ear-tickling debate of the adversary. I have been out-debated on occasions by opponents of the Church, but never converted to their points of view. Even at times when my actions have prevented my feeling the promptings of the Spirit, the memory of how the Spirit feels has kept me from making improper eternal decisions, no matter how enticing they may have appeared. At times when I have felt unworthy to have the Spirit constantly with me, I have thanked and praised God for the memory of those feelings. Because of those memories, I have always known I could never make incorrect decisions that would have permanent, lasting effects. I have always longed to "come home."

I have some friends who might be considered inactive in the Church. Most of them have been born and raised in the Church and exposed to spiritual experiences. Many of them, because of bad habits, don't feel comfortable in formal church settings, but if someone is in need, they are among the first to help. Some of them are occasionally critical of policies and personalities in the Church (which may be their most damaging bad habit), and they will tease me in a good-natured way about my "fanaticism." However, if someone else starts to criticize the Mormons, watch out! They are like a mother grizzly bear defending her cubs. During their life they may have been offended by certain individuals, or they may have transgressed the Lord's commandments and feel unworthy of the Spirit. But deep down they have beautiful feelings about the Church—and, more importantly, they know by the witness of the Spirit that Joseph Smith restored the gospel to the earth and is a prophet of God.

Some time ago I visited with a young woman I had known at a former place of employment. I didn't know she was a Latter-day Saint because I had never heard her mention the Church except in a negative way. On this occasion, after she again criticized the Church, she began asking questions. I answered them as best I could and then added, "It's true, you know. All of it." This seemingly hardened young woman began to cry and said, "I know the Church is true, but I'm not strong enough to do anything about it." Despite her current life-style, the Spirit witnessed again what she had felt at other times. It was unmistakable. I told her what I would say to anyone who may be in a similar circumstance: "Yes you are! The Lord will give you all the strength you need if you will just reach out. Come back. We need you."

A firm testimony is reached when one recognizes the still small voice for what it really is. Once this happens, the commonplace feelings of the Spirit one has experienced throughout his life take upon themselves a very uncommon importance. As we recognize those feelings for what they are, our trust in them increases, and as we exercise faith and live the gospel more precisely, they become stronger. Soon we find that we have developed a sixth sense with which we can test the truth of all things. In addition to sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste, we can obtain a spiritual feeling that cannot be misled.

Through the sixth sense, we can prove the truth of all things. It will never lie and is never wrong. What does it feel like? It is as difficult to describe as the scent of a rose or the song of a bird or the beauty of a landscape.

The scriptures give us some insights into these feelings. One of the best descriptions of what I felt that day after visiting Temple Square and then reading Joseph Smith's testimony is this passage:

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy; and then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive." (D&C 11:13-14.)

As a ten-year-old boy in front of Walgreen's Drugstore, I felt joy. Even though many in our society teach that big boys don't cry, I could not hold back the tears springing forth from a water line that burst when the Spirit connected with the depths of my soul.

In an explanation to Oliver Cowdery about how he could tell when he had found the truth, the Lord said, "If it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right." (D&C 9:8.)

Sometimes the feeling is one of peace. The Lord reminded Oliver of this kind of experience: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, if you desire a further witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things. Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:22-23.)

As inconsistent as it sounds, feeling and hearing the still small voice can shake us to the center. "Yea, thus saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake." (D&C 85:6.)

The voice of an angel has had a similar effect. In the Book of Mormon we read about one such experience: "And it came to pass when they heard this voice, and beheld that it was not a voice of thunder, neither was it a voice of a great tumultuous noise, but behold, it was a still voice of perfect mildness, as if it had been a whisper, and it did pierce even to the very soul." (Helaman 5:30.)

A witness of the Spirit sometimes feels like the recalling of a pleasant memory. This is because we knew the gospel once, in our premortal life. President Marion G. Romney once described this form of personal witness: "Man is a dual being. He is composed of a spirit and a body of flesh and bones. His body came into being with his entrance into this world of mortality. His spirit as an individual person was begotten unto God in the spirit world. Through a long period of growth and development, each person's spirit came to know God and spiritual things, including the gospel, obedience to which is a prerequisite to attaining eternal life. Men, however, enter mortality spiritually blind. Never in this life do they recover memory of premortal spiritual things. What they here learn of them must be revealed anew. . . .

"Notwithstanding the fact that during their mortal lives men do not remember anything about their premortal experiences, there still persists in the spirit of every human soul a residuum from his premortal life which instinctively responds to the voice of the Spirit of Christ." (Look to God and Live, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971, pp. 66-67.)

Some truths are revealed gradually over a period of days, weeks, months, or even years. We have to be patient and wait for the witness to come. Alma taught: "Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me." (Alma 32:28.)

While these scriptures help our understanding, they fall short because some things can be communicated only spirit to spirit. Although we may not be able to explain the feeling once we have felt it, we cannot deny it. Even as I write these words and review these scriptures, I feel the undeniable witness of the truthfulness of the gospel and am very thankful for it.

You might pause and reflect on what you are feeling right now. I am assuming that you are with me and are feeling that "burning in your bosom." Why? Because what you have read are simple truths, and the Spirit has carried those words into your heart. In spite of the form, the Spirit bears witness of the substance. If you do not feel a witness, or at least do not recognize it for what it is, let me digress long enough to give you some encouragement to keep trying.

The first thing to do is examine your life and see if there is anything out of harmony with the teachings of the Church. Transgression can seriously clog the spiritual lines of communication. If you will make an honest effort to rid yourself of those things, you will be surprised how fast the lines are cleared. Once you have done that, pray to your Father in Heaven fervently that you may know for yourself the truthfulness of the Joseph Smith story and the Book of Mormon, the reality of a living prophet today, and the reality of Jesus Christ, His mission, and the consequence of that mission to you personally.

The question about Joseph Smith is simple. He is either a prophet of God or he is a fraud. It is black or white, with no room for gray. He either saw God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, or it is a lie. One might argue that Joseph thought he saw a vision and, therefore, he isn't really a perpetrator of falsehood so much as one who has been misled by either his imaginative mind or the adversary. But that avoids the issue.

What about the Book of Mormon? It is tangible and it can be read. Again, there is no room for gray. Joseph Smith either translated it from ancient tablets or he didn't. It's as clear as that.

If you doubt the authenticity of Joseph Smith's vision but believe in a Supreme Being who cares about our welfare and the truth we are seeking, we have some common ground. Would God want us to know if He did or did not speak to Joseph Smith, and if He did or did not have an angel deliver to Joseph the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated? If this is true, He would make it possible for us to know for ourselves. If it is not true, surely He would not leave us in the dark, following incorrect doctrine. Hence, the promise in the Book of Mormon: "And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moroni 10:4.)

Those who are honest in heart, if they are willing to study, pray, and put living the commandments to the test, have relatively little trouble receiving a witness that Jesus is the Christ and that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God and was the vehicle through whom the Lord restored the gospel in this dispensation. They may also receive a witness that succeeding prophets received and continue to receive revelation from the Lord. However, it is much harder for us to have confidence in our own ability to receive revelation. A partial explanation of this phenomenon is that we are so well aware of our own imperfections.

On April 5, 1985, when I received my call to serve as the second counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, I had not been a regional representative, mission president, stake president, or bishop. I had recently been released as second counselor in our ward bishopric. I knew the Church is true and that we have a living prophet on the earth today, but I didn't know nor could I comprehend why the Lord would call me to this position.

I went to him in prayer and received that same joy I received in my parents' car outside Temple Square thirty-five years earlier relative to the reality of the Joseph Smith story. I knew that the Lord had initiated the call even though I could not comprehend why. This type of personal revelation is available to everyone. It comes as a result of worthiness, not office.
