Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

2

Balancing Intellectual with Spiritual Testimony

Once we have received a witness of the Spirit that the Church is true, we need to move on to learning how we can let that same Spirit become a personal guide. It is extremely important that we gain the confidence and faith that we are individually, personally, guided in our lives by that same Spirit which testified to the divinity of Jesus Christ and the truthfulness of the Church. Sometimes our confidence in our ability to receive revelation suffers because we have on occasion misunderstood the Spirit, and we can't figure out what is wrong.

One of the most common mistakes we make is in not paying the intellectual price to justify a confirmation of the Spirit. The opposite is also a problem, because nothing in the gospel can be understood or reasoned out by the intellect alone. How can we avoid relying too much on our intellectual powers while ignoring the Spirit, or expecting spiritual solutions while ignoring our own power to reason things out for ourselves?

Our objective is to reach an elusive balance between two extremes.

On one side of the spectrum are those who tend to trust only in the intellect and thus feel little need to call upon the Lord. Such individuals prefer to be independent and free in their thinking and not tied to the absolute truths of the gospel. They may spend their lives chasing down every intellectual loose end. They take counsel from general or local Church leaders with a grain of salt because, after all, the knowledge of such authorities is minimal when compared to that which so-called scholars have amassed.

The other end of the spectrum may present an even greater threat to the rank-and-file membership of the Church. People on this end of the spectrum think something like this: "I know the Church is true and I have received the gift of the Holy Ghost. I am a worthy member of the Church and, therefore, have access to the Spirit." When faced with a problem they will pray for an answer and then canonize the first thought that comes to mind. I believe that an idea or solution that comes without appropriate reasoning is nothing better than a hunch. There are times of instant inspiration, but they are rare and usually involve an emergency.

Remember what the Lord told Oliver Cowdery when Oliver failed in his attempt to translate the Book of Mormon: "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought." (D&C 9:7-9.)

Of this scripture Elder Bruce R. McConkie commented: "Implicit in asking in faith is the precedent requirement that we do everything in our power to accomplish the goal that we seek. We use the agency with which we have been endowed. We use every faculty and capacity and ability that we possess to bring about the eventuality that may be involved. . . . There's a fine balance between agency and inspiration." (Speeches of the Year: BYU Devotional Addresses, 1972-1973, pp. 110, 113.)

President Romney put it this way: "When confronted with a problem I prayerfully weigh in my mind alternative solutions and come to a conclusion as to which of them is best. Then in prayer I submit to the Lord my problem, tell him I desire to make the right choice, what is, in my judgment, the right course. Then I ask him if I have made the right decision to give me the burning in my bosom that He promised Oliver Cowdery. . . . When we learn to distinguish between the inspiration that comes from the Spirit of the Lord and that which comes from our own uninspired hopes and desires, we need make no mistakes." (New Era, October 1975, p. 35.)

This doctrine is so simple and straightforward that we might feel guilty admitting we have difficulty with its application. How do we determine when we have done enough homework and, consequently, we have a right to a spiritual confirmation? How can we become masters at knowing when we have received a spiritual witness?

There is a sentence used in church circles that sends a chill up my spine. It is a perfectly good sentence and packs a spiritual wallop when used by someone who has been acted upon by the Spirit, but unfortunately it is used too often by those who have wandered off center in the spectrum. The sentence is this: "I feel really good about it." Every time I hear it, I see a red flag go up. It is a perfectly good way of expressing a feeling of the Spirit, but too often the literal translation is, "I haven't done my homework." Some bad decisions have been made by people who "feel really good" about something they have failed to reason out in their minds.

Several years ago I learned a great lesson while laboring as the managing director of the Church's Welfare Services Department. We were at a critical stage in the history of Church welfare, and it was time to go through an agonizing reappraisal of the program in light of current world conditions.

After praying for a solution to the problems we faced, I had a terrific thought: Glenn, you have access to the Quorum of the Twelve and to a member of the First Presidency. What a resource! I called for appointments and met individually with these great men. I poured out my concerns and added my feeling that we were at a stage where further revelation on the subject was necessary. Then I sat back with my pen and yellow notepad and waited for pearls of wisdom. I was devastated when their collective counsel amounted to this: "Brother Pace, we commend you for your concern and conscientiousness in finding solutions to these weighty matters. We, too, have some deep concerns and anxieties, and you are absolutely right—we do need revelation. Now, go get it!"

Who, me? I was an employee of the Church, not a General Authority. However, I had been taught that I had the responsibility to take to the Brethren well-thought-out recommendations that could be confirmed, modified, or rejected in the appropriate forums. It was my obligation and right to receive inspiration. And I knew that inspiration would come only after intense, agonizing study, research, and meditation. In other words, I learned that revelation is 95 percent hard work.

We can learn from President Spencer W. Kimball's experience in receiving the revelation on the priesthood. He used both intellectual and spiritual faculties prior to receiving that revelation. He explained the process:

"As you know, on the ninth of June a policy was changed that affects great numbers of people throughout the world. Millions and millions of people will be affected by the revelation which came. I remember very vividly that day after day I walked to the temple and ascended to the fourth floor where we have our solemn assemblies and where we have our meetings of the Twelve and the First Presidency. After everybody had gone out of the temple, I knelt and prayed. I prayed with much fervency. I knew that something was before us that was extremely important to many of the children of God. I knew that we could receive the revelations of the Lord only by being worthy and ready for them and ready to accept them and put them into place. Day after day I went alone and with great solemnity and seriousness in the upper rooms of the temple, and there I offered my soul and my efforts to go forward with the program. I wanted to do what he wanted. I talked about it to him and told him, 'Lord, I want only what is right. We are not making any plans to be spectacularly moving. We want only the thing that thou dost want, and we want it when you want it and not until.'

"We met with the Council of the Twelve Apostles, time after time, in the holy room where there is a picture of the Savior in many different moods and also pictures of all the Presidents of the Church. Finally we had the feeling and the impression from the Lord, who made it very clear to us, that this was the thing to do to make the gospel universal to all worthy people." (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982, pp. 450-51.)

President Kimball had to use every intellectual faculty at his disposal prior to receiving a spiritual witness.

In receiving personal revelation, we must not depend entirely on our own intellect. We can learn much from the problems the Church went through concerning some false historical documents a few years ago. The lessons on straying off center are vivid. To those who may lean toward this end of the spectrum, I would ask a soul-searching question: ''Would the discovery of any document, no matter how contradictory to what you believe to be true, shake your testimony?" The discovery might raise some intellectual questions, but if it shakes a person's testimony, I would submit that that person really doesn't have one. Those who rely entirely on intellect may point at those whose testimony cannot and will not be shaken and accuse them of blind faith. The very fact that they would make such an accusation suggests they have not yet learned there is an avenue to truth greater than intellect and more certain than the five senses. They have left unexplored the most glorious of all avenues to truth—direct revelation from heaven.

On this subject, George Q. Cannon said: "We are asked whether it is possible for a man, by means of his five senses alone independent of the Holy Ghost, to know that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of the living God. . . .

"To begin with the perfect use of our senses is only given to us by the aid of the Spirit of God and the light that cometh from Him; and while it is possible for men to reason upon various subjects and satisfy their minds concerning truth, still the highest testimony that a human being can have respecting Joseph Smith being a Prophet or of our Lord Jesus being the Savior is the testimony of the Holy Ghost. The Lord has given light and intelligence to His children by means of which they are able to arrive at a knowledge concerning many things. This is done through the instrumentality of the Spirit of God. Men can satisfy themselves that Jesus is the Savior of the world by reasoning upon it and adducing evidences that are open to the outer senses, and yet they cannot reach such a conclusion without the aid of the Spirit of God. Paul says: 'No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.' (1 Corinthians 12:3.) The same may be said in relation to the knowledge of Joseph Smith being a Prophet of God.

"For a man to say he knows a spiritual truth by the aid of his outer senses, is a rash and ill-considered expression, and it should not give rise to discussion." (Gospel Truth, Deseret Book, 1987, pp. 270-71.)

Does all this mean we should not pursue knowledge with our five senses? Should we not study history? I love Church history. I am thankful we know the location of the Sacred Grove, the Hill Cumorah, the site for the temple in Jackson County, Nauvoo, Adam-ondi-Ahman, Liberty Jail, and other Church sites. My joy when visiting these areas is intensified by knowing what took place there. However, the most lasting impressions obtained by these visits is what is felt there rather than what is remembered.

On one occasion, my wife and I visited some of these sites. Two experiences come to mind that are relevant to this search for balance. In Jackson County we sat on the lawn at sunset within the boundaries of the future Jackson County temple. We talked of history and of prophecies of the future. But what we remember most vividly is the sweet, peaceful, spiritual witness that Jesus Christ stands at the head of His church today and that Joseph Smith is what he claimed to be, a prophet of God.

No amount of historical research alone could bring to pass that spiritual witness. It comes only when we become attuned and learn to recognize spiritual things. However, the spiritual witness was intensified by our knowledge of what has happened there in Jackson County and what will yet happen there. That evening we found the elusive balance.

The next day we strayed off center. We went to Adam-ondi-Ahman, part of a sacred past and destined to be included in a sacred future. Knowing this history helped us understand the significance of the land. We had a history book that told of an altar of Adam and of the Nephites and that even gave the exact location. We did not know at the time that subsequent research has given rise to some questions on the exact location of the altar. We arrived one hour before sunset, and in our search for the precise location as described in that book, we drove to and fro, becoming more frustrated by the minute. We climbed over fences, walked through fields, stampeded cattle, and soon found ourselves in a very vile mood.

Fortunately, we came to our senses and drove to a knoll just in time to watch the sunset and enjoy the spirit of the place. Again, the Lord blessed us with a spiritual experience we can recall vividly.

Often we see people becoming so involved in the search for historical and archeological details that they fail to take advantage of spiritual experiences right before their eyes. The same historical knowledge that can intensify spiritual experiences can destroy spirituality when one strays too far off center. A complete testimony was never intended to be gained through history or other scholarly source except that which has been kept by prophets and that which comes forth as scripture. A saving testimony will never come from a spectacular historical or archeological find.

If the Lord meant for our testimonies to be based on physical, historical evidence rather than scripture—if we needed to have such evidence to validate our testimonies, rather than relying on faith and inspiration—He could certainly give us such evidence. To illustrate, while I was on my mission, the question I dreaded most was, "Where are the golden plates today?" I did not enjoy the looks my companion and I got when we answered, "The angel took them back." I didn't comprehend then what I know now. If we had been able to take Moroni and the plates from door to door, the number of converts would not have increased. Without a confirmation of the Spirit, they would not have believed or would have found some way to explain away what they were seeing.

Remember what the Lord told Joseph Smith regarding Martin Harris's desire to see the plates: "Behold, if they will not believe my words, they would not believe you, my servant Joseph, if it were possible that you should show them all these things which I have committed unto you." (D&C 5:7.)

The only way to gain a testimony is through the way given in the promise of Moroni. Spiritual manifestations are generally reserved for those who are spiritually mature, not just as a reward for faith, but also to assure that sacred things are not mocked. A person must become adept at recognizing the Spirit before a spiritual manifestation can be a sanctifying experience. Numerous examples in the scriptures show how pointless a physical manifestation can be without the accompanying receipt of the witness of the Holy Ghost. Conversion does not come by physical manifestations from heaven.

Laman and Lemuel observed many miraculous manifestations such as this one recorded by their brother Nephi: "After the angel had spoken unto us, he departed. And after the angel had departed, Laman and Lemuel again began to murmur, saying: How is it possible that the Lord will deliver Laban into our hands? Behold, he is a mighty man, and he can command fifty, yea, even he can slay fifty; then why not us?" Nephi couldn't believe what his brothers were saying. He responded, "Ye also know that an angel hath spoken unto you; wherefore can ye doubt?" (1 Nephi 3:30-31; 4:3.) Here we have an example of knowledge being of no eternal value because the Spirit was absent.

Nephi later put his finger on Laman and Lemuel's problem: "Ye are swift to do iniquity but slow to remember the Lord your God. Ye have seen an angel, and he spake unto you; yea, ye have heard his voice from time to time; and he hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling." (1 Nephi 17:45.)

Even in heavenly manifestations we must acquire the ability to recognize the Spirit and feel as well as see and hear the experience. Were it not so, Satan could thoroughly confuse us with his own demonstrations. Despite all the spectacular manifestations received by the Nephites and Lamanites at the birth of the Savior, within a short time doubts crept into the minds of those who were not converted. "The people began to forget those signs and wonders which they had heard, and began to be less and less astonished at a sign or a wonder from heaven, insomuch that they began to be hard in their hearts, and blind in their minds, and began to disbelieve all which they had heard and seen—imagining up some vain thing in their hearts, that it was wrought by men and by the power of the devil, to lead away and deceive the hearts of the people." (3 Nephi 2:1-2.)

If a witness of the Spirit is necessary to discern the validity of a visit by an angel, how very vital that witness is in more subtle situations.

While we should constantly improve our scholarship on every wholesome subject, it is not necessary to reserve judgment on the reality of the complete gospel until all the evidence is in. To do so would be to stumble through life with so much uncertainty that the gospel could not begin to have a personal effect on us, and the whole plan of the gospel would be frustrated as far as our personal life is concerned. We must accept the premise that when all of the data are in, every gospel principle will be proven scientifically sound.

We all bump into some intellectual stumbling blocks. We see some of them disappear as we gain spiritual and intellectual maturity, while others seem to remain with us. However, once we have received that witness, to refuse to accept the gospel as being true because we do not have answers to all of our intellectual questions would be like refusing to believe that the Savior raised Lazarus from the dead because we cannot figure out what scientific process took place to restore life.
