Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

4

Criticism and Critics

Nothing squelches the Spirit more than for an individual, after once having received a witness of the truthfulness of the gospel, to allow questions to turn into doubts, doubts into frustration, and frustration into criticism of the Lord's anointed. Sometimes criticism comes as a result of members feeling they must justify our beliefs to the pointing fingers and mocking voices coming from "the great and spacious building" that Lehi saw in vision:

"After they had partaken of the fruit of the tree they did cast their eyes about as if they were ashamed. And I also cast my eyes round about, and beheld, on the other side of the river of water, a great and spacious building; and it stood as it were in the air, high above the earth. And it was filled with people, both old and young, both male and female; and their manner of dress was exceedingly fine; and they were in the attitude of mocking and pointing their fingers towards those who had come at and were partaking of the fruit. And after they had tasted of the fruit they were ashamed, because of those that were scoffing at them; and they fell away into forbidden paths and were lost." (1 Nephi 8:25-28.)

To a certain degree, we are all somewhat susceptible to pressures around us.

One day when one of my sons bade me farewell as he left for high school, I noticed he had forgotten to tie his shoelaces. For a fleeting second I was tempted to turn the moment into the major crisis of the week, but, thankfully, I let it pass.

A few days later at a school function I observed, to my amazement, that the shoelaces of all of the young men were untied. I then realized my son had fallen victim to another fad. I think it was in this same year that I found out it was no longer socially acceptable to go to school with boots, gloves, or ear muffs.

Sometimes we appear to be enslaved by fads and trends in society. Some are good. Some are silly but harmless. Others can be detrimental to our physical or spiritual health. It never ceases to amaze me how some members of the Church are so sensitive to pressure from a world that has no spiritual perspective whatsoever.

Knowing that the shortest distance from the world to the celestial kingdom is a straight line, the Lord has restored His gospel, which contains the truth and guidance we need in order to make the journey as smooth as possible. We can avoid unnecessary detours by reading the scriptures and listening to the Lord's anointed prophets. As the Church holds firm to the traditional values taught by prophets of previous dispensations and reaffirmed by our modern-day prophets, the pointing finger of a failing society seems to be regularly aimed at us. One can hardly get through a day without hearing some form of criticism about the Church. The criticism comes from three groups: nonmembers, former members, and current members.

Teasing and criticism from nonmembers are often harmless. In fact, such comments can help keep us on our toes. Occasionally we need to step back and look at ourselves from a nonmember's perspective. Really, to them don't we sometimes appear to be just a little bit strange? Imagine yourself coming into a Mormon community for the first time and hearing talk about gold plates, an angel named Moroni, and baptisms for the dead. Imagine seeing, for the first time, nine children and two beleaguered parents in a beat-up station wagon with a bumper sticker reading "Families are forever." The puzzled nonmember doesn't know if this is a boast or a complaint. And where do these families go to church? A stake house. We may truly seem strange to nonmembers—until they get to know us.

In this regard, my counsel to members would be to relax, lighten up, mellow out, and not get so huffy. While the gospel is sacred and serious, sometimes we take ourselves a little too seriously. A sense of humor, especially about ourselves, is an attribute worthy of development. But we should not allow the teasing and questions to derail us from the knowledge we have received from the witness of the Spirit, and to sidetrack us into endless, meaningless debate.

Some criticisms of nonmembers may be a little more painful—criticism always hurts most when we deserve it. For example, it may be aimed at active Latter-day Saints who don't live up to what they have been taught and who may be condescending, intolerant, or clannish. Such characteristics strike at the very heart of the second great commandment, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:39.) One can be a friend to all without participating in all of their activities. How shortsighted we are if we place denominational limits on our friendships. How sad it is if we rob ourselves by making our friendship contingent upon another's willingness to listen to the first missionary discussion. We would eliminate the most painful criticism from responsible nonmembers by simply internalizing our testimonies and living what the Spirit has witnessed to us.

The second category of critics is comprised of former members who have become disenchanted with the Church but who are obsessed with making vicious and vile attacks upon it. Most members and nonmembers alike see such attacks for what they really are. What credibility can possibly be given to a person who mocks beliefs held sacred by another? Anyone who would resort to such attacks unwittingly discloses his or her true character, or lack of the same. As Latter-day Saints, we are appalled by such attacks. We would hope that they would make us more sensitive to the sacred beliefs of others and careful not to make light of those beliefs. We should waste no time in defending ourselves from those who have chosen to listen to a voice of the adversary.

In addition to attacking our sacred beliefs, some former members speak evil of the Brethren. Joseph Smith received his share of this kind of criticism from the dissidents of his day. The Lord's revelation to him is applicable to us today: "Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith the Lord, and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned before me, saith the Lord, but have done that which was meet in mine eyes, and which I commanded them. But those who cry transgression do it because they are the servants of sin, and are the children of disobedience themselves." (D&C 121:16-17.)

It seems that history continues to teach us: You can leave the Church, but you can't leave it alone. The basic reason for this is simple. Once someone has received a witness of the Spirit and accepted it, that person leaves neutral ground. People can lose their testimonies only by listening to the promptings of the evil one, and Satan's goal is not complete when such individuals leave the Church, but only when they come out in open rebellion against it.

The third source of criticism is within the Church itself. This kind of criticism is more lethal than that which comes from nonmembers and former members. The danger lies not in what might come from members who are critical, but in the chance that we might join them with our own criticisms. Nothing will destroy a testimony faster than for a person to openly rebel or criticize the Lord's anointed.

Member critics testify that they know the gospel is true but they believe the Brethren are just a little out of touch. Out of touch with what? Don't confuse a decision to abstain from participating in a trend in society with a lack of awareness about its existence. These Brethren "prove all things" and "hold fast that which is good." (1 Thessalonians 5:21.) To accomplish this, they are in constant touch with Him who created this earth and knows the world from beginning to end.

I am amazed at the egotism of those members who suggest that without debate on certain issues, the prophet would not know what questions to ask the Lord. Regarding those who feel inclined to steady the ark, President Joseph F. Smith said: "It is very unfortunate for a man to be taken in this snare; for be it understood by the Latter-day Saints that as long as the servants of God are living pure lives, are honoring the Priesthood conferred upon them, and endeavoring to the best of their knowledge to magnify their offices and callings, to which they have been duly chosen by the voice of the people and the priesthood, and sanctioned by the approval of God, so long as the Lord has any communication to make to the children of men, or any instructions to impart to his Church, he will make such communication through the legally appointed channel of the priesthood; he will never go outside of it, as long, at least, as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints exists in its present form on the earth." (Gospel Doctrine, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986, p. 41.)

On the same subject, Elder John A. Widtsoe said: "There are many attacks by the evil one upon a weakening testimony. Commonly, a feeling of superiority, ending in ambition for office, overshadows all else and leads to testimony starvation. Personal ambition has always been a destructive force in human lives. Sometimes, and closely related to the feeling of superiority, [there] are false interpretations of scripture. These rise to such magnitude, though at variance with accepted, revealed doctrine, that they endanger the spiritual life of the individual. The various cults that arise, like mushrooms, from time to time, are but variations of this manner of destroying a testimony. They can always be recognized, for they are in opposition to some principle or regulation of the Church.

"Most frequently, however, the loss of a testimony is due to finding fault with one's fellow believers, and with the leadership of the Church. Every action of bishop, stake president, or General Authority seems wrong, to such unfortunate people. Their vision distorts the world and all in it." (Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 40.)

Some Latter-day Saints practice selective obedience. A prophet is not one who displays a smorgasbord of truth from which we are free to pick and choose. However, some persons become critical and suggest that the prophet should change the menu. A prophet doesn't take a poll to see which way the wind of public opinion is blowing. He reveals the will of the Lord to us. The world is full of deteriorating churches whose leaders have succumbed to public opinion and have become more dedicated to tickling the ears of their members than obeying the laws of God.

In the early days of the Restoration, some converts wanted to bring a few of their previous beliefs into the Church with them. Our problem today is with members who seem vulnerable to the trends in society (and the pointing fingers that attend them) and want the Church to change its position to accommodate them. The doctrinal grass on the other side of the fence looks very green to them.

The Lord's counsel in 1831 is relevant today: "Behold, I say unto you, that they desire to know the truth in part, but not all, for they are not right before me and must needs repent." (D&C 49:2.) We need to accept the full truth, "put on the whole armour of God" (Ephesians 6:11), and get to work building up the kingdom.
