Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

5

Making Our Commitment

A time must come in our lives when we make a basic decision. Is the gospel true? Yes! Then let's get on with what is expected of us. We might also ask ourselves, Do I contribute in a positive way toward the building up of the kingdom?

A testimony is serious business. Once we have it, we need to do something about it. I would remind you that the first plateau is only the beginning. It is kindergarten. We need to get on to graduate school. Too many of us view the obtaining and retaining of a testimony as our ultimate goal. If we find that our testimony is fading, we tend to immerse ourselves in studying, praying, and serving until we once again feel that familiar spirit, and then we rejoice in the fact that our testimony has come back. At that point, rather than lying down in the flowers of the first plateau and taking a nap, we should resolve to do more and prepare to move on to the next plateau.

In the mission field, my companion and I were teaching a Harvard University student. After we told him the Joseph Smith story and bore our testimonies to him, as we had done many times before, he said, "Wait a minute. Are you telling me you believe God and Christ appeared to Joseph Smith and told him he was to set up a new church?" We said we did believe that. He continued the interrogation: "You also believe an angel gave plates to Joseph Smith, who translated them into the Book of Mormon, and that the Savior appeared to the people on this continent?" We said we did. "You also believe the president of your church is a prophet who receives revelation from God, as did Adam, Noah, and Abraham?" We said we did. Getting more animated by the minute, the investigator said, "That is the most incredible story I have ever heard. If I really believed all of that, I wouldn't be able to sleep. I would run down the streets screaming it to everyone. Why aren't you more excited about it?" That was a penetrating question.

Do you have a testimony? What are you doing about it? As the Harvard student implied, a testimony is not enough. A testimony that Joseph Smith saw God and the Savior is meaningless unless that fact begins to mean something to each of us individually.

A few years ago I was going through a much needed spiritual renaissance. As part of that rejuvenation I read two sets of books on the history of the Church: A Comprehensive History of the Church, by B. H. Roberts, and History of the Church, by Joseph Smith. These sets consist of a total of thirteen volumes, and it took me approximately two years to read them. In the course of my reading, I found myself absolutely captivated by Joseph Smith—emotionally, intellectually, and spiritually. As I read the revelations he received and the letters written by him and to him and about him, I gained a great testimony of the divinity of his mission here upon the earth.

I once again received an undeniable testimony, just as I had at ten years of age. However, at age thirty-five I was better able to appreciate what the Prophet accomplished in his thirty-eight years. I caught myself wishing I had been born during his ministry. As I read about the dissenters and traitors, I wondered why I could not have been born then instead of now. After all, he needed all of the help he could get, and I would not have betrayed him. If I had been born then, I would have done everything in my power to help him with the work. But then I asked myself: Are you sure? Are you sure you would have been valiant? You would have given your life for Joseph Smith, but what are you doing for the prophet and president of the Church today? You would die for Joseph Smith, but you are not willing to accept a home teaching assignment to visit more than two families.

Why do we sometimes find it easier to accept and follow past prophets? It is partly because history has proven their counsel to be sound. Future generations will find the same to be true of the prophets of our day. Each of us might ask ourselves, What am I doing for our current, living prophet?

As I finished reading those histories of the Church, I came to a realization, as powerful as my testimony of Joseph Smith, on this issue. I was allowed to see into my own soul deeply enough to recognize the following: If, by some miracle, the Lord changed my place in time and I found myself living in Nauvoo at the time Joseph was there, how valiant would I have been? A witness of the Spirit gave me an answer I didn't like, but I knew it was true at that point in my life. I received the conviction that with my current spiritual quotient, I would not have been valiant had I been with Joseph. This was a devastating revelation to me.

This experience taught me firsthand that a testimony is not enough. I had just finished thirteen volumes about the life of Joseph Smith and I knew he was a prophet, but I wasn't doing much about it. Therefore, I realized, the gospel was not changing my life. I decided right then that I was going to be more submissive to what the Lord would have me do now, in this period of time, inasmuch as this is when He chose to have me come to the earth. In effect, I laid everything on the altar. The gospel is true. What would the Lord have me do about it?

Since being called to my current assignment in the Church, I have learned another lesson relative to living the gospel today as opposed to dreaming about how I would have lived it in the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Soon after my call, I was assigned to visit conferences at the Rochester New York Stake and the Rochester New York Palmyra Stake, both of which would be held on the same weekend. I was excited with the possibility of going to the Hill Cumorah, the Sacred Grove, and other sites in our early Church history. I had seen these places before but not since this call. To do so, I would have to leave a day early, on Thursday rather than Friday afternoon. That would be all right—except that the Presiding Bishopric meets with the First Presidency at eight o'clock every Friday morning. However, since I would be attending almost twice the usual number of meetings on my assignment, I reasoned that I should leave earlier. With this rationalization, I left Thursday afternoon and arrived in Rochester late that night.

Early Friday morning I went to the Sacred Grove and walked straight up the path. As I entered the grove I noticed that I was alone. It was March 29, 1986, a day similar to that day in the spring of 1820 when Joseph Smith had entered the grove: "a beautiful, clear day." (JS-H 1:14.)

As I sat down and read the Joseph Smith story, I experienced basically what I had hoped for—a beautiful feeling of the reality of the events as recorded by Joseph. I thought how sacred this ground was, and the thought came to my mind: If Joseph were allowed to come to the Sacred Grove today and to sit down on the log next to me, what would he tell me? In the Doctrine and Covenants we read how the Lord sometimes told Joseph, in essence, "Tell my servant Sidney Rigdon to do this," and "Tell my servant Oliver Cowdery to do that." If Joseph were allowed to come and give me a revelation, I wondered, what would it be? "Tell my servant Glenn Pace to . . ."

Then I received a message, one that I will try to put in scriptural language, although it is not scripture except to me. It was something like this: "Why seek ye the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove this morning when, at this very hour, before the Prophet Ezra Taft Benson sits your empty chair?"

This was a sobering thought! I realized that it is easy to get caught up in history and even in the beauty of what it feels like to have a testimony and let it end there. A testimony becomes meaningful only when it leads to action—to living the gospel.

In summary, it is incumbent upon every member of the Church to obtain a testimony of the gospel. We cannot move forward to the next plateau on the testimony of another person. Obtaining a testimony is relatively easy for an honest seeker of the truth, for by studying, praying, and living gospel principles, each one has access to the undeniable witness of the Spirit.

Retaining a testimony is a little harder because once we have received a witness, we must do something about it. Many individuals who receive a testimony become lost along the way because they wander into forbidden paths. Others fail to continue progressing spiritually because they cling to their own abilities and will not make a leap of faith. Still others fail to use their own innate abilities and wait to be miraculously carried to a greater vista without exerting any effort of their own. Either of the latter groups can become disenchanted and frustrated. As a result, they can drift into sitting on the sidelines and criticizing those who are using their best spiritual and physical attributes to move the kingdom forward.

The time must come when each of us will accept the reality of the Restoration and get on with it. This may mean we have to withhold judgment on some intellectual questions. It means we must overlook weaknesses in others who may be presiding over us on all levels, local or general.

How tragic it will be if we don't each come to grips with our own personal potential and learn the role the Lord has in mind for us. How sad if we waste one more day with a lack of commitment and not meet the measure of our creation. When we genuinely lay everything on the altar, an illumination follows that helps us understand what our role is to be in building God's kingdom today. When we accept the gospel as being a reality and lay our all on the altar, we are ready to move on to greater heights. Join me in the next section as we get up and leave the rest, relaxation, and beauty of the first plateau and begin our climb to the joys received on the second plateau. A testimony is simply not enough.
