Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

Second Plateau:

Sanctification

6

What Does Sanctification Mean?

If we are not careful, we can make the obtaining and retaining of a testimony our whole objective. Once they have obtained a testimony, many people have a tendency to relax until they start to feel it slip; then they put forth additional effort in studying and praying. When they feel that familiar spirit once more, they breathe a sigh of relief and say to themselves, "Thank heavens, it's back"—and they begin to relax again. This cycle can repeat itself over and over again until they realize that a testimony is not the objective. Perfection and, consequently, exaltation is the goal toward which we should all be working.

A testimony that Joseph Smith saw God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, is only the beginning. What is important is what the Restoration means to you and me personally and individually, not the fact that we know that a third party, Joseph Smith, actually saw Deity. We have to arrive at that stage quickly so that the teachings of the gospel and its importance to us can begin to take deep root in our lives.

I have chosen to call the second plateau sanctification. Other names that might be used are purification, the mighty change, born again, or even converted.

President Marion G. Romney distinguished the difference between converted (born again) and having a testimony as follows:

"Webster says the verb convert means 'to turn from one belief or course to another'; that conversion is 'a spiritual and moral change attending a change of belief with conviction.' As used in the scriptures, converted generally implies not merely mental acceptance of Jesus and his teaching, but also a motivating faith in him and in his gospel—a faith which works a transformation, an actual change, in one's understanding of life's meaning and in his allegiance to God—in interest, in thought, and in conduct. While conversion may be accomplished in stages, one is not really converted in the full sense of the term unless and until he is at heart a new person. Born again is the scriptural term.

"In one who is wholly converted, desire for things inimical to the gospel of Jesus Christ has actually died, and substituted therefor is a love of God with a fixed and controlling determination to keep his commandments. . . .

"From some of the Savior's sayings, it would seem that there might even be people in high places whose conversion is not complete. For example, conversing with his apostles at his last supper, he said to Peter, 'Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.' (Luke 22:31-32.)

"From this it would appear that membership in the Church and conversion are not necessarily synonymous. Being converted, as we are here using the term, and having a testimony are not necessarily the same thing either. A testimony comes when the Holy Ghost gives the earnest seeker a witness of the truth. A moving testimony vitalizes faith—that is, it induces repentance and obedience to the commandments. Conversion, on the other hand, is the fruit of, or the reward for, repentance and obedience. (Of course, one's testimony continues to increase as he is converted.)" (Look to God and Live, pp. 108-9, 111.)

When we finally commit to living the gospel rather than merely maintaining a testimony of it, our spirits can begin a metamorphosis. Elder John A. Widtsoe wrote: "When there is harmony between the instrument and the pounding message, there is joy in the heart. The world's confusion roots in discord, lack of harmony. To be out of focus or to live in the midst of static is to be in semi-darkness and chaos. To have control of self, to bid the baser appetites depart, is to walk through life in full light and with full power. They who think the path difficult, have not tried it. 'Living the gospel' is the true way to the full and free expression of human powers, to the help that the Spirit of God can give.

"It may be added that all who yield to such obedience to God's law undergo a real transformation, by the Holy Ghost, which enables them more and more, to receive and understand spiritual messages. Unless that transformation is accomplished, a person is opaque to spiritual truth, and the 'things of God' are beyond his understanding." (Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 88.)

According to Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "By the power of the Holy Ghost—who is the Sanctifier (3 Ne. 27:19-21)—dross, iniquity, carnality, sensuality, and every evil thing is burned out of the repentant soul as if by fire; the cleansed person becomes literally a new creature of the Holy Ghost. (Mosiah 27:24-26.) He is born again." (Mormon Doctrine, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966, p. 73.)

In connection with this fine-tuning, Joseph Smith said: "We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with Him." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 51.)

Elder McConkie was very clear in differentiating between baptism and being born again: "Mere compliance with the formality of the ordinance of baptism does not mean that a person has been born again. No one can be born again without baptism, but the immersion in water and the laying on of hands to confer the Holy Ghost do not of themselves guarantee that a person has been or will be born again. The new birth takes place only for those who actually enjoy the gift or companionship of the Holy Ghost, only for those who are fully converted, who have given themselves without restraint to the Lord. Thus Alma addressed himself to his 'brethren of the church,' and pointedly asked them if they had 'spiritually been born of God,' received the Lord's image in their countenances, and had the 'mighty change' in their hearts which always attends the birth of the Spirit. (See Alma 5:14-31.)

"Those members of the Church who have actually been born again are in a blessed and favored state. They have attained their position, not merely by joining the Church, but through faith (1 John 5:1), righteousness (1 John 2:29), love (1 John 4:7), and overcoming the world. (1 John 5:4.)" (Mormon Doctrine, p. 101.)

The scriptures are full of examples of sanctification, purification, being born again, and the mighty change. I will quote just a few to demonstrate how extensively these subjects are taught. First, from the Bible:

"And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh: That they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God." (Ezekiel 11:19-20.)

"Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand." (Daniel 12:10.)

"Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double minded." (James 4:8.)

"Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently." (1 Peter 1:22.)

"And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." (1 John 3:3.)

"We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not." (1 John 5:18.)

As is the case with most doctrine, the Book of Mormon is clearest on this issue as well:

"For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)

"It came to pass that when Ammon arose he also administered unto them, and also did all the servants of Lamoni; and they did all declare unto the people the selfsame thing—that their hearts had been changed; that they had no more desire to do evil." (Alma 19:33.)

"Nevertheless they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God." (Helaman 3:35.)

"Father, I thank thee that thou hast purified those whom I have chosen, because of their faith, and I pray for them, and also for them who shall believe on their words, that they may be purified in me, through faith on their words, even as they are purified in me." (3 Nephi 19:28.)

"Wherefore, . . . pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure." (Moroni 7:48.)

As we would expect, modern-day scripture continues to emphasize the importance of this doctrine:

"Ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken." (D&C 43:16.)

"Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God." (D&C 84:23.)

"For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies." (D&C 84:33.)

My favorite scriptural illustration is in Mosiah, when King Benjamin addressed the members of the church. After delivering his address, we are told, "he sent among them, desiring to know of his people if they believed the words which he had spoken unto them. And they all cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually." (Mosiah 5:1-2.)

In verse 2 of this scripture we see three types of testimonies: 1. "Yea, we believe all the words" (below the first plateau). 2. "We know of their surety and truth" (the first plateau). 3. "The Lord Omnipotent . . . has wrought a mighty change in us . . . that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually" (the second plateau).

There is a vast difference between being good and doing good. Imagine how free we would be if we were able to express our true feelings through our actions rather than restraining our actions to hide our true feelings.

We should all be striving for a disposition to do no evil, but to do good continually. This isn't a resolve or a discipline; it is a disposition. We do things because we want to, not just because we know we should. Enos had this experience:

"Behold, I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the words which I had often heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart. And my soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the heavens. And there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed. And I, Enos, knew that God could not lie; wherefore, my guilt was swept away."

When Enos was told that this was accomplished because of the sacrifice of the Savior, he said, "Now, it came to pass that when I had heard these words I began to feel a desire for the welfare of my brethren, the Nephites; wherefore, I did pour out my whole soul unto God for them." The Lord told Enos He would personally visit the Nephites, and because of this outpouring of love, Enos said, "My faith began to be unshaken in the Lord; and I prayed unto him with many long strugglings for my brethren, the Lamanites." (Enos 1:3-6, 9, 11.)

In other words, Enos had such love for his fellowman that he was now praying for his enemies and even had genuine concern for them. This was not because he thought he should or that he had been so commanded, but because he wanted to. He had received a mighty change. His disposition was such that he felt a desire for the welfare of his brethren. He didn't say, "The Lord commanded me to worry about my brethren." He had a disposition to do good rather than just a discipline of doing good.

Sometimes we overlook the fact that a spiritual transformation or metamorphosis must take place within us. It comes about through grace and by the Spirit of God, although it does not come about until we have truly repented and proven ourselves worthy. We can be guilty of being so careful to live the letter of the law that we don't develop our inner spiritual nature and fine-tune our spiritual communication to the point that we may receive sanctification and purification. My conclusion is that we will not be saved by works if those works are not born of a disposition to do good, as opposed to an obligation to do good.

Sometimes we lose sight of the purpose of the Church or, for that matter, what the Church really is. What is the role of the Church in the sanctifying process?

In the Church, I fear, sometimes programs have triumphed over principles. It is easy to become captivated by programs and forget the principles. We can become so prolific and creative in our Church programs that we can lose track of our objective. Someone has said that a fanatic is one who, once having lost track of his objective, doubles his effort. We become so hypnotized by the form that we can't see the substance. The result is a shallowness in our spirituality. Programs blindly followed bring us to a discipline of doing good, but principles properly understood and practiced bring us to a disposition to do good.

What does the Church mean to you? Imagine it without beautiful buildings, banquets, plays, basketball, softball, Eagle Scouts, the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, Brigham Young University, beautiful flowers on Temple Square, Young Women medallions, Church magazines, canneries, seminary and super activities for the youth, Christmas lights on Temple Square, and so forth. If this list, and many more items that could be added, is what the Church means to us, we are failing in teaching the gospel. All of these things can be helpful, but they are only a means to an end.

As great as the various programs of the Church are, they carry with them a potential danger. If we are not careful, it is possible to get so wrapped up in the programs that we forget the principles. We can fall into the trap of mistaking traditions for principles and confusing programs with their objectives.

One Saturday morning, I was on my way to fulfill an assignment on a welfare farm. We were to clean the weeds out of an irrigation ditch. My route took me past the home of an elderly widow in my ward who was weeding her front yard. The temperature was already in the mid-eighties, and she looked as if she were close to having sunstroke. For a fleeting moment I thought I should stop and lend a helping hand, but my conscience allowed me to drive on because, after all, I hadn't been assigned to help her. My assignment was on the welfare farm.

I wonder what would have happened had I followed the spontaneous prompting of the Spirit and unleashed the genuine compassion I was feeling. I wonder what would have happened to her; I wonder what would have happened to me.

The early members of the Church had few of the things that we now supply for our members in so many programs, and yet thousands of them were willing to die for their beliefs—and many did. Do we have the spiritual depth they had? We do, but I fear it may be dormant. Could we have endured what they did with the testimony we now have? More importantly, can we go through that which is at our doorstep with the depth of spirituality we now possess?
