Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

7

Covenants and Ordinances

By now I hope I have aroused within you, if you are not already there, a desire to move on to the second plateau. If so, you are asking yourself: What is it about the Church that brings a person to sanctification? How do I do it? It isn't so simple as deciding to pay your tithing, observe the Word of Wisdom, keep the Sabbath day holy, be morally clean, or any other of the disciplines the Lord has given us until such time as our disposition automatically has us act in the right manner. It isn't so simple as saying, "All right, I'm going to go get myself sanctified." It is similar to loving your neighbor as yourself: you can't get there by just gritting your teeth and charging forward.

No amount of rhetoric from me is going to bring this mighty change to you. And even if I have convinced you intellectually that it is something you should pursue, an intellectual decision is not enough. Feelings cannot be dictated by intellect. Christlike love is a gift of the Spirit. You will recall that the people in King Benjamin's time said, "The Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent . . . has wrought a mighty change in us." (Mosiah 5:2.) We are, therefore, dependent upon the Spirit to bring us to this condition.

It begins with faith, repentance, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. With faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, we are ready to place our burden of sin at His feet. As we go through life, each of us makes mistakes and transgresses. As we receive a testimony of the Savior, we feel much like Alma: "I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins. Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell; yea, I saw that I had rebelled against my God, and that I had not kept his holy commandments. . . . Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds." (Alma 36:12-13, 15.)

While some may not have the same gravity of sins for which to repent, all have need of much repentance. While in this repentant spirit, Alma realized that through the Atonement he could be forgiven. This led to unspeakable joy: "And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more. And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain! Yea, I say unto you, my son, that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say unto you, my son, that on the other hand, there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet as was my joy. Yea, methought I saw, even as our father Lehi saw, God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels, in the attitude of singing and praising their God; yea, and my soul did long to be there." (Alma 36:19-22.)

At this point, we are baptized and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Subsequently, mistakes are made and the process repeats itself as we partake of the sacrament. As we accept the Savior and abide by the commandments, a metamorphosis of our spirit begins to take place. However, to bring us to ultimate sanctification, we need the higher ordinances, which are received in the temple. Becoming a Melchizedek Priesthood holder won't bring sanctification about. It is the ordinances of the Melchizedek Priesthood that bring this to pass. Hence, male and female alike receive the sanctifying power as they receive their endowments in the temple.

I am convinced that if the Saints really understood what can happen as a result of going to the temple, we would have a vast increase in the number of persons who hold temple recommends without sending anyone on a guilt trip. If a person wants to become sanctified, he or she must participate in the higher ordinances of the temple, receive the endowment given there, and remain true to the covenants made there.

In his dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith explained the purpose of the temple. He said, in part: "And now, Holy Father, we ask thee to assist us, thy people, with thy grace, in calling our solemn assembly, that it may be done to thine honor and to thy divine acceptance; and in a manner that we may be found worthy, in thy sight, to secure a fulfilment of the promises which thou hast made unto us, thy people, in the revelations given unto us; that thy glory may rest down upon thy people, and upon this thy house, which we now dedicate to thee, that it may be sanctified and consecrated to be holy, and that thy holy presence may be continually in this house; and that all people who shall enter upon the threshold of the Lord's house may feel thy power, and feel constrained to acknowledge that thou hast sanctified it, and that it is thy house, a place of thy holiness. . . .

"And we ask thee, Holy Father, that thy servants may go forth from this house armed with thy power, and that thy name may be upon them, and thy glory be round about them, and thine angels have charge over them." (D&C 109:10-13, 22.)

Simply put, an infusion of the sanctifying Spirit comes to those who have gone to the temple that is not available to those who have only received the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Too often we look upon becoming worthy to go to the temple as the objective. The real blessings of temple attendance are the insights we receive there and the power that lingers with us after having been there. To those who keep their covenants, the sanctifier (the Holy Ghost) continues its work between visits as well as during the sessions.

So why go to the temple? First, the Lord has commanded it. This is very clear in modern revelation: "For behold, I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant; and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory. For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world." (D&C 132:4-5.)

Joseph Smith said: "There are mansions for those who obey a celestial law, and there are other mansions for those who come short of the law, every man in his own order." (History of the Church 6:365.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "I do not care what office you hold in this Church, you may be an apostle, you may be a patriarch, a high priest, or anything else, and you cannot receive the fulness of the priesthood unless you go into the temple of the Lord and receive these ordinances of which the prophet speaks. No man can get the fulness of the priesthood outside the temple of the Lord." (Elijah, the Prophet and His Mission, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957, p. 46.)

In addition to going to the temple because we are commanded, we should also have a desire to participate. I am convinced that once we truly understand ordinances, covenants, and endowments, we will become anxious to go to the temple, making it unnecessary for God to command us to go.

The ordinances performed in the temple include baptism, washing, anointing, ordination, endowment, marriage, and sealing of children to parents. Elder James E. Talmage described the endowment as follows:

"The Temple Endowment, as administered in modern temples, comprises instruction relating to the significance and sequence of past dispensations, and the importance of the present as the greatest and grandest era in human history. This course of instruction includes a recital of the most prominent events of the creative period, the condition of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, their disobedience and consequent expulsion from that blissful abode, their condition in the lone and dreary world when doomed to live by labor and sweat, the plan of redemption by which the great transgression may be atoned, the period of the great apostasy, the restoration of the Gospel with all its ancient powers and privileges, the absolute and indispensable condition of personal purity and devotion to the right in present life, and a strict compliance with Gospel requirements. . . .

"With the taking of each covenant and the assuming of each obligation a promised blessing is pronounced, contingent upon the faithful observance of the conditions." (The House of the Lord, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1968, pp. 83-84.)

One might ask, "What difference does it make whether I go to the temple? Isn't the important thing how I live and how I treat my fellowman?"

This is the same as asking, "What difference does it make if I am baptized and receive the Holy Ghost? Can't the Holy Ghost descend on me if I live righteously without the laying on of hands, and can't I be forgiven of my sins by repenting without being immersed in water?"

The answer to these questions is no. There exists an eternal truth that a certain process or outward manifestation is required before blessings can be received.

For example, when we were given the gift of the Holy Ghost, hands were placed upon our head and we received the companionship of the Holy Ghost. We can continue to receive it as long as we are faithful. We have complied with an ordinance and we know we received the gift.

We often speak of the "mantle" of a bishop. Those who have been bishops have felt it. Others have seen it descend upon a bishop and bring about a change in him. When does this happen? After he has been called and ordained. The ordination is necessary first.

In a like manner, there are blessings of the temple. When we receive those blessings, the Spirit begins to perfect us in ways not available to someone who has been baptized but not endowed. A new level of revelation becomes available to those who make—and keep—the covenants and who perform the ordinances of the temple. They begin to live by celestial laws and thereby receive celestial blessings. And as we return to the temple frequently, we bless the dead for whom we serve as proxy and we are blessed and strengthened for our obedience.

While the ordinances and covenants are required, it should be pointed out they are only the beginning. They give us the right to begin the journey to perfection. They give us access to spiritual gifts necessary to bring about perfection. However, it is through our obedience, sacrifice, and adherence to gospel principles that these gifts bear fruit.

In order to reach the highest degree of the celestial kingdom, it is necessary not only to receive the endowment but also to participate in the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. Adam said, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh." (Abraham 5:18.) Paul noted: "Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Corinthians 11:11.) And in the Doctrine and Covenants we are told: "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; and if he does not, he cannot obtain it." (D&C 131:1-3.)

Elder Widtsoe wrote: "Modern revelation sets forth the high destiny of those who are sealed for everlasting companionship. They will be given opportunity for a greater use of their powers. That means progress. They will attain more readily to their place in the presence of the Lord; they will increase more rapidly in every divine power; they will approach more nearly to the likeness of God; they will more completely realize their divine destiny. And this progress is not delayed until life after death. It begins here, today, for those who yield obedience to the law. Life is tasteless without progress. Eternal marriage, with all that it means, provides for unending advancement. 'Eternal increase' is the gift to all who enter into the eternal marriage covenant, as made in the temples of the Lord.

"They who have won a temple marriage have been sealed for time and eternity by the power of the Holy Priesthood. This is the supreme power committed to man's keeping. That power issues from the unseen world. It gives life and light to the world. Human life with its cares and worries is transfigured into a radiant experience and adventure when it clings to this divine power and is blessed by it. To walk under divine authority, to possess it, to be a part of it, is to walk with heads erect, with grateful hearts, before our fellow men and our Father in heaven. The men and women who have come with this power out of the Lord's holy house will be hedged about by divine protection and walk more safely among the perplexities of earth. They will be indeed the ultimate conquerors of earth, for they come with the infinite power of God to solve the problems of earth. Spiritual power accompanies all who marry in the temple, if they thenceforth keep their sacred covenants." (Evidences and Reconciliations, pp. 300-301.)

Why can't a person who isn't married obtain the highest degree of the celestial kingdom?

We are too quick to suggest, as the overriding reason, the ability to have children. Remember, the Father did not say, "It is not good for man not to be able to have children." The Father said, "It is not good that the man should be alone." (Genesis 2:18; see also Moses 3:18; Abraham 5:14.)

I would like to propose two reasons why the Lord's plan would be frustrated without the introduction of the male and female. The most obvious is parenthood. The second is less obvious but, in my opinion, more profound. It has to do with Eve's role in Adam's quest for individual exaltation, and vice versa.

I believe that the Father's statement that "it is not good that the man should be alone" had much deeper meaning than the obvious biological implications. It also went further than providing Adam with "company." Perhaps the reason why a person cannot enter the highest degree of the celestial kingdom without a companion is not because that person has not obeyed a celestial law, but because he or she hasn't become a celestial being. Is it possible there is a limit to our spiritual development so long as we are single? Is there a spiritual development that can be obtained only when a man and a woman join their incomplete selves into a complete couple through celestial marriage?

A man and a woman can accomplish marvelous things alone. However, they are incomplete until they are united physically, emotionally, psychologically, and, most importantly, spiritually. Also, when a man and a woman are joined together by anything short of the temple sealing, there is a limit to their progress no matter how compatible they are. Could it be that just as conception requires the union of male- and female-produced cells, perfection requires the spiritual union of the male and female?

We commonly hear the phrase "Men have the priesthood and women have been given the blessing of conceiving and bearing children." Without perfection, neither assignment meets the full measure of its creation. After perfection comes the ultimate role of god and goddess. Eternal roles, one complementing the other, one dependent upon the other. Perfection through the male and female spiritual union is dependent upon the sanctification process, which is a gift of the Spirit, available only to those in tune with that spirit and married under the covenant.

How I wish every priesthood holder would realize how absolutely dependent he is on his wife for his perfection and exaltation. Thankfully, many men do realize this. Unfortunately, however, some look upon the patriarchal order as a monarchal order. The patriarchal order is not an authority of command, but a point of order.

To the single women of the Church, this promise of a prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson, has been given (of course, the same promise would apply to worthy single men): "I also recognize that not all women in the Church will have an opportunity for marriage and motherhood in mortality. But if those of you in this situation are worthy and endure faithfully, you can be assured of all blessings from a kind and loving Heavenly Father—and I emphasize all blessings. I assure you that if you have to wait even until the next life to be blessed with a choice companion, God will surely compensate you. Time is numbered only to man. God has your eternal perspective in mind." (Ensign, November 1988, p. 97.)

In summary, sanctification is a gift of God and comes to those who qualify for it by performing the ordinances and making and keeping the covenants at baptism and in the temple.
