Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

8

The Trials of Life

From a practical standpoint, after having received the covenants and ordinances, how does one consciously work toward sanctification? I offer six suggestions, all of which can occur simultaneously:

The last point deserves some amplification. The key to the sanctification process lies in the way we respond to the adversities we face and the compassion we feel because of having been through these adversities. Compassion that we can gain in no other way develops within us when we have been through a trial. I am convinced that before the mighty change can occur within us, each of us will obtain a broken heart and a contrite spirit through experiences we receive in life.

I remember grasping this concept, in a very limited way, in my early high school years. I love sports. In grade school and junior high school, I dreamed of completing a pass in a football game with time running out, and thereby winning the state championship. I had similar fantasies regarding a last-second shot in basketball, and a home run in the bottom of the ninth inning in a baseball game.

As a sophomore in high school, because I had a small frame, I decided basketball was my game. I was quick and had a good two-handed set shot. (If you don't know what that is, ask someone over forty to tell you about it.) Tryouts were held in October. I played hard, stole the ball on several occasions, and made a few long, outside set shots; however, when the coach posted the names of the team members, my name was not on the list. I was crushed. My dream of having the cheerleaders swarm all over me after my game-winning shot was lost forever.

By the next summer I regrouped and decided maybe football was my game after all. At tryouts I put on a helmet, shoulder pads, and other gear. On my way out to the practice field, I remember looking in the mirror and saying to myself, "Hey, you look taller! And when you turn sideways, you don't disappear!" But then I noticed that the big guys looked bigger too.

In the first few drills, I felt fine. My speed allowed me to come in near the first in the sprints, and my confidence soared. Then came scrimmage. I was given the ball and told to run straight up the middle. As I got to the line, I was met by the biggest defensive lineman on the team. He planted his helmet in the pit of my stomach, wrapped his arms around my thighs, picked me up, threw me on the ground, and jumped on top of me. The only reason I didn't fumble was that the ball was implanted in my rib cage. As my friends carried my limp, breathless body off the field, I heard the coach say to the tackle, "Ooh! Wow! Nice hit, Kimber!"

Once again my dreams were shattered—not to mention my ribs and my ego. In the weeks that followed, I began to look around to see what else life had to offer. It took a while, but I made a marvelous discovery: there is a lot more to life than sports. I looked at my classmates in a different light. In addition to the respect I already had for good athletes, I began to appreciate the individual talents of each person. I marveled at those gifted with artistic ability. I looked at their paintings and thrilled at their talent. Others had developed their talents in music. I watched in amazement as a pianist played classical music. A dancer fascinated me with her grace and creativity. I read things written by a gifted poet. I laughed and cried as I watched some thespians perform. They actually made me forget who they were and convinced me they had become the characters on the stage. Some of my friends excelled in academics. And perhaps the most important talents are those we are likely to take for granted, such as compassion, benevolence, and integrity.

In short, a whole new world began to appear. I remember thinking how sad it was that talents such as these didn't receive the publicity and glory afforded athletic heroes. I thought of the hours, days, weeks, months, and years of practice, study, and meditation it took to develop such talents without having the encouragement of a cheering crowd.

I learned to appreciate and love a variety of friends. I also learned to feel genuine joy for their accomplishments—similar to the manner of Alma. He and Ammon separated as both left for their missions, and when they finally got back together after many years, Alma said: "God hath called me by a holy calling, to preach the word unto this people, and hath given me much success, in the which my joy is full. But I do not joy in my own success alone, but my joy is more full because of the success of my brethren. . . . Now, when I think of the success of these my brethren my soul is carried away, even to the separation of it from the body, as it were, so great is my joy." (Alma 29:13-14, 16.)

The disappointment I suffered relative to high school athletics softened my heart and increased my love and appreciation for a broad spectrum of friends at school.

With our limited understanding, we may wish life were easier. Sometimes we look at the nonmembers around us and envy their life-style. Several years ago I heard a popular song that contained the line "I'd rather laugh with the sinners than cry with the saints." My immediate reaction was anger. When I heard the song again, I laughed at myself because in the interim I had figured out why the line made me so mad. It was because it sounded so true!

In grade school, my parents made me go to church on Sunday while others went to the movies. In junior high school, I collected fast offerings on Sunday while others slept till noon. In high school, I passed up working on Sunday and earning double time at a grocery store so I could keep the Sabbath day holy. During my mission I walked down the streets on Saturday nights with my companion while others our age drove past us with their dates, laughing, pointing, and asking, "What's with those guys?"

As a young married couple, my wife and I attended church with our squirming children. On Super Bowl Sunday, while the rest of the world ate, drank, and cheered, we could be found pulling the hair and flipping the heads or ears of our children and encouraging them to listen to the words of a member of the stake high council. While traveling in our old clunker of a station wagon, we would pull up alongside a Mercedes Benz. The occupants, with their national average 1.7 kids dressed in designer jeans, would point and laugh at my six kids dressed in their Toughskins. That is why that line made me so mad!

My frustration over this issue peaked a few years ago when my older children prevailed in getting me to attend a concert at Brigham Young University. When the singer announced the song from which the following line is taken, "I'd rather laugh with the sinners than cry with the saints," the crowd went wild. He said, "I'm not trying to convert anyone—I just want to provide you with an alternative." I thought the roof was going to come off the place. I wanted to race down the steps, grab the microphone, and give my opinion on the subject. Of course, my children would have been horrified.

The statement "sinners laugh and saints cry" is a simplistic generalization at best. We Latter-day Saints definitely have our share of laughter, and some sinners leave a trail of broken lives and buckets of tears. For saints as well as sinners, all that is meaningful in life doesn't have to be funny. However, to brush aside the line in the song with this equally simplistic argument would be to ignore a reasonable question. At a given point in time, don't many who make no effort to live Church standards appear to be enjoying life more than some who do?

Our lives as Latter-day Saints may appear to be controlled by inhibitions, constraints, service, sacrifice, guilty consciences, and financial obligations. In the world we see people with none of these so-called restrictions—people who are home with their families on more than just Monday night and who have 10 to 15 percent more of their gross income to spend.

When our children were younger and we would be on our way to Sunday church meetings, occasionally we would pass a car pulling a boat. My children would become silent and press their noses against the windows and ask, "Dad, why can't we go waterskiing today instead of to church?" Sometimes I would take the easy but cowardly way out and answer, "It's simple: we don't have a boat." However, on my more conscientious days, I would muster up all the logic and spirituality available to a patriarch of a family and try to explain how much happier our family was because of our church activity.

I first realized I wasn't getting through when on a subsequent Sunday we saw a family laughing and excited as they loaded up their boat. One of my teenage sons said with a sly grin, "They're not really happy, huh, Dad?" That statement has become a family joke whenever we see someone doing something we cannot do. When I see a teenager driving a beautiful, expensive sports car, I say to my sons, "Now there's one miserable guy."

Our children are growing up in a most challenging and confusing world. Activities that have always been forbidden by the Lord and that for many years were frowned upon by society are now accepted and promoted by that same society. The media serve up these activities in such a fashion as to make them look very desirable. Add to acceptability and desirability the power of peer pressure, and you have an extremely explosive situation.

Lehi's vision of the tree of life is appropriate for our day. In that vision, he saw a great and spacious building, which represents the pride and temptations of the world: "It was filled with people, both old and young, . . . and their manner of dress was exceedingly fine; and they were in the attitude of mocking and pointing their fingers towards those who . . . were partaking of the fruit." (1 Nephi 8:27.)

Even though a person may have a testimony and want to do what is right, it is difficult not to be drawn to that great and spacious building. From all appearances, the people in the building look happy and free and seem to be having a great time. But don't mistake telestial pleasure for celestial happiness and joy. Don't mistake lack of self-control for freedom. Complete freedom without appropriate restraint makes people slaves to their appetites. Don't envy a lesser and lower life.

When I was in junior high school, I would get out of bed on cold winter mornings and head for the heat vent to get warm. The family cat would always beat me there, so I would gently shoo her away and sit down. Soon my mother would tell me it was time to leave for school. I would look out at the icicles on the house and dread going out into the cold, let alone beginning another day of school.

As I kissed my mother good-bye and went out the door, I would look longingly at my comfortable spot in front of the heat vent and find that the cat had repossessed it. How I envied that cat! If that weren't enough, she would look up at me with heavy eyelids and an expression that seemed to laugh at me and say, "Have fun in school, Glenn. I'm sure glad I'm not a human." I hated it when she did that.

However, an interesting thing would happen as the day went on. I would come home after experiencing the joys and sorrows of the school day and see that lazy cat still curled up in front of the vent, and I would smile and say to her, "I'm sure glad I'm not a cat."

To those who are inching their way closer and closer to that great and spacious building, let me make it completely clear that the people in that building have absolutely nothing to offer except instant, short-term gratification that is inescapably connected to long-term sorrow and suffering. The commandments we observe have not been given by a dispassionate God to prevent us from having fun, but by a loving Father in Heaven who wants us to be happy while we are living on this earth as well as in the hereafter.

Compare the blessings of living the Word of Wisdom with those available if we choose to party with the individuals in the great and spacious building. Compare the joy of intelligent humor and wit with drunken, silly, crude, loud laughter. Compare our faithful, virtuous young women who still have a blush in their cheeks with those who, having long lost their blush, try to persuade others to join them in their loss. Compare lifting people up to putting people down. Compare the ability to receive personal revelation and direction in your life with being tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine.

The members of many churches in the world have been putting pressure on their leaders to change doctrine to fit changing life-styles. Many such movements have been successful, and increasingly we see churches made up of the doctrines of men. However, there are absolute truths of eternity. They do not change as a society drifts from them. No popular vote can change an absolute, eternal truth. Legalizing an act does not make it moral. Don't be fooled by the argument "Everybody's doing it." Our spirits should be offended and our intelligences insulted by such reasoning.

When all of the evidence is in, the world's graduate school of hard knocks will teach what we learned in the kindergarten of our spiritual training: "Wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10.) Why wait for finite man to prove what his infinite Creator has already revealed to His prophets?
