Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

9

Crying with the Saints

In spite of our knowledge that wickedness never was happiness, many tears are shed by Saints who are living the gospel, while laughter seems more prominent in the lives of those living a rather worldly life. The celestial happiness we seek does not come without effort. The voguish phrase "no pain, no gain" applies equally well to the things of the Spirit. Sometimes in the midst of trials we cry out, "What have I done wrong to deserve this?" Often, tribulation comes into our lives not because we are doing something wrong but because of what we are doing right.

In striving for the purification and sanctification that will lead us to exaltation, we all must pass through a certain amount of fire so that our spirits will be pliable in the hands of the Lord. Joseph Smith's life exemplifies this principle. There was probably not a darker period in his life, by all outward standards, than the winter of 1838-39 when he was imprisoned in Liberty Jail. The Saints were being persecuted, robbed, and murdered, and there was dissension and apostasy in their ranks.

We may be inclined to underestimate Joseph's suffering. I don't speak of the coldness of the jail, but of his discouragement. We may think that his anguish would be mitigated by his memory of having seen the Father and the Savior and by his memory of visits from Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James, John, and a host of other heavenly messengers. In reality, this knowledge may have intensified the pain. After all, Joseph had a perfect knowledge that God could free him.

It was in this setting that Joseph cried unto the Lord, "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" To this agonized plea came the Lord's answer: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment." (D&C 121:1, 7.) Then He added, "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 122:7.)

"For thy good"? What possible good could come from that experience? Elder B. H. Roberts gave an insight about the possible good that could come from such an experience when he described Joseph's reaction to a similar experience in 1842: "What is most pleasing to record of this period of enforced seclusion while avoiding his enemies, is the development of that tenderness of soul manifested in his reflections upon the friends who had stood by him from the commencement of his public career. . . . No act of kindness seems to go unmentioned. No risk run for him that is not appreciated. Indeed he gathers much benefit from those trials, since their effect upon his nature seems to be a softening rather than a hardening influence; and the trials of life are always beneficial where they do not harden and brutalize men's souls; and every day under his trials the Prophet seems to have grown more tender-hearted, more universal in his sympathies; his moments of spiritual exaltation are superb. No one can read them and doubt that the inspiration of God was giving this man's spirit understanding." (History of the Church 5:xxviii.)

Joseph taught, "The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls; we feel that we want to take them upon our shoulders, and cast their sins behind our backs. . . . If you would have God have mercy on you, have mercy on one another." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 241.)

After the Lord told Joseph, "These things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good," He explained, "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8.)

Part of the reason the Savior suffered in Gethsemane was so that He would have infinite compassion for us as we experience our trials and tribulations. Through His suffering in Gethsemane, He became qualified to be the perfect judge. Not one of us will be able to approach Him on the Judgment Day and say, "You don't know what it was like." He knows the nature of our trials better than we do, for He "descended below them all."

As a loving Father in Heaven viewed His Beloved Son suffering in the Garden of Gethsemane, the Savior cried out, "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matthew 26:39.)

Can you imagine the tears in the eyes of the Father when He had to deny His Son's request? Can you comprehend the sacred tears shed by the Father when He had to abandon the Savior on the cross and hear Him say, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Mark 15:34.) And yet, even as God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ wept, sinners laughed.

Each of us must pass through our own gethsemanes. Ella Wheeler Wilcox wrote a poem titled "Gethsemane":

In golden youth when seems the earth A Summer-land of singing mirth, When souls are glad and hearts are light, And not a shadow lurks in sight, We do not know it, but there lies Somewhere veiled under evening skies A garden which we all must see— The garden of Gethsemane. With joyous steps we go our ways, Love lends a halo to our days; Light sorrows sail like clouds afar, We laugh, and say how strong we are. We hurry on; and hurrying, go Close to the border-land of woe, That waits for you, and waits for me— Forever waits Gethsemane. Down shadowy lanes, across strange streams, Bridged over by our broken dreams; Behind the misty caps of years, Beyond the great salt fount of tears, The garden lies. Strive as you may, You cannot miss it in your way. All paths that have been, or shall be, Pass somewhere through Gethsemane. All those who journey, soon or late, Must pass within the garden's gate; Must kneel alone in darkness there, And battle with some fierce despair. God pity those who cannot say, "Not mine but thine," who only pray, "Let this cup pass," and cannot see The purpose in Gethsemane.

There is probably no greater gethsemane for saint or sinner than the death of a child. Just minutes after he learned of his ten-year-old daughter's accidental death, a father I know wrote a letter to her. Note how this good man's gethsemane became a sanctifying experience because of his knowledge of the gospel and the gift he had received of the Comforter. Contrast his reaction with what it might have been without the light of the gospel:

If you may be permitted to listen, these are some thoughts your "Dear Ole Dad" would like to express in his and your mom's hour of joy and sorrow.

You have been an angel of light in our home. Even in your passing you have sanctified the experience by the sweet sorrow of this temporary parting. As I sit in this hotel room many miles from home and only moments after hearing of your passing, I have confidence that you are really home. It's pleasing to know that you are no longer encumbered by the mild but troublesome physical limitations you accepted and lived with in such an adorable, noncomplaining way.

Mom and I and your seven brothers and sisters are better because you came to our house. Soon after your day of birth you helped us to accept fear and the unknown; to better love others with physical, emotional, or mental challenges; to accept the disappointment accompanying an unknown prognosis; and to query and plead with our Father, who today you know better than we do. As you grew older, we learned determination from you, who had every right to spill your milk but never did, who royally beat your mom and dad in tetherball, who averaged 97 percent in spelling for an entire year and by sheer grit struggled with math, and who without ever a complaint sat with your mom every night—summer and school months—to read and understand what you had read. Yes, we did our best to help you learn, but what we learned from you cannot be printed in books—cannot be written—because it is almost too sacred to rehearse.

We pray for all of us whom the Lord expects to stay here on the job for yet a while. Our prayers are that we will be worthy to be reunited with you and to see you whole and perfect. Oh, how we would have loved to have you stay. How we would love to hear your ever-so-spontaneous "I love you." How we'd thrill to feel that clinging embrace. Oh yes, especially today.

I witnessed an explosion of sanctification one Sunday evening. My cousin called and asked me to join him at the hospital. His nineteen-year-old daughter had just been killed in an automobile accident. His wife arrived a few minutes after I did. He told her their daughter was gone, and for a few moments they stood over the lifeless body. The next day I wrote this letter to them expressing my feelings on that sacred, sanctifying experience:

Never have I felt more inadequate and helpless than when I walked into that hospital room made sacred by the passing of your beloved daughter—to see the pain on your faces and know I couldn't ease it. All I could do is what many others are doing, and that is to reach out to you with my love and support. Few of us have had the experience you are going through, but all of us have had tragedies of one kind or another and, therefore, feel the pain to some degree. Please accept our willingness to share yours with you.

I don't know why you chose to have me join you at that personal and sacred moment. For me, the time of death has held the same reverence as birth and temple marriage. After last night, I am feeling that it surpasses all others. I am grateful and humbled for the testimony I saw in you. Yes, there were tears, bewilderment, sorrow, regrets, and shock. However, overshadowing those emotions was something I will remember long after that memory fades. The Savior allowed me to see through spiritual eyes something easily missed under such trying conditions.

This was a zero hour in your spiritual preparedness. At such moments all facades fall from your being. There is nothing of this world to protect you. Lip service to the gospel would leave your souls completely unprotected. It was a day of spiritual reckoning. How did you do? Let me try to do justice to what I saw.

Above the tears, pain, and questions of why and how this accident could have been avoided, I saw dignity and majesty in both of you. I saw humble submission to the Lord; and through that humility and willingness to accept this tragedy without cursing God, you have earned the love God has for Abraham just as surely as if He had asked for your daughter's life. Very few of us will be asked to give our lives for the kingdom, but all of us must be willing to do so before we will be worthy of it. You have gone one step further. You have given something much dearer to you. Who of us would not gladly give our own life in place of our beloved children?

I can tell you that because of your acceptance and trust in our Father in Heaven, you have proven yourselves herewith. In short, I saw in you a god and a goddess, a king and a queen. I saw radiance emerge victorious from your countenances.

You have probably asked yourselves a thousand times: Is it because of something we did or didn't do that she was taken? Is it because we need an incentive to be better people? Perhaps it isn't what you need, but rather what the Lord needs from her in the world beyond.

You may cry because her early exit prevents her from the accomplishments of this life. Your hearts might ache for the grandchildren you would have loved; the births, baptisms, ordinations, and marriages. These events have not been taken from her or you, only delayed for a very short season. For her, the pain and suffering most of us will know when we approach death a moment at a time have been canceled. She will not see herself grow old. She will not be lonely in her old age. She will not experience what you are enduring right now. The negative experiences of life have been waived, but she will still have the privilege of participating in the positive experiences.

Therefore, we need not feel sorrow for her. She is with those she has known who have already passed through the veil. She is with those whom you have known and loved and whom she has never met. She has already made new friends. She is well and happy.

The sorrow you feel is for yourselves and those who are left behind, all of whom will join her one by one—some perhaps in months, others in years or decades. Don't feel guilty for your "self sorrow." How pathetic it would be if we didn't miss those who precede us in death. How empty our lives would be if the death of those close to us didn't bring unbearable pain. And yet, He who loves you for your love of Him will hold you up and nurse you back to a state of normalcy.

You will not forget her but you will love each other more, and the rest of your children will be closer than ever before. In this fashion she is doing her part to make certain you will be with her when your times come. She will not be disinterested in the family, although her new assignments will keep her busy.

Since my call as a General Authority, my responsibilities have taken me away from my family more than ever before. But my family has become dearer to me the more I serve in my assignment. In your daughter's case, travel is not a problem. As you recall, I was not able to perform her marriage because of an assignment out of town. We have restrictions here which do not saddle those who have passed on.

Even last night, in my mind's eye, I saw her enter the room where we were with her vacated body to do what she could to comfort you and then ask Grandpa and Grandma [who had both passed away earlier] to stay with us as she watched over her husband and the others who were hurt in the accident. It is incomprehensible that the family would become secondary to any assignment in the spirit world and, therefore, I can promise you that you will feel her spirit on those special family occasions, including this very time.

Thank you for showing me a righteous, dignified, eternal couple last night. Thank you for sharing the most sacred moment of your lives thus far. With you, I thank God for the knowledge He has given us. Please accept this feeble attempt to share this burden with you, thereby trying to make it lighter for you.

As we shed tears in our own gethsemanes while others laugh with the sinners, we must not curse the purifying fire in which we have been placed. Our crucible is divine and will ultimately sanctify and perfect us. Latter-day Saints don't seek the unpleasant things of life. We don't look for pain and suffering. However, we recognize that trials and tribulations come to all of us, and they can be turned into spiritual stepping-stones to sanctification and exaltation.

While on my mission, I received word that a friend had drowned. He was ice-skating on Utah Lake and fell through. About two years later his best friend also drowned in Utah Lake while saving the life of a young woman. Both boys were from my ward. I was home from my mission by then and went to the viewing. I had lived in the ward most of my life and knew both families well. The father of the second boy had been my bishop when I went on my mission. As my turn came to pay respects to the parents, I embraced each of them, shed tears with them, and shared experiences I had had with their son. I felt love and sympathy for them and expressed it as best I could.

As I moved on to the casket, I glanced back and witnessed a sacred scene I will never forget. Behind me in the line were the parents of the first boy. They said very little as they shed tears and embraced, much as I had done. However, they reached a place in the souls of the grieving parents I was unable to reach. They made a connection. They administered a soothing comfort of which I was incapable. They completely understood and had compassion and empathy. I hold that moment sacred.

We don't all have to suffer the same thing in order to develop that compassion which accompanies the mighty change, but we all must experience something. Although we might choose otherwise, we all must pass through a certain amount of trial and tribulation before we will humble ourselves to the point that our spirits can be molded by our Father in Heaven. "My people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must needs be, by the things which they suffer." (D&C 105:6.)

Orson F. Whitney wrote: "No pain that we suffer, no trial that we experience is wasted. It ministers to our education, to the development of such qualities as patience, faith, fortitude and humility. All that we suffer and all that we endure, especially when we endure it patiently, builds up our characters, purifies our hearts, expands our souls, and makes us more tender and charitable, more worthy to be called the children of God . . . and it is through sorrow and suffering, toil and tribulation, that we gain the education that we come here to acquire and which will make us more like our Father and Mother in heaven." (Quoted by Spencer W. Kimball, "Tragedy or Destiny," Improvement Era, March 1966, p. 211.)

George Q. Cannon discussed the purifying nature of trials and tribulations as follows: "Whatever fate may threaten us, there is but one course for men of God to take, that is, to keep inviolate the holy covenants they have made in the presence of God and angels. For the remainder, whether it be life or death, freedom or imprisonment, prosperity or adversity, we must trust in God. We may say, however, if any man or woman expects to enter into the Celestial Kingdom of our God without making sacrifices and without being tested to the very utmost, they have not understood the Gospel. If there is a weak spot in our nature, or if there is a fiber that can be made to quiver or to shrink, we may rest assured that it will be tested. Our own weaknesses will be brought fully to light, and in seeking for help the strength of our God will also be made manifest to us." (Gospel Truth, p. 304.)

"The Lord our God is working with us; He is trying us, probably with trials of a new sort that He may approve of us in every respect. If we have set out to obtain celestial glory, the precious and inestimable gift of eternal lives, there is no trial necessary for our purification and perfection as Saints of God that we will not have to meet, contend with and overcome. Such trials will come in various shapes, on the right hand and on the left, whether they be in having everything move on prosperously, or in adversity, hardship and the laying down of our lives for the truth, until the design is fully accomplished and the dross of our natures is purified and these earthly tabernacles are redeemed from everything that is groveling and low and brought into entire subjection to the mind and will of God." (Ibid., p. 527.)

President Howard W. Hunter addressed this issue as he spoke in general conference about the troubles he was facing:

"Life—every life—has a full share of ups and downs. Indeed, we see many joys and sorrows in the world, many changed plans and new directions, many blessings that do not always look or feel like blessings, and much that humbles us and improves our patience and our faith. We have all had those experiences from time to time, and I suppose we always will.

"A passage from one of the greatest prophetic sermons ever given—King Benjamin's masterful discourse to the people of Zarahemla in the Book of Mormon—reads this way:

" 'Men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children. . . . For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father' (Mosiah 3:18-19).

"Being childlike and submitting to our Father's will is not always easy. President Spencer W. Kimball, who knew a good deal about suffering, disappointment, and circumstances beyond his control, once wrote: 'Being human, we would expel from our lives physical pain and mental anguish and assure ourselves of continual ease and comfort, but if we were to close the doors upon sorrow and distress, we might be excluding our greatest friends and benefactors. Suffering can make saints of people as they learn patience, long-suffering, and self-mastery' (Faith Precedes the Miracle [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972], p. 98).

"In that statement, President Kimball refers to closing doors upon certain experiences in life. That image brings to mind a line from Cervantes' great classic, Don Quixote, that has given me comfort over the years. In that masterpiece, we find the short but very important reminder that where one door closes, another opens. Doors close regularly in our lives, and some of those closings cause genuine pain and heartache. But I do believe that where one such door closes, another opens (and perhaps more than one), with hope and blessings in other areas of our lives that we might not have discovered otherwise.

"Our beloved quorum president, Marion G. Romney, . . . has known considerable pain and discouragement and has seen his plans changed during these past few years. But it was he who, from this very pulpit a few years ago, said that all men and women, including the most faithful and loyal, would find adversity and affliction in their lives because, in the words of Joseph Smith, 'Men have to suffer that they may come upon Mount Zion and be exalted above the heavens' (History of the Church, 5:556; see Conference Report, Oct. 1969, p. 57).

"President Romney then said: 'This does not mean that we crave suffering. We avoid all we can. However, we now know, and we all knew when we elected to come into mortality, that we would here be proved in the crucible of adversity and affliction. . . . [Furthermore,] the Father's plan for proving [and refining] his children did not exempt the Savior himself. The suffering he undertook to endure, and which he did endure, equaled the combined suffering of all men [and women] everywhere. Trembling and bleeding and wishing to shrink from the cup, he said, "I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men" (D&C 19:18-19)' (in Conference Report, Oct. 1969, p. 57).

"These lines from Robert Browning Hamilton, titled 'Along the Road,' . . . teach a lesson on pleasure and a lesson on sorrow:

"I walked a mile with Pleasure; She chattered all the way, But left me none the wiser For all she had to say. I walked a mile with Sorrow, And ne'er a word said she; But oh, the things I learned from her When Sorrow walked with me!" (Ensign, November 1987, pp. 54, 59.)

Elder Franklin D. Richards of the First Quorum of the Seventy once said: "Although it is not customary for one to seek out the difficult or unpleasant experiences, it is true that the trials and tribulations of life that stand in the way of man's growth and development become stepping-stones by which he climbs to greater heights, providing, of course, that he does not permit them to discourage him." (Ensign, December 1971, p. 50.)

As we petition the Lord that we might have this mighty change, we need to let the trials and tribulations that have come or may yet come into our lives propel us to this second plateau. We need to beware of self-pity and, even worse, cursing the Lord for the situation in which we find ourselves. If we do not approach our individual problems with the right attitude, these stepping-stones become stumbling blocks and we may even fall to a lower plateau.

I know of no great person who has not had his or her share of adversity. We all have our own personal bag of rocks we are carrying around. Each one is different from every other one, and my load may not look too heavy to you and vice versa. I do know that we are each generally hit in an area that hurts us most. I also know that some of the biggest wounds we carry are self-inflicted and, in many cases, come to us as a result of transgression. Even the agony of transgression, however, can result in our sanctification when we truly repent and have a broken heart and contrite spirit.

I also know that the easiest way to lighten our load is to reach down and help carry someone else's. There is no greater cure for our own wounds than to dress the wounds of someone else.

While I have been speaking of tears of sorrow and pain shed by the saints, I would also suggest that the saints shed tears of joy during their sojourn on the earth. These tears are unique to saints and will never be shed by sinners.

When I was in an elders quorum presidency, we worked with several less-active families. In a personal interview with one couple, I asked, "Isn't it about time you went to the temple with your family?"

I couldn't believe their answer. They said, "Yes." We cried.

They were asked to speak about their "conversion" in a Saturday evening session of stake conference, and as they expressed their love, I cried. I thought I was all cried out by the time we went to the temple—until I saw them and their beautiful daughters kneel at the altar and be sealed for time and eternity.

A few years ago, President Ezra Taft Benson stood before the General Authorities in their monthly temple meeting. He had been ill, and it was the first time we had been together with him for several months. He expressed his love to us and said, "Brethren, it is so good to be with you again." And then the prophet cried.

When the Savior concluded His visit to the people of Nephi, He felt their love and faith and was deeply touched. He had just announced that He must leave, but as He looked at the people, He "beheld they were in tears, and did look steadfastly upon him as if they would ask him to tarry a little longer with them. And he said unto them: Behold, my bowels are filled with compassion towards you."

Then Jesus healed the sick, and those who were healed did "bow down at his feet, and did worship him; and . . . did bathe his feet with their tears." And He "commanded that their little children should be brought. So they brought their little children and set them down upon the ground round about him."

After praying to the Father for the people, Jesus told them, "Blessed are ye because of your faith. And now behold, my joy is full." And then "he wept, . . . and he took their little children, one by one, and blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them. And when he had done this he wept again." (3 Nephi 17:5-6, 10-12, 20-22.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie spoke of tears in general conference just a few weeks before his death. In one of the most powerful testimonies I have ever heard, that special witness, who had full and complete knowledge that his passing was near, said: "I testify that [Jesus Christ] is the Son of the Living God and was crucified for the sins of the world. He is our Lord, our God, and our King. This I know of myself independent of any other person. I am one of his witnesses, and in a coming day I shall feel the nail marks in his hands and in his feet and shall wet his feet with my tears." (Conference Report, April 1985, p. 12.)

Those of us who witnessed the delivery of that magnificent address can testify that tears were flowing even as Elder McConkie stood at the pulpit. They were not tears of sorrow, but tears of joy at the anticipation of the blessing awaiting him.

Just one day before Elder McConkie's address, I had received my call to the Presiding Bishopric. One day after his address, at five o'clock on Easter morning, I was writing my remarks to be delivered that afternoon. As I reflected on his beautiful oration, I was overcome with the knowledge of my weaknesses and inadequacies. However, as I began to comprehend what had taken place in my own life, self-doubt was replaced with peace, confidence, and eternal joy. I wept. I penned these words, which seem appropriate to repeat at this time: "I love the Lord Jesus Christ. I love the transformation his atonement has wrought in me. . . . I once was in darkness, and now see light. I once lost all of my confidence, and now know all things are possible in the Lord. I once felt shame and now am 'filled with his love, even unto the consuming of my flesh' (2 Ne. 4:21). 'I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love' (2 Ne. 1:15)." (Conference Report, April 1985, p. 100.)

I feel the same way now as I did on that Easter Sunday. That knowledge brings tears.

Would I rather laugh with the sinners than cry with the saints? Not for one moment. Once one has felt the joy of the gospel, there is no going back into a frivolous world. Try as we may, travel where we may, there is an emptiness that all the laughter the world has to offer cannot fill. That emptiness can be filled only by placing ourselves in tune with eternal truths and living according to the prescribed laws of God.

As our understanding increases, we realize that tears of sorrow can be exquisitely beautiful—and that they ultimately give way to tears of eternal joy. In life, with all of its complications, we shed tears of both joy and sorrow. Those who react positively to life's challenges go through a refinement that propels them toward the second plateau.
