Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

10

The Savior's Example

The closer we get to sanctification, the nearer the Lord comes to us. We find ourselves literally coming unto Christ. With this perspective, we can begin to appreciate His life and why He was so selfless. We begin to appreciate that He is happy only when serving others. He understands the great principle and is an example of how one who has become sanctified acts and feels.

Lately I have been pondering the complete and absolute selflessness, or unselfishness, of the Savior. Sometimes we speak of Gethsemane and the crucifixion as being the example of His love for and His gift to us. Of course, this is His ultimate gift. I am thankful, however, that we know more about the Savior than just how He was born and how He died.

As I have studied Jesus the Christ by James E. Talmage, my mind and heart have been turned to the life He lived rather than the death He suffered. I have also concentrated more on what He did rather than what He said. I have become more impressed with what He did on the way to deliver the Sermon on the Mount than with what He said in the sermon. The Savior's every thought and action were directed to the benefit of others. Even before He came to this earth, His work was "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

We have all heard this scripture from the Pearl of Great Price quoted on numerous occasions. An insight into the Lord's unselfishness is gained by studying the verses preceding this verse. The scripture is part of a marvelous revelation wherein Moses was shown some sacred and mind-expanding realities, the first of which was to see Jesus Christ Himself in His spiritual form. "And he saw God [Jehovah] face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence." (Moses 1:2.) Moses learned Jehovah was a man.

After revealing Himself to Moses, the Lord showed him this world. Soon Satan came and tried to convince Moses to worship him as the god of this earth. Moses passed the test by saying, "I will not cease to call upon God, I have other things to inquire of him: for his glory has been upon me, wherefore I can judge between him and thee. Depart hence, Satan." (Moses 1:18.)

The Lord then showed Moses incomprehensible creations and glories that could be understood only under the influence of the Spirit: "Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the spirit of God. And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the sea shore." (Moses 1:27-28.)

This must have been overwhelming to Moses, and he wondered about the purpose of it all. Seemingly, the Lord teased him a little and didn't give him a direct answer to his thoughts. He said, "For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me." Then He added, "And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose. . . . The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine." (Moses 1:31, 33, 37.)

In some incomprehensible way, the Lord knows all of His creations intimately. He knows the heavens, the earth, and, more importantly, each individual on any one of the numberless earths. To leave no doubt in Moses' mind that numberless earths are not enough, the Lord continued, "As one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works." (Moses 1:38.)

And then the Lord felt that Moses was ready to have his question answered. As Moses marveled and wondered—Why this earth? Why all the other earths? And why will there always be more?—the Savior gave him the answer: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

The Savior is omnipotent. He is omniscient. With all this power and knowledge, what does He choose to do with His time? His whole purpose in being is to serve others by bringing to pass their immortality and eternal life. He has no other interest. His desire, which seems insatiable, is to lift others. He has an absolute, righteous need for an eternal expression, or outlet, for His infinite love.

This is a great chapter of scripture to me, not just because of the insights it gives us into the universe, but because of the insights it gives us into the love and unselfishness of the Lord.

The Savior is not looking toward retirement and relaxation. He is, and will be throughout all eternity, looking toward new opportunities to serve. We see this attitude perpetuated as He came to the earth to live as we live, only in much less comfort. While on this earth, He continued to think only of others. While here, He experienced all that we experience and more.

He "descended below [us] all" (D&C 122:8), but never do we see an account of agony about Himself. In one of the most painful times of His life, with His heart breaking for those who tormented Him, He said, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.) He was much more worried about the eternal consequences the acts of His enemies would have upon themselves than the temporary pain He was feeling as a result of their acts.

The Savior is omniscient and omnipotent, but never do we see Him use this knowledge and power to make His own life easier. He performed numerous miracles for others, but He would not perform a single miracle for His own benefit. Consider as an example the miracle of the bread and fish, recorded in Mark 6:34-44. He had taught the multitude long, and it was too late for them to obtain food. Therefore, He fed them by performing a miracle in order that they would not go hungry through the night.

On another occasion, Jesus turned water into wine. (See John 2:1-11.) This same Jehovah, at the time of Moses, sent manna from heaven for forty years because not to do so would mean the children of Israel would die in the wilderness. (See Exodus 16:31-35.)

On the other hand, when He Himself had fasted for forty days and forty nights, He refused the temptation of Satan to change the stones into bread for Himself. Satan chose the end of the fast, when the Savior's physical needs were the greatest, to tempt Him, saying, "If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread," to which the Savior answered, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matthew 4:3-4.)

Could Jesus not have changed the stones into bread, or called for manna from heaven? Was He not justified in just a little miracle at the end of His forty-day fast? Elder McConkie has suggested that the reason He would not use His power in this way was because "Lucifer had made the providing of food for Jesus' hungry body a test of his divinity. 'If thou be the Son of God,' do this thing." (The Mortal Messiah, Book I, From Bethlehem to Calvary, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979, p. 412.)

Elder Talmage suggests, however, that even if the question had been phrased in a way so as not to question His divinity, Jesus would not have performed this miracle for Himself. These powers were only to be used in the service of others. "The superior power that Jesus possessed had not been given to Him for personal gratification, but for service to others. He was to experience all the trials of mortality; another man, as hungry as He, could not provide for himself by a miracle; and though by miracle such a one might be fed, the miraculous supply would have to be given, not provided by himself. It was a necessary result of our Lord's dual nature, comprising the attributes of both God and man, that He should endure and suffer as a mortal while possessing at all times the ability to invoke the power of His own Godhood by which all bodily needs could be supplied or overcome. His reply to the tempter was sublime and positively final: 'It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.' " (Jesus the Christ, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982, pp. 121-22.)

The Lord could have performed the selfish miracle but would not. At the time of His betrayal and arrest, He said to those who wanted to fight: "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels? But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?" (Matthew 26:53-54.) Again, the Lord could have used His powers to save Himself personal agony, but He would not. To have done so would have detracted from and even negated His mission.

Imagine the self-discipline and love Jesus has for us. He has all power and knowledge, but He has never taken unrighteous advantage of that power, and He never will, throughout all eternity, do so. Were He to do so, He would cease to be God.

If the Savior had chosen to squander His power or if He had had selfish desires, we might well assume He would have failed in His mission. He, as well as the Father, is bound by eternal, absolute truths. We have evidence of this in Alma's discourse on mercy and justice. Alma explains that the Lord is merciful, but there are limits to what He can do even if His heart wants to. "What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." (Alma 42:25.)

Nephi, the son of Helaman, was an example of someone who had arrived at a godly state of total commitment to others. Because he had become Christlike and was totally consumed with the plight of others, he became one with God and Christ. The Savior was then able to give him the ultimate trust: "Blessed art thou, Nephi, for those things which thou hast done; for I have beheld how thou hast with unwearyingness declared the word, which I have given unto thee, unto this people. And thou hast not feared them, and hast not sought thine own life, but hast sought my will, and to keep my commandments. And now, because thou hast done this with such unwearyingness, behold, I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will." (Helaman 10:4-5.)

Grasping this eternal concept helps us understand Doctrine and Covenants 121:36, where we read that "the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness." The only way we can increase our strength is to give away that which we receive.

We have many modern-day examples of unselfishness. I remember an interview of President Spencer W. Kimball by a member of the media. President and Sister Kimball lived in a modest home in an average neighborhood. The interviewer asked, "Now that you are the President of the Church, why don't you move into a more comfortable home?" President Kimball looked genuinely puzzled and replied, "What on earth would be gained by that?" It had never occurred to him that his standard of living should be changed as a result of his new status.

In a world going crazy with people roaming to and fro trying to find themselves, the Lord's counsel rings clearly in the ears of those who will listen: "Whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." (Matthew 16:25.)

Unselfishness marked every action of the Savior. Personal pleasures and comfort all came last, if at all. He spent his ministry serving others. As great as was His suffering on the cross and in Gethsemane, I am touched by His day-to-day service prior to that appointed hour. As He explained to one disciple who wanted to join Him, "Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." (Luke 9:58.)

Prior to His birth, during His earthly life, and into the eternal future, the Savior has continued to give and give and give. Why? He has infinite love for us, individually and collectively. To feel His love personally is one of life's greatest blessings. To feel that same love for Him is another blessing. However, to feel that love for all mankind is the ultimate goal. Until we have pure love for all men, our love of the Savior is incomplete. We gain this love in increments that are directly related to living our lives in the service of others.

Many people in the world, including some Latter-day Saints, spend their whole lives looking for that which will permanently satisfy some infinite cravings of the soul. Some turn to power; others to sex, drugs, money, travel, and an infinite smorgasbord served up by the world. Once they have subdued one goal, they soon find their craving has not been eliminated, and they charge off into another direction.

That seemingly insatiable craving is inborn into all spirit children of our Father in Heaven. It can be fulfilled and satisfied only when we lose ourselves in the service of others. By so doing, we begin to feel the Savior's love for us, the love of our fellowman for us, and a Christlike love for the Savior and all God's children. That love sometimes feels as if it is going to consume us, but instead it purifies, sanctifies, and satisfies.

The joy of feeling Christlike love for others is indescribable and delicious to the taste. Can we comprehend such love? While on this earth, perhaps we can only obtain a finite understanding, but as we reach out in pure love to serve others, we do get a glimpse into infinite love. Service is not the price we pay to earn the celestial kingdom. Service is the very fiber of which the celestial kingdom is made.

As we remain true to our covenants and go through the trials and sorrows of this life with our hearts turned toward the Lord, something begins to happen to our nature. Through the gift of God, by the power of the Holy Spirit, a metamorphosis takes place, which we have referred to as purification and sanctification. As this evolves, our thoughts and actions are turned from our own problems to feeling compassion and empathy for others. This is demonstrated by spontaneous acts of Christian service.

As we lose our lives in serving others, each of us can find our life. We can discover a great truth: True happiness can be found only when we are lifting others. Our whole disposition is turned to doing good, and we have no disposition to do evil. We have arrived on the second plateau.
