Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

Third Plateau:

Spiritual Graduate School

11

Mysteries, Miracles, and Signs

What more could we ask for than to reach the second plateau, sanctification? Nothing, really, because once we have reached that plateau, we have accomplished what we were sent to earth to do. We have accepted the gospel, placed our faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ, repented, and become very much like Him. With this oneness, our life is filled with good deeds, all done for the right reason because it has become our disposition to do so. Nevertheless, the Lord continues to bless us with what we need in our eternal progression. To those who sanctify themselves, a third plateau emerges.

I have entitled the third plateau "spiritual graduate school." There are blessings available to those who have become substantially purified or sanctified, blessings that are reserved for the pure in heart. From the moment we become converted, we receive personal revelation through the Holy Ghost. This is what takes us to the testimony plateau. Revelation increases as we travel the difficult trail of the sanctification process. At some point on that spectrum, another vista opens to us. The timing is impossible to pinpoint, for it depends on our circumstances, need, and righteousness. This spiritual graduate school is a continuum, but some aspects of the training definitely come when we prove ourselves by our endurance.

Modern-day revelation tells us: "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come. There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:18-21.)

As this scripture points out, the receipt of a blessing depends upon obedience to the law upon which it is predicated. The blessing of spiritual graduate school comes as a person becomes purified and sanctified. Sometimes this advanced information is referred to as mysteries of the kingdom. In the first verse in the Book of Mormon, we are introduced to this reality: "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father; and having seen many afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless, having been highly favored of the Lord in all my days; yea, having had a great knowledge of the goodness and the mysteries of God, therefore I make a record of my proceedings in my days." (1 Nephi 1:1.)

Of special note relative to the theme of this book is that Nephi refers to all three plateaus in this verse: testimony, sanctification (through his afflictions), and spiritual graduate school (knowledge of the mysteries of God). Many other scriptures invite us to learn these truths. Here are just a few:

"It is given unto you [Jesus' disciples] to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them [those who are not spiritually attuned] it is not given." (Matthew 13:11.)

"Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God." (1 Corinthians 4:1.)

"And it came to pass that I, Nephi, being exceedingly young, nevertheless being large in stature, and also having great desires to know of the mysteries of God, wherefore, I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father; wherefore, I did not rebel against him like unto my brothers." (1 Nephi 2:16.)

"For he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the Lord is one eternal round." (1 Nephi 10:19.)

"Yea, he that repenteth and exerciseth faith, and bringeth forth good works, and prayeth continually without ceasing—unto such it is given to know the mysteries of God; yea, unto such it shall be given to reveal things which never have been revealed; yea, and it shall be given unto such to bring thousands of souls to repentance, even as it has been given unto us to bring these our brethren to repentance." (Alma 26:22.)

"If thou shalt ask, thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal." (D&C 42:61.)

"Seek not for riches but for wisdom, and behold, the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. Behold, he that hath eternal life is rich." (D&C 6:7.)

"And to them [the righteous] will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom." (D&C 76:7.)

"The power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—to have the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant." (D&C 107:18-19.)

As these scriptures demonstrate, mysteries are revealed to those who obey the law upon which the blessing is predicated.

We also learn that signs follow those who believe. The appropriate purpose of signs is given in section 63 of the Doctrine and Covenants: "Verily, I say unto you, there are those among you who seek signs, and there have been such even from the beginning; but, behold, faith cometh not by signs, but signs follow those that believe." (D&C 63:8-9.)

From this we learn there is nothing inherently evil in signs; in fact, they are a natural consequence of righteousness. They are gifts from God to those who purify themselves before Him. However, we are not to seek after them for physical proof of what the Spirit has revealed to us. Once we have accepted and believed what the Spirit tells us, signs follow.

President Spencer W. Kimball said, "Signs will follow them that believe. He makes no promise that signs will create belief nor save nor exalt. Signs are the product of faith. They are born in the soil of unwavering sureness. They will be prevalent in the Church in about the same degree to which the people have true faith." (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 500.)

President Brigham Young said: "Miracles, or these extraordinary manifestations of the power of God, are not for the unbeliever; they are to console the Saints, and to strengthen and confirm the faith of those who love, fear, and serve God, and not for outsiders." (Discourses of Brigham Young, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954, p. 341.)

From Elder James E. Talmage we learn: "Miracles are not primarily intended, surely they are not needed, to prove the power of God; the simpler occurrences, the more ordinary works of creation do that. But unto the heart already softened and purified by the testimony of the truth, to the mind enlightened through the Spirit's power and conscious of obedient service in the requirements of the Gospel, the voice of miracles comes with cheering tidings, with fresh and more abundant evidences of the magnanimity of an all merciful God." (Articles of Faith, 1984 ed., p. 199.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie put it this way: "Miracles are part of the gospel. Signs follow those that believe. Where the doctrines of salvation are taught in purity and perfection, where there are believing souls who accept these truths and make them a part of their lives, and where devout souls accept Jesus as their Lord and serve him to the best of their ability, there will always be miracles. Such ever attend the preaching of the gospel to receptive and conforming people. Miracles stand as a sign and a witness of the truth and divinity of the Lord's work. Where there are miracles, there is the gospel, the Church, the kingdom, and the hope of salvation. Where there are no signs and miracles, none of these desired blessings will be found." (The Mortal Messiah 2:10.)

Elder McConkie also wrote: "Signs flow from faith. They may incidentally have the effect of strengthening the faith of those who are already spiritually inclined, but their chief purpose is not to convert people to the truth, but to reward and bless those already converted. . . . To seek the gifts of the Spirit through faith, humility, and devotion to righteousness is not to be confused with sign-seeking. The saints are commanded to 'covet earnestly the best gifts.' (1 Cor. 12:31.) But implicit in this exhortation is the presumption that those so seeking will do so in the way the Lord has ordained." (Mormon Doctrine, pp. 713, 715.)

Many of us have heard the counsel, "Don't get into the mysteries." Elder McConkie sheds light on this seeming inconsistency: "There is . . . a restricted and limited usage of the expression mysteries; it is more of a colloquial than a scriptural usage, and it has reference to that body of teachings in the speculative field, those things which the Lord has not revealed in plainness in this day. It is to these things that reference is made when the elders are counseled to leave the mysteries alone.

"'Oh, ye elders of Israel, hearken to my voice,' the Prophet said, 'and when you are sent into the world to preach, tell those things you are sent to tell; preach and cry aloud, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; repent and believe the gospel." Declare the first principles, and let mysteries alone, lest ye be overthrown. Never meddle with the visions of beasts and subjects you do not understand.' (Teachings, p. 292.)" (Ibid., p. 524.)

Mysteries are elusive because as soon as one understands a concept, it is no longer a mystery. The gospel itself is a mystery to the world at large. The fact that God the Father has a body of flesh and bones is a mystery to most of mankind. Latter-day Saints take for granted the wealth of mysteries that have been revealed in this last dispensation. Mysteries of general knowledge are received on the first and second plateaus. The mysteries on the third plateau are reserved for those who have obtained a certain amount of purification.

Let me illustrate this by quoting and elaborating on my favorite scriptures on this subject. You are familiar with Lehi's vision of the tree of life and that he explained this vision to his family. This was Nephi's reaction: "And it came to pass after I, Nephi, having heard all the words of my father, concerning the things which he saw in a vision, and also the things which he spake by the power of the Holy Ghost, . . . I, Nephi, was desirous also that I might see, and hear, and know of these things, by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him." (1 Nephi 10:17.)

Notice that Nephi did not pray, "Heavenly Father, bless me that I might know that what my father saw was true." He said he was desirous to have the same vision.

Nephi continued: "For it came to pass after I had desired to know the things that my father had seen, and believing that the Lord was able to make them known unto me, as I sat pondering in mine heart I was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceedingly high mountain, which I never had before seen, and upon which I never had before set my foot." (1 Nephi 11:1.)

Then Nephi went on to recount that he saw the things his father had seen. He was not content to live by the testimony of his father. He wanted to experience these things and know them for himself. This was not idle curiosity or selfishness. He was not seeking a sign. It was a righteous desire. He already had an unshakable testimony, and all evidence suggests he had experienced the mighty change of heart. The Lord said to him, "Blessed art thou, Nephi, because thou believest in the Son of the most high God; wherefore, thou shalt behold the things which thou hast desired." (1 Nephi 11:6.)

Nephi was shown the same vision as his father. It was in this context that he wrote: "He that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the Lord is one eternal round." (1 Nephi 10:19.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants we are told: "If your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will." (D&C 88:67-68.)

This scripture illustrates my point that some spiritual insights are reserved for those who have sanctified and purified themselves, insights that would not be available to those who have not paid the price.

When section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants is mentioned, most of us think of the three degrees of glory. This is another example of a mystery not understood by the world in general. Also included in this section is the majestic vision of the Father and His Son. Joseph Smith recorded: "We beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his fulness; and saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever. And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—that by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God." (D&C 76:20-24.)

The last verses of section 76 are some of the greatest scriptural beckonings to the third plateau in holy writ. Unfortunately, in many of our gospel discussions we never reach the end of that section. One reason may be that too often we get into a debate as to whether or not one can progress from one degree of glory to the other. We also tend to think up every hypothetical situation possible and argue over to which degree of glory each person would be assigned. In other words, we delve into the speculative mysteries—and while thus engaged, we don't catch the vision of supernal truth available to us if we are willing to pay the price.

After disclosing the vision of the Father and the Son, the three degrees of glory, and many other beautiful truths that had previously been mysteries to all mankind, Joseph Smith concluded the revelation as follows: "Great and marvelous are the works of the Lord, and the mysteries of his kingdom which he showed unto us, which surpass all understanding in glory, and in might, and in dominion; which he commanded us we should not write while we were yet in the Spirit, and are not lawful for man to utter." (D&C 76:114-15.)

The Prophet almost seems to be teasing us by saying, in effect, "If you think what we've written is exciting, you should have seen what else we saw, but we can't tell you." However, in reading the next verses we find the commandment wasn't necessary, because words could not describe it: "Neither is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him; to whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves; that through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh, they may be able to bear his presence in the world of glory." (D&C 76:116-18.)

Note the condition upon which the blessing is predicated: purification, the second plateau.

A similar invitation is made in section 93: "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am." (D&C 93:1.)

Hence, some things that are available to those who "purify themselves before him" are not disclosed to the general membership of the Church, let alone the world. These things I am classifying as spiritual graduate school.

Since God is no respecter of persons, all who purify and sanctify their lives (the second plateau) have access to learning the mysteries of the kingdom. As Elder McConkie put it: "Personal revelation is not limited to gaining a testimony and knowing thereby that Jesus, through whom the gospel came, is Lord of all, nor is it limited to receiving guidance in our personal and family affairs—although these are the most common examples of revelation among the Lord's people. In truth and in verity, there is no limit to the revelations each member of the Church may receive. It is within the power of every person who has received the gift of the Holy Ghost to see visions, entertain angels, learn the deep and hidden mysteries of the kingdom." (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985, pp. 489-90.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants we are told that the key to the third plateau is the Melchizedek Priesthood: "This greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest. And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh; for without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." (D&C 84:19-22.)

Commenting on section 84, Joseph Fielding Smith said: "It is impossible for men to obtain the knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom or the knowledge of God, without the authority of the Priesthood. Secular learning, the study of the sciences, arts and history, will not reveal these vital truths to men. It is the Holy Priesthood that unlocks the door to heaven and reveals to man the mysteries of the Kingdom of God. It is this Divine Authority which makes known the knowledge of God! Is there any wonder that the world today is groping in gross darkness concerning God and the things of his kingdom? We should also remember that these great truths are not made known even to members of the Church unless they place their lives in harmony with the law on which these blessings are predicated." (Church History and Modern Revelation, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1953, 1:338.)

It should go without saying that the blessings are available to male and female alike. We sometimes confuse the privilege of holding the priesthood with the blessings of the priesthood. Blessings of the priesthood are far greater than those concerned with holding the priesthood. The ordinances and covenants of the priesthood and remaining true to them are what bring forth the blessings.

On this subject President Smith said: "It ought to make every man among us who holds the priesthood rejoice to think that we have that great authority by which we may know God. Not only the men holding the priesthood know that great truth, but because of that priesthood and the ordinances thereof, every member of the Church, men and women alike, may know God." (Doctrines of Salvation, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, vol. 3, 1956, pp. 142-43.)
