Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

12

Third Plateau Experiences of Today

Blessings of the third plateau are available to all and are present in the Church today. According to the Book of Mormon, those things will always be with the Church as long as there are righteous people:

"Wherefore, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased because Christ hath ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the right hand of God, to claim of the Father his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men? For he hath answered the ends of the law, and he claimeth all those who have faith in him; and they who have faith in him will cleave unto every good thing; wherefore he advocateth the cause of the children of men; and he dwelleth eternally in the heavens.

"And because he hath done this, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased? Behold I say unto you, Nay; neither have angels ceased to minister unto the children of men. For behold, they are subject unto him, to minister according to the word of his command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness. And the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him. . . .

"And now, my beloved brethren, if this be the case that these things are true which I have spoken unto you, and God will show unto you, with power and great glory at the last day, that they are true, and if they are true has the day of miracles ceased? Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain." (Moroni 7:27-31, 35-37.)

Modern-day prophets have testified to that reality. Elder Boyd K. Packer has said: "We who have been called to lead the Church are ordinary men and women with ordinary capacities struggling to administer a church which grows at such a pace as to astound even those who watch it closely. Some are disposed to find fault with us; surely that is easy for them to do. But they do not examine us more searchingly than we examine ourselves. A call to lead is not an exemption from the challenges of life. We seek for inspiration in the same way that you do, and we must obey the same laws which apply to every member of the Church.

"We are sorry for our inadequacies, sorry we are not better than we are. We can feel, as you can see, the effect of the aging process as it imposes limitations upon His leaders before your very eyes.

"But this we know. There are councils and counselors and quorums to counterbalance the foibles and frailties of man. The Lord organized His church to provide for mortal men to work as mortal men, and yet He assured that the spirit of revelation would guide in all that we do in His name.

"And in the end, what is given comes because the Lord has spoken it, 'whether by [His] own voice or by the voice of [His] servants, it is the same.' (D&C 1:38.) We know His voice when He speaks.

"Revelation continues with us today. The promptings of the Spirit, the dreams, the visions and the visitations, and the ministering of angels all are with us now. And the still, small voice of the Holy Ghost 'is a lamp unto [our] feet, and a light unto [our] path.' (Psalm 119:105.)" (Ensign, November 1989, p. 16.)

To this I add the sacred testimony and experience of Elder David B. Haight, which he shared in general conference:

"Six months ago at the April general conference, I was excused from speaking as I was convalescing from a serious operation. My life has been spared, and I now have the pleasant opportunity of acknowledging the blessings, comfort, and ready aid of my Brethren in the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, and other wonderful associates and friends to whom I owe so much and who surrounded my dear wife, Ruby, and my family with their time, attention, and prayers. . . .

"The evening of my health crisis, I knew something very serious had happened to me. Events happened so swiftly—the pain striking with such intensity, my dear Ruby phoning the doctor and our family, and I on my knees leaning over the bathtub for support and some comfort and hoped relief from the pain. I was pleading to my Heavenly Father to spare my life a while longer to give me a little more time to do His work, if it was His will.

"While still praying, I began to lose consciousness. The siren of the paramedic truck was the last that I remembered before unconsciousness overtook me, which would last for the next several days.

"The terrible pain and commotion of people ceased. I was now in a calm, peaceful setting; all was serene and quiet. I was conscious of two persons in the distance on a hillside, one standing on a higher level than the other. Detailed features were not discernible. The person on the higher level was pointing to something I could not see.

"I heard no voices but was conscious of being in a holy presence and atmosphere. During the hours and days that followed, there was impressed again and again upon my mind the eternal mission and exalted position of the Son of Man.

"I witness to you that He is Jesus the Christ, the Son of God, Savior to all, Redeemer of all mankind, Bestower of infinite love, mercy, and forgiveness, the Light and Life of the world. I knew this truth before—I had never doubted nor wondered. But now I knew, because of the impressions of the Spirit upon my heart and soul, these divine truths in a most unusual way.

"I was shown a panoramic view of His earthly ministry: His baptism, His teaching, His healing the sick and lame, the mock trial, His crucifixion, His resurrection and ascension. There followed scenes of His earthly ministry to my mind in impressive detail, confirming scriptural eyewitness accounts. I was being taught, and the eyes of my understanding were opened by the Holy Spirit of God so as to behold many things. . . .

"During those days of unconsciousness I was given, by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, a more perfect knowledge of His mission. I was also given a more complete understanding of what it means to exercise, in His name, the authority to unlock the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven for the salvation of all who are faithful. My soul was taught over and over again. . . .

"I cannot begin to convey to you the deep impact that these scenes have confirmed upon my soul. . . . I testify to all of you that our Heavenly Father does answer our righteous pleadings. The added knowledge which has come to me has made a great impact upon my life. The gift of the Holy Ghost is a priceless possession and opens the door to our ongoing knowledge of God and eternal joy. Of this I bear witness, in the holy name of Jesus Christ, amen." (Ensign, November 1989, pp. 59-61.)

While these testimonies are from two of the Lord's special witnesses, I reemphasize that God is no respecter of persons, and that these blessings come as a result of purity, not position.

As a general rule, this type of revelation is reserved for the pure in heart. It comes after a trial of faith. Faith precedes the miracle. Why is it reserved for those who have proven themselves? If we do not learn how to recognize the truth of unseen things, we will not be able to discern the source of physical manifestations. For every spiritual gift or manifestation from the Lord, Satan has a counterfeit.

Sometimes people struggling with a testimony (especially transgressors who are losing the testimony they once had) will pray for manifestations of the third plateau. Satan hears and obliges them. Inasmuch as these persons have lost the discernment of the Spirit—or have not matured in the gospel enough to have ever acquired it—they accept the manifestation as having come from the Lord. Satan then leads them carefully away from the Church and often into open rebellion against it.

As Elder Talmage put it: "Specified gifts of the Spirit are to follow the believer as signs of divine acknowledgment. The possession of such gifts may be taken therefore as essential features of the Church of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, we are not justified in regarding the evidence of miracles as proof of authority from heaven; on the other hand, the scriptures aver that spiritual powers of the baser sort have wrought miracles, and will continue so to do, to the deceiving of many who lack discernment. . . . John the Revelator saw in vision a wicked power working miracles, and thereby deceiving many, doing great wonders, even bringing fire from heaven. Again, he saw unclean spirits, whom he knew to be 'the spirits of devils, working miracles.' " (Articles of Faith, 1984 ed., p. 209.)

President Joseph F. Smith said: "The gifts of the Spirit and the powers of the holy Priesthood are of God, they are given for the blessing of the people, for their encouragement, and for the strengthening of their faith. This Satan knows full well, therefore he seeks by imitation-miracles to blind and deceive the children of God. Remember what the magicians of Egypt accomplished in their efforts to deceive Pharaoh as to the divinity of the mission of Moses and Aaron. John the Revelator saw in vision the miracle-working power of the evil one. Note his words. 'And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; . . . and he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men. And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by the means of those miracles,' etc. (Rev. 13:11-14.) Further, John saw three unclean spirits whom he describes as 'the spirits of devils, working miracles.' (Rev. 16:13-14.)" (Gospel Doctrine, p. 376.)

With these truths in mind, it is easier to understand why I suggest the chronology of the spiritual plateaus: testimony, sanctification, and spiritual graduate school. The revelations of which we have been speaking come subsequent to sanctification in order that they will not be mocked by one not ready to receive them, or imitated by the evil one. Satan's counterfeit cannot fool a person who, through faithfulness, has acquired the ability to discern good from evil. That person has already learned to discern the truth of things unseen and is now qualified to discern the truth and source of things seen.

These things are not talked of much by those who have experienced them, because they are personal and sacred. Alma said: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him. And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full." (Alma 12:9-10.)

Elder Widtsoe said: "Divine manifestations for individual comfort may be received by every worthy member of the Church. In that respect all faithful members of the Church are equal. Such manifestations most commonly guide the recipients to the solution of personal problems; though, frequently, they also open the mind to a clearer comprehension of the Lord's vast plan of salvation. They are cherished possessions, and should be so valued by those who receive them. In their very nature, they are sacred and should be so treated." (Evidences and Reconciliations, pp. 98-99.)

When asked, inappropriately, "Have you ever had any spectacular spiritual experiences from beyond the veil?" someone once wisely answered, "Nothing to speak of."

While we hold such experiences sacred, those who have received counterfeit manifestations from the evil one often shout them from the rooftops and publish them in newspapers. It is horrifying to see how misled some individuals can become. Some who break sacred moral commandments and even commit violent crimes will use as a justification, "I received a revelation." As members of Christ's church, we must always remember that beautiful, spiritual things have a dark and opposite side. Satan is willing and able to produce his own miracles. He does not hold them sacred.

Elder Packer has said, "All inspiration does not come from God. (See D&C 46:7.) The evil one has the power to tap into those channels of revelation and send conflicting signals which can mislead and confuse us. There are promptings from evil sources which are so carefully counterfeited as to deceive even the very elect. (See Matthew 24:24.) Nevertheless, we can learn to discern these spirits. Even with every member having the right to revelation, the Church can be maintained as a house of order." (Ensign, November 1989, p. 14.)

Moses is an example of a person who had a physical witness of the Savior, followed by a physical visit from Satan. At the time both were spirits. Regarding Moses' experience, we read: "[Moses] saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence. And God spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and Endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years; and is not this endless?" (Moses 1:2-3.)

The Lord then showed Moses the world in its completeness: "And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created; and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marveled and wondered." (Moses 1:8.)

In other words, the Lord revealed some mysteries to Moses. Then, we read: "The presence of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses; and Moses was left unto himself. And as he was left unto himself, he fell unto the earth. And it came to pass that it was for the space of many hours before Moses did again receive his natural strength like unto man; and he said unto himself: Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed. But now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him." (Moses 1:9-11.)

Immediately thereafter, Satan appeared to Moses and tempted him, saying, "Moses, son of man, worship me." (Moses 1:12.)

Moses had two reasons for seeing through Satan. First, he had just seen the Lord and could compare the two visits. He could see a difference in the glory. He told Satan, "I could not look upon God, except his glory should come upon me, and I were transfigured before him. But I can look upon thee in the natural man. Is it not so, surely?" (Moses 1:14.)

The second reason was that by the discernment of the Spirit, Moses could tell that this spectacular manifestation was not of God: "Blessed be the name of my God, for his Spirit hath not altogether withdrawn from me, or else where is thy glory, for it is darkness unto me? And I can judge between thee and God; for God said unto me: Worship God, for him only shalt thou serve. Get thee hence, Satan; deceive me not; for God said unto me: Thou art after the similitude of mine Only Begotten. And he also gave me commandments when he called unto me out of the burning bush, saying: Call upon God in the name of mine Only Begotten, and worship me. And again Moses said: I will not cease to call upon God, I have other things to inquire of him: for his glory has been upon me, wherefore I can judge between him and thee. Depart hence, Satan." (Moses 1:15-18; italics added.)

Moses had reached a level of sanctification whereby he could discern the source of a physical manifestation. He commanded Satan to leave, at which Satan became very angry and, showing his true ugliness, had a temper tantrum: "Now Satan began to tremble, and the earth shook; and Moses received strength, and called upon God, saying: In the name of the Only Begotten, depart hence, Satan. And it came to pass that Satan cried with a loud voice, with weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; and he departed hence, even from the presence of Moses, that he beheld him not." (Moses 1:21-22.)

Again, we see the very real power of Satan and his ability to do miraculous things. The earth shook, but he was dismissed by the higher power. Should Satan and his angels appear to someone of less spiritual maturity than Moses and demonstrate their powers, it is possible that that person could be misled. Consequently, there is a reason for the chronology of the plateaus.
