Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

13

The Still Small Voice

We have reviewed scriptures relative to the mysteries of the kingdom. I have also pointed out through the scriptures that miracles have not ceased nor have visions, dreams, and visitations of angels. My objective has been to awaken us to our individual spiritual potential. I would now like to bring these more "spectacular" revelations into perspective. I will have done a great injustice to the seeker of truth if anyone has been led to the conclusion that all "spiritual graduate school" is taught by visions, dreams, and visitations. In fact, quite the opposite is true. Mysteries of the kingdom are taught for the most part by the Spirit of the Holy Ghost as we ponder the scriptures for answers to our soul's questions.

We may have read the Book of Mormon many times, but between readings we experience life and the sanctification that accompanies a true Saint. Because of our experiences, the current reading can trigger a depth of understanding not previously grasped. We constantly "discover" new scriptures in the same book. In the process, the Holy Ghost gives customized revelation to each individual to suit his or her level of spiritual development. Sometimes we search out people with whom to share our new insight. Sometimes the individual gives us a look that implies, "Did you just discover that?" Other individuals can't comprehend what we are talking about because they are not yet ready. Gradually we gain the wisdom to rely on the Spirit to let us know what should and what should not be shared and with whom we should or should not share.

The still small voice is the vehicle most commonly used for educating us on the mysteries of the kingdom, just as it is the vehicle most commonly used for relaying the truthfulness of the gospel to investigators. The experience we gain in listening to this voice in gaining our testimonies and going through the sanctification helps develop the skill necessary for spiritual graduate school.

Therefore, the fact that a person has not received a vision or visitation does not mean "spiritual graduate school" has not yet begun. One plateau leads to another. There are no clear distinctions in leaving one and entering another. We receive line upon line, precept upon precept. In the Book of Mormon we read: "Now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this strait and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save. Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:19-20.)

And in the Doctrine and Covenants: "Behold, ye are little children and ye cannot bear all things now; ye must grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth. Fear not, little children, for you are mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are of them that my Father hath given me; and none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost. And the Father and I are one. I am in the Father and the Father in me; and inasmuch as ye have received me, ye are in me and I in you. Wherefore, I am in your midst, and I am the good shepherd, and the stone of Israel. He that buildeth upon this rock shall never fail. And the day cometh that you shall hear my voice and see me, and know that I am." (D&C 50:40-45.)

We know there are many gifts of the Spirit. The Doctrine and Covenants delineates them very well in section 46. I would like to make several points relating to the gifts that are relevant to our spiritual progress through the plateaus. In verse 7, we are told to beware of being seduced by evil spirits: "Ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devils."

In verse 8 we are told, "Seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given."

Then in verses 9 and 10, we are told why the gifts are given: "They are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited that seek or that ask of me, that ask and not for a sign that they may consume it upon their lusts. And again, verily I say unto you, I would that ye should always remember, and always retain in your minds what those gifts are, that are given unto the church."

These gifts are to keep us moving toward exaltation and to help build our testimonies, love, sanctification, and, I would suggest, spiritual schooling. They are for the benefit of the membership of the Church individually and collectively. However, although many gifts are available, we are instructed that not everyone has every gift:

"For all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God. To some is given one, and to some is given another, that all may be profited thereby.

"To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world. To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful. And again, to some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know the differences of administration, as it will be pleasing unto the same Lord, according as the Lord will, suiting his mercies according to the conditions of the children of men. And again, it is given by the Holy Ghost to some to know the diversities of operations, whether they be of God, that the manifestations of the Spirit may be given to every man to profit withal.

"And again, verily I say unto you, to some is given, by the Spirit of God, the word of wisdom. To another is given the word of knowledge, that all may be taught to be wise, and to have knowledge.

"And again, to some it is given to have faith to be healed; and to others it is given to have faith to heal.

"And again, to some is given the working of miracles; and to others it is given to prophesy; and to others the discerning of spirits.

"And again, it is given to some to speak with tongues; and to another is given the interpretation of tongues.

"And all these gifts come from God, for the benefit of the children of God.'' (D&C 46:11-26.)

Since all have not every gift, but the gifts are to benefit all, we should not feel inadequate when we see that others possess gifts we have not experienced. We all have need of each other, and we each have some gifts and talents unique to us. Consequently, we can be of great service to others. In this way, we are all interdependent on each other. With this circumstance, we are all able to give and receive, and this process sanctifies us.

As we enter spiritual graduate school, we should not be concerned about the vehicle the Lord chooses to carry his instruction. Compared to the celestial knowledge, the vehicle is irrelevant. However, I bear you my witness that as we progress, we discover new talents and gifts, and this will continue as long as we dedicate them to blessing the lives of the Lord's children.
