Glenn L. Pace, Spiritual Plateaus ( 1991)

Epilogue

In the preface, I dedicated this book to the rank-and-file members of the Church—especially those who have not held the more visible positions in Church government and may be having some questions relative to their eternal progress. This group is on my mind partly because it is the group from which I came and partly because of the common expression I have heard from them: "I know the gospel is true, but I'm not sure I'm good enough or strong enough to make it." I pray my humble words have had some impact on your confidence and feelings of spiritual self-worth and that this confidence will lead you to a desire to keep climbing upward to new plateaus.

I would like to summarize all I have written by telling an experience of someone close to me who experienced the three plateaus in a short, three-year period. Another reason for sharing this is to reach out to those who have not, for whatever reason, seen fit to join the Saints in full fellowship. By this I mean specifically those who at this moment have not put aside whatever is keeping them from receiving their temple blessings. Sometimes we refer to these individuals as "less active."

Our approach to less-active members is not always as sensitive or loving as it could be. Perhaps I should use myself as an example because as an elders quorum president, I made some mistakes in this regard. When I was called, I decided to meet in the home of every member whether or not he attended any meetings. I had never met some of those brethren. On my first visit, after exchanges of pleasantries and gathering the family around, I would ask the prospective elder, "Don't you want to be with your family forever?" Now, that sounded like a legitimate question to me at the time, but with hindsight I can see that asking a man or a woman that question in front of his or her spouse and children is very unfair. In fact, I would go so far as to say it was a "cheap shot." Of course they want to be with their family forever, but at the current time there are conditions affecting that eventuality. This makes the question unanswerable. If the answer was yes, the quorum member knew I would jump all over him. If he said no, his wife and children would jump all over him. I asked the wrong question.

I sometimes catch myself asking my children "unanswerable" questions of the same sort. I will ask a son, "Do you want to break your neck?" Of course not, but he does want to climb on the garage roof. I will ask, "Do you want to starve to death?" Of course not, but he doesn't want to eat his big, squishy peas or lima beans either. I guess my favorite is, "Do you want a spanking?" Not once have I had a child answer, "Oh, please!"

Having repented of that approach, I would like to reach out to the less active by telling you about my Uncle Bill. His story crystallizes the progression of the plateaus from testimony, sanctification, and spiritual graduate school.

First, let me describe Bill to you. Everyone will recognize him and think I'm talking of someone they know before I get to the specifics. He was a big, strong man. When he shook my hand, my bones cracked. It was difficult for him to sit through long meetings and he couldn't stand to be in a suit and tie. He loved nature. He didn't like being assigned to visit someone. "If I want to visit, I'll visit." And yet, if someone was in trouble or needed help, he was there, unassigned. If the widow next door or across the street needed help, he was there. He could fix anything. However, after being married for fifty years, he still had not taken his wife and children to the temple.

When I received my current assignment on April 5, 1985, my favorite card of congratulations came from Uncle Bill:

Glenn, I just wanted to tell ya how proud I am of ya. You should be proud too because you accomplished something nobody else has ever been able to do. You got this old reprobate of an uncle of yours to watch general conference. Bill. P.S. Yours was the best talk.

In July of that year, he and my Aunt Fon celebrated their fiftieth wedding anniversary. After the reception, I walked them out to the car, and once more Uncle Bill told me how proud he was of me. I replied, "Thanks, and do you know something else? With this call, I also received the sealing power. One of these days, if you'll bring Aunt Fon to the Salt Lake Temple, I'll tell you what I'll do for you. I'll perform your sealing for free!" They both gave nervous chuckles and a loving smile. I wonder what would have happened if I had said, "Uncle Bill, don't you want to be with Aunt Fon forever?"

Months passed and one Sunday evening I returned home at about midnight from a stake conference. There was a note from my wife where she knew I would find it—on the refrigerator door: Call your Uncle Bill, no matter what time you get home.

Even though it was late I took Bill at his word and returned the call. He told me that he had called to collect on the anniversary present I had given him. I put my hand over the telephone receiver and asked my wife, "What did we give Bill for his anniversary?"

Before she could answer he said, "You know, the free marriage sealing in the Salt Lake Temple."

I responded, "Are you serious?"

He said, "Yup. As a matter of fact, the bishop is still here. Do you want to talk to him?" (He wouldn't let the bishop go home until I called.)

The bishop confirmed what Bill had said, that he was working toward getting his temple recommend. I asked Uncle Bill when they planned to go to the temple and he said, "The bishop thinks I can be good enough in two months."

This good man had been on the first plateau for years. I never questioned that he had a testimony and there was a lot of good done in his life because of his testimony and because of the fact that he was basically a very good man. He was now ready, however, to make a total commitment and go to the temple where he would receive the blessings that would put him well on his way to the second plateau of sanctification. There was already some of this taking place due to the trials he had suffered in his life as well as the service he had performed for others. But now a greater infusion of the Spirit would be possible because of this final commitment.

A date was set and there in the Salt Lake Temple, Uncle Bill and Aunt Fon were sealed to each other and to two of their middle-aged sons who had previously received their endowment.

A year passed and I received a phone call from one of his sons, my cousin, informing me that there had been a tragic accident. His nineteen-year-old daughter, who had been married about a year, had been killed in an automobile accident. He was at the hospital with her awaiting the arrival of his wife. He asked if I would come up to be with them. This I did and there participated in a very sobering and sacred event. I stood with my cousin and his wife over the lifeless body of their beloved daughter. I described this event earlier in this book. As we went to the viewing later in the week, Uncle Bill sought me out. He was very close to this granddaughter and he shared with me his great gratitude to his Father in Heaven that he had seen fit earlier to do those things which needed to be done to place him in complete harmony with the gospel. He said, "I don't know how I would ever have been able to stand this if I didn't know that I would be able to be with her again." He added, "As a matter of fact, I feel that when I go to the other side she will be allowed to usher me home."

On several other occasions he expressed his happiness and shared some very sacred experiences he had had relative to feeling the presence of those in the spirit world. He was encouraged and comforted at this particular time in his life. It was as if he had received a speeding-up of the sanctification process and he was definitely enrolled in graduate school.

Another year or two went by, and I received another call from my cousin, telling me that Uncle Bill was very ill and asking me to come to the hospital and administer to him. Priesthood leaders who have received similar calls will understand the humility and anxiety one feels on such an occasion. There is no time to prepare—except to pray for inspiration to say that which should be said.

I walked into the hospital and saw the family gathered around the bed and felt not only humility but inadequacy. There was my aunt who had faith in the Melchizedek Priesthood and in her nephew who was a General Authority. I looked into her pleading eyes and then went over to the bed and chatted with Bill, who was conscious and coherent at the time. I spent five minutes just stroking his beautiful white hair, and then nodded to my cousin to join me in the blessing. As I placed my hands upon his head, I looked again into the pleading eyes of my aunt, but the impression that came to my mind as I sealed the anointing went something like this, "Bill, I bless you that the pain you have experienced will subside and that you will be able to spend the next few days having great joy and rejoicing in your posterity, and then you will begin to have a reunion with those who have passed on to the other side."

When we finished, I looked up expecting to see disappointment in my aunt's eyes, but although there were tears, she gave a knowing smile which told me the Spirit had borne witness to her that the blessing was the will of the Lord. Uncle Bill took hold of my hand. To my memory, it was the only time that we shook hands that he didn't crack my knuckles. He gave me a big smile, pulled me down to his head where I kissed him on the cheek, and he said, "Glenn, thanks for the anniversary present."

I don't know what Bill's final judgment would have been if he had not made the final commitment prior to his death. There is one thing, however, of which I am certain. The last three years of his life were the happiest of his life. He told me that on many occasions.

Too often we decide we had better start living the gospel so that we can escape punishment on the other side. We need to realize that the joy of living the gospel is not postponed until after death. The benefits derived from following the Lord's plan are to be experienced now. We can receive much comfort prior to receiving the ultimate comfort of returning to the presence of our Father in Heaven. We can experience the joys of the sanctification process and marvel in the teachings of the spiritual graduate school.

If Bill were able to pen his own words, I'm sure he would say something like this: "Don't wait until you're seventy-five years old to put your life in order. I had no idea what I was missing."
