Daniel Tyler, Concise History of the Mormon Battalion ( 1881)

364CHAPTER XLVI.

364Synopsis of a Lecture by James Ferguson—Correspondence Between Ferguson and Cooke—Cooke's Deference to the Mormon Battalion when Passing Through Salt Lake City in 1858—Survivors of the Mormon Battalion—Song.

364The following from a lecture by Sargeant Major James Ferguson, delivered before an assembly of Elders, including the Presidency of the Church in Europe, at 36, Islington, Liverpool, Nov. 7, 1855, is an interesting review of some of the most striking incidents of the Battalion's experience:

364"Although on the subject of the Mormon Battalion much has been said and written, I cheerfully comply with the request of our much-loved President, brother Franklin D. Richards to speak upon it now. It may seem strange to you that such a subject should be called up in these lands; but when you call to mind that there is no portion of the kingdom of God with which the interests of that Battalion are not now interwoven, it cannot seem strange to you that it should be talked of wherever that kingdom has an interest.

364"We were mustered into service on the 16th of July, 1846. A few hurried preparations, and the gray haired old men and striplings marched off merrily as our commander ordered the music to play a hasty farewell to `the friends we left behind us.'

364"Deprived of the rights granted to other volunteers, of choosing our own officers, Captain Allen, of the regular dragoons, was commissioned by the President of the United States to command us. But he was a gallant and brave officer. The rigid discipline and rough service of the army had failed to smother the better impulses of his generous heart. He was ever ready to befriend us, and but for his stern and willing interference, we would have been compelled to submit to, or avenge, various and repeated insults as we passed down the frontiers of Missouri to our place of outfit, Fort Leavenworth.

365"But our bright hopes in him had an end here. Scarcely had we resumed our march, when the sad news of his death overtook us. A gloom overspread our whole camp, for there was not a heart but loved him.

365"At Council Grove, we were halted to deliberate how to proceed. The command of the Battalion was here given to Lieutenant Smith, of the First Dragoons. Letters were despatched to President Polk, praying for the privilege due to us, of electing our commander. And now commenced a series of the most trying cruelties. Our commander was not of himself cruel and wicked, but he was weak, and became, to a great extent, the creature of Doctor Sanderson, a rotten-hearted quack, that was imposed upon us as our surgeon. The hospital wagons, designed for our use by Colonel Allen, were left behind. These abuses continued and increased until, when we mustered at Santa Fe, and on the Rio Grande, one hundred and fifty of the Battalion were pronounced unable to continue the march to California. These were ordered back to winter quarters at the Pueblo near Taos, where, in the midst of much suffering and exposure, their term of enlistment nearly expired. Some of them died there; and among the number, young Richards, to whom I have before referred, and Blanchard, an only son of aged depending parents.

365"On our arrival at Santa Fe, instead of the favorable answer we had a right to expect from the government, we found Captain Cooke appointed to take command—an officer also of the First Dragoons, famous, in his own corps, for the tyrannical strictness of his discipline. Not a murmur was heard at this fresh indignity.

365"With a sorry outfit of jaded mules, famished beeves, and scabby sheep, we resumed our march. While yet in the settlements of New Mexico, our rations were reduced a quarter; and for our comfort, we learned that for a march of a hundred days, over an undiscovered country, we had fifty days' scanty rations.

"Leaving the Rio Grande, about the southern boundary of New Mexico, without a guide who knew the country before us, we turned in a westerly course. We threaded our way through the Sierra del Madre, cutting a road through the "Pass of the Guadaloupe," alternately pulling our ponderous wagons up the sandy hills, and lifting them down the rocky descents. The various incidents of our travels, each day presenting something new, are materials for a long history. I can only glance hastily at some scenes as I pass along.

366"Descending the Sierra del Madre, as we came in sight of the valley of the San Pedro, the vast prospect before us made us for a moment forget our fatigues and sufferings. Fresh hope seemed to enliven every heart. It seemed like a new world ready for population. Parched, and fainting with thirst, the waters of the river were before us, and the shade trees on its banks.

366"While marching down this river, a scene occurred, which, while it afforded amusement to some and suffering to others, manifested the kind watch-care of our Heavenly Father. Our beeves had dwindled down to a few sickly skeletons. Our camp was threatened with scurvy, and many attacked with diarrhoea; and there seemed no hope for us. Surprised, and some of them wounded by our hunters, a herd of wild cattle made their appearance on all sides of us. Some, more furious than the rest, made a dash at our train. One pitched a poor fellow into the air, severely wounding him. Another tossed a mule on its horns, and tore his entrails, while another lifted a wagon out of its track.

366"The troops of four "Presidios," having learned of our approach, had assembled at Tucson to interrupt our march. Heedless of the threats of the Mexican commandante, we advanced, and, as the troops retreated with their artillery, we marched through their walled town.

366"A desert of seventy miles brought us to the Gila. We were welcomed by the rude hospitality of the Pimas. An old chief, at the head of his warriors, squaws, and little ones met us in the path, and presenting his cakes of sweet cornmeal, invoked upon us the protection of the Great Spirit as we passed on.

"On the 10th of January, 1847, we crossed the Colorado. An unsuccessful attempt to raft our provisions down the Gila had deprived us of a great part of them, although we were already reduced to quarter rations. Without a chance for rest, we entered upon the `Tierra Calienta,' the Big Desert of the Colorado. Ninety miles without water, save in the deep wells we dug but had no time to drink from, brought us to the end of our deserts. Those alone who endured them can conceive the sufferings experienced on this desert. It was well named the Hot Land. In vain was our rear guard ordered to prevent the men from lagging behind; the stoutest staggered, and one after another fell fainting. They would revive, advance, and fall again; and many, when at last water and grass were found, fell down exhausted, unable to reach the camp. The clear stream appeared to laugh at them in mockery, and there they lay gasping till some feeling messmate returned with the replenished canteen.

367"A few days brought us to the rancho of the American Warner. Unlike the hospitable Pimas, he hid his bread and drove his cattle into the mountains. Here we learned of the retreat of the Californians from Los Angeles. Without a pause for rest, we changed our course to meet them, but they concealed themselves till we had passed.

367"Thus, despite of every attempt to bring us to an engagement, we reached our destination at San Diego, on the 31st of January, fulfilling the prediction of our President, that we should not fight a battle. God fought our battles for us, and our victories were not bought with blood. Garrison duty, drills, and entrenching the camp at Los Angeles, made up the balance of our service.

367"Many attempts were made by Fremont to excite the people of the country against us. He had attempted to retain the governorship of California, against General Kearny, when our arrival put a stop to his insubordination. Our entry into the Pueblo, starved, ragged, and weary, seemed to testify to the inhabitants to the truth of his accusations against us of cannibalism, barbarity, plunder, and rapine.

367"When he came into our midst at a subsequent period, how different his reception. He was starved, dismounted, and weary. His party sick and dying daily. We gave him shelter, fed him, furnished him with horses, and healed his sick. A dog will show gratitude to the hand that feeds him. But he is silent, or snaps like a wolf.

"His attempts were all in vain. The people soon learned that we were their friends and protectors. They petitioned for our re-enlistment, and wept at our discharge. We had made many friends. Lieutenants Smith and Stoneman parted from us with regret. They had with others been taught to despise us. But they soon found, that though `Mormons,' and many of us from other lands, we had the hearts of men and Americans. And our brave Colonel—he was rigid in his discipline, and often cross and exacting. But beneath it all, he had a kind, manly heart, and while sometimes he would curse us to our face, he would defend us as his own honor in our absence. Major Cloud, our pay master, also of the regular army, was our true and devoted friend to the last. He, too, is gone, among the few friends who shone out for a little while, like bright stars on a stormy night, then set in the midst of thick clouds. Many who had once been our enemies became our friends. But none of our friends have ever become enemies. The most warlike of the many tribes of the red men that we passed, met us in kindness and parted from us in peace, because we did not abuse their hospitality.

368"Thus ended a campaign unparalleled in any history. The drill succeeded the weary march in cheerfulness. The song and dance made a glad echo on the bleakest desert, and the prayer of gratitude was never smothered by murmuring complaint. While one company remained an additional year in service, and husbands and fathers endured another long march to join their suffering families, a few sought employment on the Sacramento, and there, to crown the campaign, opened those inexhaustible mines which have drawn so many adventurers to the rich shores of the Pacific."

368The following written and published about eleven years subsequent to Colonel Cooke's connection with the Mormon Battalion, and at a time when, if ever, he would have thought and spoken ill of that brave band of soldiers, is significant of his sense of justice towards them:

368"GREAT SALT LAKE CITY,

368"August 25, 1858.

368"Editor Deseret News:

"Having been requested by numerous friends to publish the accompanying letters, and obtained the permission of Colonel Cooke to do so, I shall feel obliged by your insertion of them in the News.

369"Very respectfully,

369"Yours in Christ,

369"JAMES FERGUSON."

369"GREAT SALT LAKE CITY, U. T.,

369"May 4, 1858.

369"SIR:

369"In looking through files of eastern papers, lately received, I saw a letter purporting to have been written by you, and dated at Camp Scott, November 29th, 1857. In that letter you assert that the `Mormons' are a set of cowards, like all assassins and bullies.

369"I am what is generally termed a `Mormon,' and as such served my country honorably under your command. Your statements I consider most unwarranted, and a very ungenerous return for the sincere respect entertained for you by the Mormon Battalion, and indeed the whole `Mormon' people.

369"I sincerely trust that you have it in your power to disclaim the authorship of that letter. If not, as an American citizen and a gentleman, spurning the epithets hurled at me in connection with a people of whom in the midst of their worst misfortunes I am proud, I ask you, kindly and with respect, to make that apology which your own sense of honor will suggest is due.

369"I have the honor to remain,

369"Most respectfully, etc.,

369"LT. COL. P. ST. GEO. COOKE, JAMES FERGUSON,

369"2nd Dragoons, U. S. A., Brig. Gen. U. T.

369"Camp Scott. Adj. Gen."

369The following is Cooke's reply:

369"HEAD QUARTERS, 2nd DRAGOONS,

369"CAMP FAULKNER, June 8, 1858.

369"SIR:

"I have this day received your letter of May 4th, respecting the authenticity of a letter, which you say, was published in an eastern newspaper, purporting by, and in which I `assert the Mormons are a set of cowards, like all assassins and bullies.' I wrote no such letter: I wrote no letter for publication. I never wrote or spoke such a sentence. I left Camp Scott November 26th, and did not return: the letter, you say, was dated there November 29th.

370"I never saw such a letter in the papers, or heard of its existence, until lately as a rumor from Salt Lake City.

370"I thank you for informing me of this mysterious forgery. My sense of the performance of the Mormon Battalion was expressed at San Luis Rey, in an order, which you remember, and which stands printed in a Senate document; and I can only refer to my connection with you, on the Battalion staff, as a satisfactory and pleasant one.

370"Very respectfully,

370"Your obedient servant,

370"GEN. JAMES FERGUSON, P. ST. GEORGE COOKE.

370"Salt Lake City, Lt. Col. 2nd Dragoons.

370"Utah Territory."

370When Colonel Cooke wrote the foregoing letter he was on his way to Utah, with the U. S. Army, under command of the late rebel general, Sidney A. Johnston, for the purpose of suppressing the imaginary "Mormon Rebellion." When the army passed through Salt lake City on the 26th of June following, Colonel Cooke, out of deference to the brave men who had served under him in the Mormon Battalion, took off his hat and rode through the deserted city with his head uncovered.

370The following are the names, addresses, occupations and offices of the surviving members of the Battalion, so far as known at the present time (March, 1882):

370Adams Orson B. (Sergt), Harrisburg, Washington Co., Utah; Farmer and Stock Raiser.

370Adair Wesley, Arizona; Farmer.

370Allen Rufus C., Paragoonah, Iron Co., Utah; Farmer.

371Allred Redick N. (Q. M. Sergt.), Chester, Sanpete Co., Utah; Bishop, and Col. of Militia.

371Averett Elisha (Musican), Kanab, Kane Co., Utah.

371Allred J. T. S., Spring City, Sanpete Co., Utah; Farmer.

371Averett Juthan, Springville, Utah Co., Utah.

371Allred Reuben W., Kanarra, Kane Co., Utah.

371Barrus Ruel (Lieut.), Grantsville, Tooele Co., Utah; Farmer.

371Bybee John M.; Farmer.

371Barney Walter, Monroe, Sevier Co., Utah; Farmer.

371Brizzee H. W., Mesa City, Arizona.

371Boyd G. W., Salt Lake City; Stock Raiser.

371Bunker Edward, Santa Clara, Washington Co., Utah; Bishop.

371Buckley Newman, Springville, Utah Co., Utah Co., Utah; Book-canvasser.

371Bates Joseph, Payson, Utah Co., Utah.

371Bird Wm., Paris, Bear Lake Co., Idaho.

371Bigler H. W., St. George, Washington Co., Utah; Employed in the Temple.

371Barrowman John, Nephi, Juab Co., Utah; Farmer.

371Brimhall John, Orderville, Kane Co., Utah; Farmer and Mechanic.

371Boyle H. G., Payson, Utah Co., Utah; Missionary, and Chaplain of Utah Legislature.

371Brown John, Leeds, Washington Co., Utah; Farmer.

371Butterfield Jacob K., Taylorsville, Salt Lake Co., Utah.

371Brunson C. D., Box Elder Co., Utah.

371Beckstead Gordon S., South Jordan, Salt Lake Co., Utah.

371Brown James S., Salt Lake City; Home Missionary.

371Buchanan John (Corpl.), Manti, Sanpete Co., Utah; Carpenter.

371Brown Alexander, Lynne, Weber Co., Utah.

371Brown Jesse S., Promontory, Box Elder Co., Utah.

371Clark Lorenzo (Lieut.), St. George, Washington Co. Utah; Tanner.

371Caldwell Matthew, Huntington, Emery Co., Utah; President of Seventies, and Farmer.

371Cazier John, Nephi, Juab Co., Utah.

371Curtis R. F., Newton, Cache Co., Utah; Farmer.

371Curtis Dorr P.; Farmer.

371Cox Amos, Manti, Fremont Co., Iowa.

371Chase Hiram B., Nephi.

371Casper Wm. W., Mill Creek, Salt Lake Co., Utah; Major in Militia and Farmer.

371Cole James, Springville, Utah Co. Utah.

371Casto Wm., Big Cottonwood, Salt Lake Co., Utah; Horticulturist and Farmer.

371Casto James.

371Collins R. H. (Corpl.), Huntington Emery Co., Utah.

371Chase John D., Nephi, Juab Co., Utah; Member of High Council.

371Carpenter W. H., St, George, Washington Co., Utah; Broom Maker.

371Cheeney Zacheus, Centerville, Davis Co., Utah; Farmer.

371Dykes Geo. P. (Lieut.), Arizona.

371Dalton Henry S., Centerville, Davis, Co., Utah.

372Dalton Edward, Parowan, Iron Co., Utah; Member of Utah Legislature and Probate Judge.

372Dalton Harry; Farmer.

372Dodge Augustus E., Toquerville. Kane Co., Utah; Agriculturist.

372Decker Zechariah, Emery Co., Utah.

372Dunn Thomas, Goose Creek, Cassia Co., Idaho.

372Earl Jacob.

372Evans Israel, Lehi, Utah Co., Utah; Farmer.

372Fairbanks Henry, Payson, Utah Co., Utah; Farmer.

372Forsgreen John, Salt Lake City.

372Follett Wm. T., St. George, Washington Co., Utah.

372Follett Wm. A., Arizona.

372Frederick David, Beaver, Beaver Co., Utah.

372Forbush Lorin.

372Garner David, North Ogden; Farmer.

372Hunter Jesse D. (Capt.), California.

372Higgins Nelson (Capt.), Elsmore, Sevier Co., Utah; Farmer.

372Hulett Sylvester (Lieut.), Manti, Sanpete Co., Utah.

372Hanks Ebenezer (Sergt.), Parowan, Iron Co., Utah; Miner.

372Hunsaker Abraham (Sergt.), Brigham City, Box Elder Co., Utah; Farmer and Bishop of Honeyville.

372Hancock Levi W. (Musician), Washington, Washington Co., Utah; One of the First Presidency of Seventies.

372Hatch Meltiar, Panguich, Iron Co., Utah; Ranchman.

372Hatch Orin, South Bountiful Davis Co., Utah; Farmer.

372Harmon Lorenzo F.

372Harrison Isaac, Sandy, Salt Lake Co., Utah; Postmaster and Justice of the Peace.

372Hendricks William D., Richmond, Cache Co., Utah; Railroad Contractor.

372Howell T. C. D., Clifton, Oneida Co., Idaho; Farmer.

372Harmon Oliver N., Hoytsville, Summit Co., Utah; Home Missionary.

372Hess John W., Farmington, Davis Co., Utah; Bishop.

372Hunter Edward, Grantsville, Tooele Co., Utah; Bishop.

372Hinckley Arza E., Cove Creek, Millard Co., Utah; Ranchman.

372Hickenlooper Wm. F., Ogden, Weber Co., Utah.

372Holdaway Shadrach, Provo, Utah Co., Utah.

372Hunt Marshall, Snowflake, Apache Co., Arizona.

372Hawk Wm., Salt Lake City.

372Hudson Wilford, Grantsville, Tooele Co., Utah.

372Henrie Daniel, Manti, Sanpete Co., Utah.

372Harris Silas, Glendale, Kane Co., Utah; Farmer and Stock Raiser.

372Huntsman Isaac, Wellsville, Cache Co., Utah; Blacksmith.

372Ivie Thos. C., Scipo, Millard Co, Utah; Farmer.

372Ivie Richard, " " " " "

372Jamerson Charles, Minersville, Beaver Co., Utah.

372Judd Zadock K., Kanab, Kane Co., Utah.

372Jackson H. J.

372Kelly Wm., American Fork, Utah Co., Utah; Farmer.

373Keysor Guy M., Richfield, Sevier Co., Utah.

373Luddington Elam (Lieut.), Sugar House Ward, Salt Lake Co., Utah; Merchant.

373Landers Ebenezer, Salem, Utah Co., Utah; Farmer.

373Lewis Samuel, Panguich, Iron Co., Utah; Stone Mason.

373Lawson John.

373Lake Barnabas, Franklin, Oneida Co., Idaho.

373Layton Christopher. Kaysville, Davis Co., Utah; Counselor to Stake President, and Farmer.

373Larson Thurston.

373Lemon James W., Weston, Cache Co., Utah; Farmer.

373Merrill Philemon C. (Adjt.), St. David, Arizona; Patriarch.

373Muir Wm. S. (1st Sergt.), West Bountiful, Davis Co., Utah; Farmer.

373Miles Samuel (Q. M. Sergt.), St. George, Washington Co., Utah; High Counselor and Justice of the Peace.

373Morris Thomas, Farmer's Ward, Salt Lake Co., Utah; Market Gardener.

373Murdock John R., Beaver, Beaver Co., Utah; President of Stake and Councilor in Legislature.

373Merrill Ferdinand, Salt Lake City, Utah; Farmer.

373Murdock Orrice C., Republic City, Republic Co., Kansas; Farmer.

373McCullough Levi H., Fillmore, Millard Co., Utah.

373Moore Calvin H., Spring City, Sanpete Co., Utah.

373Martin Edward, Salt Lake City; Hackman.

373Mesick Peter, West Weber, Weber Co., Utah.

373Mead Orlando F., Spanish Fork; Shoemaker.

373Myers Samuel, Glendale, Kane Co., Utah; Carpenter and Joiner.

373Martin Jesse B., Scipio, Millard Co., Utah; Farmer.

373McArthur Henry, " " " "

373Mowrey Harley, Paris, Bear Lake Co., Idaho.

373Maxwell William B., William's Valley, Secora Co., New Mexico; Ranchman.

373Naile John C., Toquerville, Kane Co., Utah; Farmer and Pomologist.

373Oakley James, Springville, Utah Co., Utah.

373Olmstead Hiram, Ogden, Weber Co., Utah.

373Pace James (Leiut), Washington, Washington Co., Utah; Farmer.

373Packard Henry, Springville, Utah Co., Utah.

373Peck Edward, Provo, Utah Co., Utah; Blacksmith.

373Prows Wm. C., Kanosh, Millard Co., Utah.

373Pulsipher David, Concho, Arizona.

373Park James, Cedar Valley, Utah Co., Utah.

373Rainey David P., (Sergt., not Corp. as erroneously appears on the roll), Richmond, Cache Co., Utah; Farmer.

373Shipley Joseph, American Fork, Utah Co., Utah.

373Roberts Levi, Kaysville, Davis Co., Utah; Farmer.

373Rowe Wm., Mendon, Cache Co., Utah; Farmer.

373Rollins John, Springville, Utah Co., Utah.

373Roe C. C., Sanpete Co., Utah.

373Riser John J., Centerville, Alameda Co., California; Farmer.

373Rogers Samuel H., Snowflake, Apache Co., Arizona.

374Rust Wm, Payson, Utah Co., Utah; Doctor.

374Strong Wm., Salt Lake City.

374Smith John G., Draper, Salt Lake Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Stoddard Rufus, Piute Co., Utah.

374Shupe James, Ogden, Weber Co., Utah; Blacksmith.

374Shepherd M. L. (Corp.), Beaver, Beaver Co., Utah; Counselor to President of Stake, Farmer and Stock Raiser.

374Smith Azariah, Manti, Sanpete Co., Utah.

374Smith Albert (Q. M. Sergt.), Manti, Sanpete Co., Utah.

374Standage Henry, Arizona.

374Savage Levi, Toquerville, Kane Co., Utah; Vine Gardener.

374Smith Willard G., Littleton, Morgan Co., Utah; Stake President and Probate Judge.

374Sprague R. D. (Musician), Brigham City, Box Elder Co., Utah.

374Sanderson Henry W., Fairview, Sanpete Co., Utah; Mayor, and Major in Militia.

374Stephens Lyman, Orderville, Kane Co., Utah; Carpenter and Joiner.

374Smith Lot. Sunset, Apache Co., Arizona; President of Stake.

374Steele John, Toquerville, Kane Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Sessions John, Provo Valley, Wasatch Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Thompson Samuel, (Lieut.), Spanish Fork, Utah Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Tyler Daniel (Sergt.), Beaver City, Beaver Co., Utah; President of High Priests' Quorum, and Magistrate.

374Terrill Joel J. (Sergt.), Ogden, Weber Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Tuttle L. T. (Sergt.), Manti, Sanpete Co., Utah; Merchant.

374Taggart G. W. (Musician), Richville, Morgan Co., Utah; Member of High Council.

374Tanner Myron, Provo, Utah Co., Utah; Bishop.

374Thompson John C., Riverdale, Weber Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Twichel Anciel, Beaver, Beaver Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Tippets John H., Sanpete, Co., Utah.

374Thompson James L.; Farmer.

374Thomas Elijah, Leeds, Washington Co., Utah.

374Wriston John P.

374Wade Edward, Ogden, Weber Co., Utah.

374Workman Andrew J., Virgen City, Kane Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Workman Oliver G., Salt Lake City.

374Walker Wm. H., Big Cottonwood, Salt Lake Co., Utah; Farmer.

374Wilson George D., Hillsdale, Iron Co., Utah.

374Wilson A. G., Moab, Emery Co., Utah.

374Weaver Franklin, Cache Co., Utah.

374White S. S., Pleasant Grove, Utah Co., Utah.

374Webb C. Y., Parowan, Iron Co., Utah.

374Winn Dennis, Richmond, Cache Co., Utah.

374Williams James V., Monroe, Sanpete Co., Utah.

374Wilkin David, Pioche, Lincoln Co., Nevada.

374Zabriskie Jerome, Minersville, Beaver Co., Utah; Farmer and Stock Raiser.

375 MORMON BATTALION SONG.

375BY THOMAS MORRIS.
