Recently, due to a job change, my wife, youngest two sons, and I moved from the United States to England. What an adventure!

Unsure of what to expect, we found a quaint, comfortable home to lease in a quiet neighborhood that is perfect for us. The house is cozy and gives us a peaceful place to live, laugh, and learn together. Everything about it is just right … except the refrigerator.

“It’s the size of a shoebox!” was only a slight exaggeration from our youngest son. “I’ve seen bigger fridges in dorm rooms” was an accurate comment. This keep-your-food-cold baby is a whopping 2.5 feet (.75 m) tall and 1.6 feet (.5 m) wide—with only 44 liters of space. It took me a while to recognize what that meant.

For an active household of four people, we eat a lot of food each week. So it was an adjustment to adapt to a fridge the size of a laundry basket.

The nearest grocery store is 1.2 miles (2 km) away. It’s a pleasant walk through the neighborhood. To go to the store and back is generally a commitment of just over an hour.

At first, the novelty of walking to the store was intriguing. Finding the way and seeing the sights provided a chance to experience the area. That interest quickly wore down, and replenishing our fridge became a “One, two, three, not it!” activity.

For some time, I found myself making this trek with minor irritation. Grumble. Grumble. “We didn’t have to do this when we had a fridge the size of a Cadillac!”

My attitude changed one fateful week.

Monday, we needed milk. Before heading to the store, I asked my youngest son if he wanted to go with me. To my delight (and moderate surprise), he agreed. We spent that hour walking and talking. I learned things from him about a video game he likes that I never even thought to ask about. We had a great time together.

Tuesday, I forgot to get apples the day before. Our second youngest son was just finishing a task, and I caught him off guard: “I’m just headed to the store. Want to come?” Sure enough, he agreed! That hour went by very quickly as we walked together while discussing a well-known artist and his career path along with my son’s similar interests and artistic journey. Best time spent all day.

Wednesday, we all had a craving for ice cream—but no ice cream. Solution? A family walk to the store. Talking as we walked there and back as a family was definitely a wholesome recreational activity.

Thursday, we were out of eggs (plus we needed bamboo skewers for a school project). “Well, Son, it is your project, but I’ll come with you to the store as long as you help me remember to get the eggs.” This time, an hour spent telling math jokes and learning what was happening at school was exactly what I needed.

Saturday, the day to get ready for Sunday, my sweetheart kindly agreed to a “shopping date” that morning. So we went off to the store for the usual: milk, bread, fruit, a meal for Sunday, and a few treats. Our walk together was a highlight of the week for me. Being with my wonderful wife while sharing thoughts and ideas about our family, the future, and our lives was a treasure.

After the week of the five trips to the store, my perspective changed quite a bit. I managed to see the blessing of time spent together with my family doing the small, simple things of life. As a result, great things have been brought to pass. (See Alma 37:6.)

I have a closer connection with my sons, and my relationship with my wife has grown stronger. The necessity of these trips has given me focused time to walk and talk with my family. That opportunity always existed, but I did not think to take advantage of that precious time until forced to by the inconvenience of a small fridge.

We have loved it here in the United Kingdom with wonderful people, historic sites, lovely places, and a chance-of-a-lifetime to experience this part of the world. At times we still miss our van-sized refrigerator in the United States. However, our family has grown closer together as we find the positive through our challenges—as small as they may be.

I never thought I would say this, but I am grateful for small refrigerators!

The author lives in Gloucester, England.
