On Sunday 11 September 2022, I led a Relief Society discussion based on Elder Uchtdorf’s April 2022 general conference address, “Our Heartfelt All”.

I was inspired to conclude by drawing comparisons to the 21st birthday speech given by her majesty Queen Elizabeth II in 1947, in which she said, “If we go forward with an unwavering faith, a high courage, and a quiet heart we shall be able to make of this commonwealth, which we all love, grander, freer, more prosperous, happier and a more powerful influence for good in the world. … To accomplish this, we must give nothing less than the whole of ourselves.”

I compared this to what I felt we might have had to pledge while in our first estate, when choosing to follow our Lord’s plan. Whether our lives be long or short, we would be devoted to the Lord’s plan, whenever we accepted it, and to serve others around us.

So, with unwavering faith, courage and resolute in purpose, I joined the queue to pay my respects to my late queen as she lay in state, on 14 September. I knew others had already been camping overnight to ensure their places in the queue; those joining it were warned to expect waiting times of up to 30 hours.

I went prepared for most eventualities and, upon joining the end of the queue, soon introduced myself to those in front of me and to those rapidly joining behind. Many have since attested to what I experienced: moments of quiet contemplation, joviality, camaraderie, and a willingness to consecrate our time together in sharing food, watching others’ belongings, and offering to purchase further snacks for each other.

As we went through security at Westminster Hall, we said our mutual goodbyes. Then a solemn reverence descended as those present who, unified in grief, filed past Queen Elizabeth’s coffin, adorned by the magnificent crown jewels. I was so overcome by the tangible presence of the Holy Spirit, that I began to weep.

It occurred to me how much the entire experience reflected the concept of enduring well once we get on the covenant path, by saving others and being served along the way, keeping our spirits up, sacrificing our time, and being one in purpose.

For the few short hours that I was in the queue—only eight—my reward was a precious moment long enough for me to curtsey and blow a kiss towards the coffin.

How much greater will it be when one day I might have earned the blessing of meeting our Majesty of Majesties and kneeling at His feet in gratitude? The glorious peace, knowing I’d given my heartfelt all to endure those eight hours queuing, will be nothing in comparison to that blessed glory that awaits all who endure to the end.
