Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Scripture

Chapter 1

How the Bible Came to Be

Just prior to his last winter in Rome, while he lay in prison awaiting the death sentence, the Apostle Paul petitioned Timothy, his beloved associate and traveling companion: "The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments" (2 Timothy 4:13; emphasis added). Some students of the New Testament have suggested that the cloak mentioned may well have been a piece of cloth used to cover books as well as to protect one from the cold. As to the content of the books (literally, rolls of papyrus) and parchments, we can only surmise; but does it require too great a stretch of the imagination to reason that they contained portions of the holy scripture? [^1] Surely after a lifetime of immersion in the scriptures, Paul would want to spend his last days and weeks in pondering once again upon those inspired messages that had so forcefully shaped his life.

What was this book of books, this work heralded by the humanists as a classic literary and historical document but revered by the Saints in all ages as a work containing the words of eternal life? How did it come to be?

What Is the Bible?

In reminding us that prophecies of the past came not by the will of man, Peter declared that "holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Peter 1:21). Latter-day Saints affirm that holy men have from the beginning not only spoken but written as they were so prompted. President Joseph Fielding Smith has stated: "We are informed that Adam and the Lord carried on conversations. How was this done unless Adam had been taught to speak? Therefore, all who have faith in the word of the Lord must know that Adam had a language; that his language was pure and perfect for it came from the Lord. All Latter-day Saints know this to be the case, for the Lord revealed to Moses, and later to Joseph Smith in the writings of Moses, that not only did Adam have the power of speech but he was taught also to read and to write, and records were kept by him and by his posterity." [^2]

The people of God from the days of Adam recognized the wisdom and necessity of collecting the revelations of the Lord to man, and thus from the early "book of remembrance" spoken of in the Pearl of Great Price (Moses 6:5, 46) came those compilations known later as the holy scriptures.

How were the sacred words recorded? It appears that anciently two main substances were used in writing. Papyrus was made from the inner bark of a reed plant that grew beside rivers and marshes. To make the papyrus the "reeds were stripped and cut lengthwise into thin narrow slices before being beaten and pressed together into two layers set at right angles to each other. When dried the whitish surface was polished smooth with a stone or other implement." [^3] Separate pieces could be joined together end to end to form a long strip that could then be rolled into a scroll of manageable size, called in the Greek a biblios or biblion. "This name was derived from one of the names of the plant itself, byblos, which is related in turn to the name of a town in Phoenicia which the Greeks knew as Byblos." [^4] It is from the word biblion that our word Bible is derived. The plural of biblion is biblia, literally, "the books."

The second material on which writing was done was parchment. Parchment was formed through shaving and scraping clean the skins of sheep, goats, antelope, and other animals in order to produce a material for writing which was more durable than papyrus. "In New Testament times parchment, being more durable and more costly than papyrus, was used chiefly for documents of greater value, or for such as were constantly in use and were, therefore, exposed to greater wear and tear." [^5] Other types of materials on which the written word could be recorded included unglazed pottery, stone, and clay and wax tablets. Though tablets of this sort were more durable, their weight and bulk made them extremely inconvenient. On the other hand, papyrus, which was very convenient, was not very durable—in humid climates the papyri soon rotted away. Pen and ink were used to write on papyrus or parchment. The pen was a reed "fashioned from rushes about 6-16 in. long, the end being cut to a flat chisel-shape to enable thick and thin strokes to be made with the broad or narrow sides." [^6] The ink was made of charcoal, gum, and water. [^7] Note the scriptural reference to "paper and ink" in 2 John 1:12 (see also 3 John 1:13). Writing instruments for the more durable substances were usually a chisel or a metal stylus.

Rollers were provided around which the papyrus could be wound. As the roll of papyrus was read, it would be unwound with one hand and wound up with the other. F. F. Bruce has given an interesting insight into the importance of the size of the rolls: "The longest books of the New Testament (which, in descending order of length, are Luke, Acts, Matthew, John) represent the amount of written matter which a roll of normal size contained. A roll could not exceed a certain length without becoming inconvenient for use. One of the reasons why Christian communities so quickly adopted the codex form [i.e., a "book" with pages] in preference to the roll form . . . was probably that the new form allowed them to have several documents together in one book." [^8]

Another biblical scholar has written: "We must remember that an ancient book was in form a roll—as the Jews made them, scrolls of skin, finished smooth on one side to be written on. These might be of most inconvenient length; Jesus in the synagogue was handed 'the roll of the Prophet Isaiah,' and he 'found the place where it was written'—a difficult thing to do in the long series of columns of that book, which amounts in print to 125 large pages and must have made at least that many columns of Hebrew, with no chapter-numbers, capitals, or column numbers (there were no pages) to aid the reader in his search.

"The Hebrew Bible—the Old Testament—as Jesus knew it, consisted of from twelve to twenty such scrolls of different sizes. They were never united into what we would call one 'book' until the invention of printing made that possible, in the fifteenth century." [^9]

Perhaps one final thought will help us appreciate our modern age: until the invention of printing, all copying had to be done by hand, one copy at a time.

Formation of the Canon

The word canon goes back through Latin to the Greek kanon. The root meaning of the word is "reed" and seems to have been understood to refer to a type of ruler or measuring device or (later, in a metaphorical sense) a standard. Origen, the great Alexandrian scholar (a.d. 184-254) used the word kanon to refer to what he called the "rule of faith," the standard by which we are to measure and evaluate everything that may be offered to us as an article of belief. In this sense the word is "closely linked with the authority of Scripture." [^10] In another sense, canon came to be associated with a list or index or collection of documents that served as the rule of faith, though such a use of the word seems not to have been made earlier than Athanasius (a.d. 296-373).

Bruce is quick to maintain a distinction between the canonicity of a book and its authority: "Its canonicity is dependent upon its authority. For when we ascribe canonicity to a book we simply mean that it belongs to the canon or list. But why does it so belong? Because it was recognized as possessing special authority. People frequently speak and write as if the authority with which the books of the Bible are invested in the minds of Christians is the result of their having been included in the sacred list. But the historical fact is the other way about; they were and are included in the list because they were acknowledged as authoritative." He concludes this thought by stating simply, "Both logically and historically, authority precedes canonicity." [^11] One group of scholars feels that there were five guiding principles used to determine whether a book belonged within the canon:

"Is it authoritative? . . . Does this book come with a divine 'Thus saith the Lord'? . . .

"Is it prophetic? . . . Was this book written by a man of God? . . .

"Is it authentic? . . . 'Does the book tell the truth . . . as it is already known by previous revelation?' [The Fathers had the attitude of 'if in doubt, throw it out.'] . . .

"Is it dynamic? . . . Does the book come with the power of God? . . .

"Was it received? . . . Has this book been accepted generally by the people of God?" [^12]

There were a number of factors that pointed out the need for a canon of Old Testament scripture. For one thing, the Jewish sacrificial system was ended by the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple in a.d. 70. The Jews were scattered and needed to determine which books were the authoritative word of God because of the numerous extrascriptural writings of the time. Exiled Jews returned to ancient scripture to rekindle the hope of deliverance and reestablishment as a nation, all of which had been the burden of so many of the Old Testament prophets. Thus, "for the study and preservation of this the synagogue arose, and Judaism was enabled to survive the destruction of its Temple and the interruption of its national worship." [^13]

The debates raged for centuries as to exactly what should be constituted as scripture. For example, there was repeated dispute as to the status of such books as Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, and Esther. The book of Esther, for example, did not contain the name of God; Ecclesiastes was difficult to square with contemporary orthodoxy. The Synod at Jamnia, which took place about a.d. 90, proved to be critical in the review and collection of these works and others that came to be the twenty-two books of the Hebrew Bible. [^14]

It is interesting to note Christ's reference to the canon of scripture in the meridian of time. In the upper room (after the Resurrection) he spoke to the disciples regarding the scriptures as a witness to his divine Sonship: "These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me" (Luke 24:44). Jesus here made reference to the threefold division of the Hebrew Bible—the Law, the Prophets, and the Writings (although he called the Writings "the psalms" here, probably because the book of Psalms is the first and longest book in the third section). It appears that by the time of Jamnia a sort of unofficial canonization had been accomplished, so that "the Council of Jamnia," as one writer has indicated, "was the confirming of public opinion, not the forming of it." [^15]

Though there seems to be no evidence of any dispute between Jesus and the Jews with regard to the canonicity of any Old Testament book, [^16] one particular clarification by the Prophet Joseph Smith in his inspired translation attests to the fact that at least some of the "plain and precious truths" of the scripture had been removed or ignored by his day: "Woe unto you, lawyers! For ye have taken away the key of knowledge, the fullness of the scriptures; ye entered not in yourselves into the kingdom; and those who were entering in, ye hindered" (JST, Luke 11:53; emphasis added). The doctors of the law had removed the "fullness of the scriptures" from their writings or from their teachings.

Another matter resolved (or confirmed) at Jamnia was the status of the Old Testament Apocrypha. St. Jerome in the fourth century was the first to call certain works "apocryphal," meaning "secret or hidden." One group of writers gave a number of testimonies of antiquity against accepting the Apocrypha:

"1. Josephus (a.d. 30-100), Jewish historian, explicitly excludes the Apocrypha, numbering the books of the Old Testament as 22.

"2. Jesus and the New Testament writers never once quote the Apocrypha.

"3. The Jewish scholars of Jamnia (a.d. 90) did not recognize the Apocrypha.

"4. Many of the great Fathers of the early church spoke out against the Apocrypha, for example, Origen, Cyril of Jerusalem, Athanasius.

"5. Jerome (340-420), the great scholar and translator of the Vulgate, rejected the Apocrypha as part of the canon.

"6. Many Roman Catholic scholars through the Reformation period rejected the Apocrypha.

"7. Not until a.d. 1546, in a polemical action at the Counter Reformation Council of Trent, did the Apocryphal books receive full canonical status by the Roman Catholic Church." [^17]

When Martin Luther finished his translation of the Bible in 1534, he placed the apocryphal books in a group by themselves at the end of the Old Testament. This same pattern was followed by Myles Coverdale in 1535 in the first Bible printed in English. Thereafter all the great historic English Bibles followed the same procedure. Only in the Catholic Old Testament of 1610, which was translated from the Latin Vulgate, did the apocryphal books remain scattered throughout the Old Testament, as they are today in the Douai Version of the Bible. [^18]

There were at least three reasons for determining a New Testament canon. First of all, there was the problem of heresy. For example, Marcion, a teacher from Asia Minor, came to Rome (a.d. 140) with a novel approach to the teaching of the gospel. Marcion rejected the Old Testament and proposed a new canon to take its place, consisting of two parts—the "Gospel" and the "Apostle." The Gospel would be represented by an expurgated Gospel of Luke, and the Apostle would contain the Pauline letters (excluding Timothy and Titus). "Even the books which he did accept as canonical Scripture were edited in accordance with what he believed to be pure Christian doctrine. No doubt he believed that by this process of editing he was removing interpolations introduced by those who followed the teaching of the Twelve, as distinct from Paul, who in Marcion's eyes was the only faithful apostle. Thus anything, even in Paul's epistles, which seemed to recognize the authority of the God of Israel or to identify Him with the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ was cut out; it could not, on Marcion's premises, be genuine. All Old Testament references were likewise excised." [^19] Second, many Eastern churches had begun to use in their services books whose authority was questionable. A decision was needed with regard to canon. Finally, there came a time when, for extremely practical reasons, it was crucial that serious thought be given to the canonicity of certain books. The Edict of Diocletian (a.d. 303) decreed the destruction of the sacred books of the Christians. Simply stated, who wanted to die for a nice book that happened to have religious overtones? These people needed to know.

As was the case with the Old Testament, much debate ensued through the years with regard to the status of particular books in the New Testament. Of special note is the fact that Origen had devised his own canon, made up of his "acknowledged" and his "disputed" books. His disputed books consisted of 2 John, 3 John, 2 Peter, Jude, and two apocryphal works—the Letter of Barnabas and the Shepherd of Hermas.20 Others quarreled over Hebrews, James, and Revelation. Even during the Reformation, we find Martin Luther speaking of a canon within a canon, evidencing his own discomfort, for example, with the Epistle of James. On the whole, however, most scholars agree that the canon of our present New Testament was fixed by the end of the fourth century.

The Scriptures: From Hebrew to English

Let us back up for a moment now, and recount some of the more critical incidents associated with the development of our own King James Version of the Bible.

The formation of the Septuagint (from the Latin word septuaginta, meaning "seventy"), the Greek version of the Old Testament (often designated in Roman numerals as LXX), is an excellent place to begin this discussion. The story is told that Ptolemy Philadelphus, king of Egypt (285-246 b.c.), became fascinated with the Jewish Law as a piece of literature. Ptolemy was known as a patron of literature and founder of the great library at Alexandria. One account of these happenings describes how the king was encouraged by his aides to send a delegate to the high priest at Jerusalem. The high priest thereafter chose six elders from each of the twelve tribes of Israel to serve as translators of the Hebrew scripture into Greek, and these were sent to Alexandria with an accurate and beautiful parchment of the Torah. After being wined and dined, these men were taken to Pharos, in the harbor of Alexandria, where they took up residence while undertaking the translation. In seventy-two days they completed their task and, upon comparison, found their individual results to be remarkably similar. [^20] Other versions of the same incident tell how the seventy-two translators did their work in seventy-two separate cells, and after seventy-two days their versions were found to be identical. Thus was born the LXX, a version of the scriptures vital to the gradual spread of the word of the Lord through his prophets to the peoples of the earth. The LXX is important to us not only because of the myriad of other translations that follow from it but also because of the fact that when the New Testament authors quote from the Old Testament, most of them quote, not from the original Hebrew, but from the LXX or other Greek translations. [^21]

It appears that the first translation of the scriptures into Latin took place in northern Africa sometime during the last part of the second century after Christ. The translation into Latin was not from the Hebrew language, but rather from the old Greek text. The name "Old Latin" is used to designate those translations of the Bible which existed prior to, or at least independent of, the work of Jerome at the end of the fourth century. Bruce M. Metzger has written: "By the close of the fourth century the limitations and imperfections of the Old Latin versions had become evident to the leaders of the Roman church. In the OT renderings rested on the Greek of the LXX instead of the original Hebrew, and in both testaments scribal corruptions had disfigured still further what had never been scholarly translations. It is not surprising, therefore, that ca. 382 Pope Damasus requested the most capable Biblical scholar then living, Eusebius Hieronymus, known today as Jerome, to undertake a revision of the Latin Bible." [^22]

Jerome's translation of the Bible, called the Latin Vulgate (written in the vulgar, or common, language of the people) helped to fill the need for one standard text with which to combat heresy and unify the Western church. On 8 April 1546 the Council of Trent declared the Vulgate to be the authoritative version of the Bible to be used by the church, and even today it is accepted as such by the Roman Catholic Church. [^23]

It is fascinating to consider that by the middle of the twentieth century much of the Bible had been translated into more than a thousand different languages and dialects. But significant to this discussion is the fact that less than a score of these translations had been made before the year 1000. [^24] Also worthy of note is the fact that eighteen editions of the complete German Bible were in print prior to Martin Luther's translation. And yet, the translation by Luther is unique. It "marks an epoch in the history, not only of the German Bible, but of the German language as well." [^25] Luther's work (published in 1534) had a profound influence upon the rise of modern German literature. Through the years Luther's personal ambition had been to give to the people a version of the Bible that truly spoke their language. He seems to have succeeded, for so influential was his rendering that for almost a century few other attempts at translations were made.

William Tyndale was a young Englishman, a reformer at heart, who had studied at Oxford and Cambridge. He had concluded that it was "'impossible to establish the lay people in any truth except the scripture were plainly laid before their eyes in their mother tongue'—'which thing only moved me to translate the New Testament.'" [^26] Unable to elicit church support for his project, Tyndale went abroad to work and began the printing of the scripture in English in Cologne in 1525. But officers of the Catholic Church learned of his work and interrupted it. Thereafter Tyndale fled to Worms, where he was able to finish the printing by the end of that same year. His translation into English was not from the Latin Vulgate but from the original Greek. This seeming obsession with the need for providing a translation of the Bible with the average man in mind was not original with either Tyndale or Luther. In 1383 John Wyclif had produced the first complete Bible in English. In commenting upon Wyclif's role in this grand drama, one writer has stated: "The work of John Wyclif is different from any translations before him. He planned and executed the translation of the entire Bible with the average man in mind and for the specific purpose of placing the Bible in the hands of laymen. His work of translation was a part of more comprehensive effort to reform the church which caused him to be called the 'morning star of the Reformation.'" [^27]

Copies of the Tyndale translation reached Britain by 1526, and although welcomed by the Reformation-minded among the people, these documents were sought out for destruction by church authorities. After a study of Hebrew, Tyndale went on to complete the Pentateuch and published it in 1530. But in 1535 his enemies finally overtook him and imprisoned him near Brussels. In that same year, 1535, while Tyndale was in prison, Myles Coverdale produced the first printed English Bible. [^28] The next year, on the sixth of October, William Tyndale was brought forth to the place of execution, strangled, and finally burned at the stake. [^29]

That which follows is easily recounted—one translation after another. [^30] Only two years elapsed after the Coverdale Bible before another English Bible made its appearance, under the name of Thomas Matthew. This name seems to have been a pen name for John Rogers, who later became the first of the Smithfield martyrs in Queen Mary's persecution in 1555. The John Rogers Bible has the distinction of having become the first licensed English Bible. As such, it could be bought and sold, owned and read without fear of interference by the authorities. In 1539 came the so-called Great Bible, a large pulpit-style book intended to be placed on the lectern at church. Now for the first time Englishmen could listen as the Bible was read in church, not in Latin but in English. And thus we have the first authorized English Bible. In 1560 the Geneva Bible came forth. This particular Bible had two significant features: first, it incorporated the recent innovation of versification that had been established in 1551 by Robert Etienne, the French printer; second, it was printed not in the old black letter, but in the new Roman type, which is in universal use today. It was this Geneva Bible (also known as the Breeches Bible because its wording for Genesis 3:7 reads, "And they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves breeches") that passed through more than one hundred editions. This was the Bible of Shakespeare, of Cromwell, and of the Pilgrim fathers. In 1568 there appeared the Bishops' Bible, a revision of the authorized Great Bible. The Bishops' Bible became the second authorized English Bible.

English Catholics had no English Bible as yet, but in 1578 Gregory Martin began a translation of the Latin Vulgate into English. He began this work at the Catholic College at Rheims, in France, but by the turn of the century the college had removed to Douai. Thus, in 1610 came the Douai Version of the Bible.

"In 1604 this period of Bible translation and revision reached its climax: On February 10, 1604, the king ordered 'that a translation be made of the whole Bible, as consonant as can be to the original Hebrew and Greek, and this to be set out and printed without any marginal notes and only to be used in all churches of England in time of divine service.' By July, 1604, King James says that he had 'appointed certain learned men to the number of four and fifty for the translating of the Bible.' These men were to be the 'best learned' in Westminster and in 'both the Universities' and their work was to be 'reviewed by the bishops and the chief learned of the church,' and 'to be ratified by Privy Council and by royal authority.' The men appointed were to be able, efficient biblical scholars and were chosen from among Anglican churchmen, Puritans, and laymen. Only forty-seven names have been included on the list of those who actually worked on the edition. Those men divided into six groups, four working on the OT and two on the NT." [^31]

Regarding the role of the Divine in the development of this collection, our own King James Version of the Bible, Elder Mark E. Petersen taught: "When I lived in England a few years ago I went to the British Museum in London and studied the history of the King James Version of the Bible. I learned that its translators fasted and prayed for inspiration in their work. I am convinced that they received it." [^32] And thus the year 1611 proved to be a year of deep significance in the continuing struggle for the children of God to obtain the word of God.

In Retrospect

To the Latter-day Saints the Bible is a special revelation of the Divine to man. We love the Bible as much, perhaps, as any people on earth. And yet this attitude is most strange to those who are not Latter-day Saints, for we claim a belief in this stick of Judah "as far as it is translated correctly" (Articles of Faith 1:8; emphasis added). Though we are aware of the fact that many plain and precious truths have been taken from the Bible through the years; that there are obviously many missing books of the Bible; that "many important points touching the salvation of man, [have] been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled"; [^33] and, finally, that "ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors" in their work with the Bible; [^34] yet, we have a special respect and reverence for this divine collection. Our faith in the hand of the Lord in its compilation is a firm faith in the overall process by which it has come to us, for we recognize that "there will be, there can be, no absolutely reliable translation . . . unless it be effected through the gift of translation, as one of the endowments of the Holy Ghost. The translator must have the spirit of the prophet if he would render in another tongue the prophet's words; and human wisdom alone leads not to that possession." [^35]

Errors in the Bible should not tarnish its image, for there is still very much within its covers that is beautiful and wholesome and ennobling. Our duty, President George Q. Cannon reminded us, is to engender faith in the Bible:

"As our duty is to create faith in the word of God in the mind of the young student, we scarcely think that object is best attained by making the mistakes of translators the more prominent part of our teachings. Even children have their doubts, but it is not our business to encourage those doubts. Doubts never convert; negations seldom convince. . . . The clause in the Articles of Faith regarding mistakes in the translation of the Bible was never inserted to encourage us to spend our time in searching out and studying those errors, but to emphasize the idea that it is the truth and the truth only that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accepts, no matter where it is found." [^36]

Notes

From an address delivered at a CES Symposium on the Old Testament, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, August 16-18, 1979.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Romans 10:17; see also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 148.
[^2] See Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:55.
[^3] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, trans. C. F. Cruse, popular edition, 10 vols. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1977), III.39; see also "Fragments of Papias," in Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, eds., The Ante-Nicene Fathers (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1981), 1:153.
[^4] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, III.24.
[^5] George Reynolds and Janne M. Sjodahl, Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1965), 21-22.
[^6] W. D. Davies, Invitation to the New Testament (New York: Doubleday & Co., 1969), 83.
[^7] Ibid., 81.
[^8] Irenaeus, Against Heresies, III.8, in Roberts and Donaldson, Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1:428.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365.
[^10] Edgar J. Goodspeed, The Twelve: The Story of Christ's Apostles (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1957), 27, 42-43; see also Edgar J. Goodspeed, Matthew: Apostle and Evangelist (Philadelphia: John C. Winston Co., 1959), 13, 16-17.
[^11] "Fragments of Papias," in Roberts and Donaldson, Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1:155; see also Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, V. 8.
[^12] Goodspeed, Matthew: Apostle and Evangelist, 101, 103. Note the following statement from Eusebius regarding the spread of the gospel to all parts of the earth, particularly the ministry of one Pantaenus of Alexandria (ca. a.d. 180): "Pantaenus also was one of them and [is] said to have gone to India, where the story [goes] that he found the gospel according to Matthew, [which] had preceded his arrival, among certain people there who had learned of Christ; that Bartholomew, one of the apostles, had preached to them; and that he had left the writing of Matthew in Hebrew letters, which also was preserved to the time indicated" (Ecclesiastical History, V. 10). A detailed study of this tradition regarding Matthew's Gospel is Matthew Black, An Aramaic Approach to the Gospels and Acts, 3d ed. (London: Oxford University Press, 1967). See also J. Reuben Clark Jr., Why the King James Version? (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), 11; Werner Georg Kummel, Introduction to the New Testament (London: SCM, 1975).
[^13] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, II.16; see also VI.14.
[^14] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:69-70; emphasis added.
[^15] Ibid., 69; emphasis added.
[^16] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, III.24.
[^17] See Mortal Messiah, 1:324.
[^18] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, III.24.
[^19] See Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:69.
[^20] Ibid., 71; see also D&C 93:6-18; Matthew 3:16-17.
[^21] Spencer W. Kimball, President Kimball Speaks Out (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981), 55-56.
[^22] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:65.
[^23] Ibid., 69.
[^24] Morton Smith, The Secret Gospel (New York: Harper & Row, 1973), 15.
[^25] Merril C. Tenney, New Testament Survey (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1961), 133.
[^26] Ibid.,s.v. "Versions, medieval."
[^27] As cited in Goodspeed, How Came the Bible? 97.
[^28] Buttrick, Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, s.v. "Versions, English."
[^29] Goodspeed, How Came the Bible? 97-99.
[^30] See Bruce, Books and Parchments, 10.
[^31] See chapter 10 in Goodspeed, How Came the Bible?
[^32] Buttrick, Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, s.v. "Versions, English."
[^33] Mark E. Petersen, in Conference Report, October 1977, 18; emphasis added.
[^34] See Preface to D&C 76; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9-10.
[^35] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 327.
[^36] James E. Talmage, The Articles of Faith, 14th ed. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1925), 237.
