Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 8

Revelation: The Plainest Book Ever Written

Perhaps no book of scripture has led to more speculation, spawned more foolishness, and resulted in more spiritual imbalance than the Apocalypse, the Revelation of John the Beloved. It was an important book in the first century of the Christian era, one that provided hope and perspective for the former-day Saints. And, when properly approached and understood, it provides a like hope for the Latter-day Saints who live in the closing years of the twentieth century and the opening years of a new millennium. Although it is not likely that even the most serious students of scripture will uncover every symbol and thereby come to understand every particular of the Revelation, there are certain doctrinal refrains, recurring lessons, and basic principles that may be grasped by all of us.

Background

The author of Revelation is John, the brother of James and son of Zebedee. This is the same John who served as an apostle and as a member of the First Presidency of the meridian church, the one who wrote the Gospel of John and the three epistles. He is known variously as John the Beloved, John the Revelator, and the one Jesus loved (see John 21:20). We know from the Book of Mormon (see 3 Nephi 28:6) and from modern revelation (see D&C 7) that John was translated—changed to a terrestrial state so as to no longer be subject to the effects of the Fall, including physical suffering, bodily decay, and death. Like the three Nephites, he is still ministering among the peoples of the earth and will do so until the Second Coming of Jesus Christ, at which time he and they will be changed from mortality to immortality (see 3 Nephi 28:8, 27-30). [^1] This book of scripture is called "The Revelation of John, a servant of God, which was given unto him of Jesus Christ" (JST, Revelation 1:1; see also 1:4, 9; 22:8).

Though most modern biblical scholars are prone to cast doubt on the authorship of John the Beloved, Johannine authorship has been attested from as early as the second century a.d. by Justin Martyr. The actual time of the writing is unknown, and debates continue among New Testament scholars: some date the Apocalypse during the reign of the Roman emperor Domitian (81-96 a.d.), while others propose a date some time during the reign of Vespasian (69-79 a.d.). What we do know is that John wrote this book from the island of Patmos (1:9), a small volcanic island just southwest of Ephesus. The Revelation contains specific counsel, condemnation, warning, and prophetic promises to the seven churches of Asia—Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea—branches of the Christian Church that had been organized by the Apostle Paul during his missionary journeys.

Apocalyptic Literature

As most readers of Revelation can attest, reading this book is unlike any other experience we have with scripture. Whereas most of the Book of Mormon, for example, is given to us "in plainness" (2 Nephi 25:4; 31:3; 33:6), Revelation is not terribly plain to the generality of the Saints. John's messages are not always clear, and coming to understand what is intended often requires extensive cross-referencing, searching out historical details, and much pondering and discernment. It does not help that many plain and precious truths have been taken from the Bible (see 1 Nephi 13:20-40), and specifically from Revelation. Nephi was given a panoramic vision, a view of things from beginning to end (see 1 Nephi 11-14). He was told, however, that he would not be permitted to write the whole of the vision in the Nephite record but that another, the Apostle John, would be asked to do so. "Wherefore, the things which he shall write are just and true; and behold they are written in the book which thou beheld proceeding out of the mouth of the Jew; and at the time they proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, or, at the time the book proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, the things which were written were plain and pure, and most precious and easy to the understanding of all men" (1 Nephi 14:18-23).

Like Lehi's dream/vision and Nephi's vision, John's Revelation was "aGod's-eye view" of things from eternity past to eternity future. "John had the curtains of heaven withdrawn," the Prophet Joseph explained, "and by vision looked through the dark vista of future ages, and contemplated events that should transpire throughout every subsequent period of time, until the final winding up scene." [^2] John's book is an example of apocalyptic literature. Apocalypse is a Greek work meaning revelation or unveiling. Other examples of apocalyptic literature include chapters in Ezekiel and Daniel, Matthew 24 (sometimes called the "little Apocalypse"), Mark 13, and 1 Nephi 13-14. These all contain some apocalyptic elements. Chronology seems irrelevant in apocalyptic writing. The writer seems to jump back and forth through time, darting from distant past to distant future in the blink of an eye. Thus we would read of two prophets who will be killed at the time of the Battle of Armageddon for their testimony (in Revelation 11) and then discover the war in heaven in the next chapter (chapter 12). To God, for whom the past, the present, and the future are "one eternal now," [^3] time apparently is not reckoned in the same way.

The following are additional elements and characteristics of apocalyptic writings (Revelation contains all of these):

Some Guides to Interpretation

There is no substitute for reading Revelation, straight through, looking for key themes and seeking to understand the grand overarching and undergirding messages of the book. It is worth our while to read Revelation several times to simply recognize the doctrinal refrains and recurring precepts that John chose to weave through this remarkable document. The big picture is crucial. As the Prophet Joseph Smith suggested, it probably doesn't matter a great deal whether we know exactly what this beast, that horn, or some poisonous vial represents; it does matter whether we get the point of the book.

Second, to paraphrase Nephi, the book of Revelation, though a sealed book to many, is clear to those who have the spirit of prophecy (see 2 Nephi 25:4). There is absolutely no way for us to grasp what was intended by John unless we are moved upon by the same Spirit that moved upon the Revelator. That is to say, it takes revelation to understand Revelation. The spirit of prophecy, which is the spirit of revelation, the same spirit that plants within our souls the testimony of Jesus (see Revelation 19:10)—even that Spirit will lead us to that level of understanding the Lord intends for each of us.

Third, the greatest commentary on scripture is scripture. Indeed, the best way to understand Revelation is to rely on other books of scripture, particularly the scriptures of the Restoration. President Marion G. Romney emphasized the need to search and study modern revelation. "In each dispensation, . . . the Lord has revealed anew the principles of the gospel. So that while the records of past dispensations, insofar as they are uncorrupted, testify to the truths of the gospel, still each dispensation has had revealed in its day sufficient truth to guide the people of the new dispensation, independent of the records of the past. I do not wish to discredit in any manner the records we have of the truths revealed by the Lord in past dispensations. What I now desire is to impress upon our minds that the gospel, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, is complete and is the word direct from heaven to this dispensation. It alone is sufficient to teach us the principles of eternal life. It is the truth revealed, the commandments given in this dispensation through modern prophets by which we are to be governed." [^5]

For example, there are certain sections of the Doctrine and Covenants (29, 45, 77, 84, 88, 133) that provide invaluable insight into John's work. Section 77 is especially helpful; it explains details concerning people and events in Revelation 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. First Nephi, chapters 13-14, and Ether 4 and 13 in the Book of Mormon are instructive. Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible is an indispensable aid; some 20 percent of the Book of Revelation was altered by the Prophet under inspiration (including about 95 percent of chapter 12). Finally, a sermon delivered by Joseph Smith on 8 April 1843 in Nauvoo, Illinois, contains several valuable insights regarding Revelation. [^6]

One other guiding principle may be useful. The Prophet Joseph explained that "the things which John saw had no allusion to the scenes of the days of Adam, Enoch, Abraham or Jesus, only so far as is plainly represented by John, and clearly set forth by him. John saw that only which was lying in futurity and which was shortly to come to pass." [^7] The first three chapters of Revelation are directed to the seven churches of Asia and address current problems in John's day, problems of conversion, immorality, idolatry, and apostasy in general. In addition, other than the brief glimpse into the past in the first eleven verses of chapter six, in which John reviews the history of the world from the beginning down to the meridian dispensation, [^8] Revelation deals with "things which must be hereafter" (Revelation 4:1). To put this in perspective, only eleven verses are used to discuss the events of the first five seals, meaning the period of time from the Creation to 1000 a.d. This is approximately 3 percent of the total number of verses in Revelation. On the other hand, 281 verses, or about 70 percent, deal with the sixth and seventh seals, the time from 1000 a.d. to the end of the Millennium.

Major Messages

Even if we are uncertain as to the meanings of many of the unusual symbols in the Apocalypse, we can grasp and appreciate the overarching messages of this book of holy scripture. Some of these include:

Conclusion

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "The book of Revelation is one of the plainest books God ever caused to be written." [^11] Some of us who struggle with understanding this rather esoteric book of scripture might be prone to suggest that such a point of view is appropriate for one who, like Joseph Smith the Seer, has essentially seen and experienced what John the Revelator saw and experienced. I sense, however, that the Prophet had reference to the key themes, the unmistakable principles that are found in Revelation, more than to the seemingly infinite number of symbolic details. These central messages we can all understand. We can, like the former-day Saints, watch and be ready. We can be vigilant, ever alert to evil in all its diverse forms. We can take heart that the God of heaven is in charge, that he presides over the affairs of men and women, and that divine justice and pardoning mercy shall yet deliver and reward the Saints. In short, we can yield our hearts to God and look to heaven. In harmony with the soul-cry of the beloved Revelator, we can exclaim: "Even so, come, Lord Jesus" (Revelation 22:20).

Notes

From "Revelation of John Offers Recurring Lessons, Doctrinal Refrains and Hope," Church News, 23 December 1995, 7, 10.

---
Notas:
[^1] Boyd K. Packer, "The Things of My Soul," Ensign, April 1986, 59.
[^2] Stephen D. Ricks, "The Historicity of the Book of Mormon: Perspectives and Problems," remarks at a Sunstone panel discussion on the historicity of the Book of Mormon, Salt Lake City, December 1988.
[^3] Ibid.
[^5] Joseph Smith, in Times and Seasons 3 (1 September 1843): 904; see also History of the Church, 2:15-18; 4:208.
[^6] Kent P. Jackson, "The Beginnings of Christianity in the Book of Mormon," in Paul R. Cheesman, ed., The Keystone Scripture (Provo: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1988), 92.
[^7] Stephen E. Robinson, "The Expanded Book of Mormon?" in Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate Jr., eds., Second Nephi: The Doctrinal Structure (Provo: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1989), 393.
[^8] Ibid., 393-94.
[^11] Paul Hedengren, "The Book of Mormon as an Ancient Document," unpublished manuscript, 20 September 1986.
