Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 10

The Book of Mormon and the Nature of God

Many Latter-day Saints have just begun to sense the power of the Book of Mormon. It is indeed a day of discovery. We have had a precious gift in our midst for more than a century and a half and have just begun, in a sense, to remove the wrapping. But the excitement is mounting, and the thrill associated with intense spiritual encounter for an entire people is perhaps just around the corner.

Using the Book of Mormon

There has been some hesitation in the past to utilize the Book of Mormon as the supreme missionary tool it was intended to be. Some have worried that they would give offense to those of other faiths by suggesting the need for another book of scripture. Some have sought to "prove" the Restoration from the Bible alone, trying to stay with what they perceive to be "common ground" between themselves and the rest of the Judaeo-Christian world. The Lord's plan for effective proselyting is set forth plainly in modern revelation. The following verses from the Doctrine and Covenants are but a few examples of that plan:

"This generation shall have my word through you [Joseph Smith]" (D&C 5:10).

"Lift up your heart and rejoice, for the hour of your mission [Thomas B. Marsh] is come; and your tongue shall be loosed, and you shall declare glad tidings of great joy unto this generation.

"You shall declare the things which have been revealed to my servant, Joseph Smith, Jr." (D&C 31:3-4; emphasis added).

"Again I say, hearken ye elders of my church, whom I have appointed: Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit"(D&C 43:15; emphasis added).

"Hearken unto my word, my servants Sidney [Rigdon], and Parley [P. Pratt], and Leman [Copley]; for behold, verily I say unto you, that I give unto you a commandment that you shall go and preach my gospel which ye have received, even as ye have received it, unto the Shakers.

"Behold, I say unto you, that they desire to know the truth in part, but not all, for they are not right before me and must needs repent.

"Wherefore, I send you, my servants Sidney and Parley, to preach the gospel unto them.

"And my servant Leman shall be ordained unto this work, that he may reason with them [the Shakers], not according to that which he has received of them, but according to that which shall be taught him by you my servants; and by so doing I will bless him, otherwise he shall not prosper" (D&C 49:1-4; emphasis added).

Joseph Smith was a mature and independent witness of the truths of salvation. Parley P. Pratt related the following incident, which provides an important pattern for all those within the faith who desire to influence those outside the faith:

"While visiting with brother Joseph in Philadelphia, a very large church was opened for him to preach in, and about three thousand people assembled to hear him. Brother [Sidney] Rigdon spoke first, and dwelt on the Gospel, illustrating his doctrine by the Bible. When he was through, brother Joseph arose like a lion about to roar; and being full of the Holy Ghost, spoke in great power, bearing testimony of the visions he had seen, the ministering of angels which he had enjoyed; and how he had found the plates of the Book of Mormon, and translated it by the gift and power of God. He commenced by saying: 'If nobody had the courage to testify of so glorious a message from Heaven, and of the finding of so glorious a record, he felt to do it in justice to the people, and leave the event with God.'" [^1]

We will not accomplish the task of carrying the message of the Restoration to the ends of the earth through stressing the similarities between ourselves and other faiths. Only as we teach and proclaim those things which have been communicated specifically and by revelation to us (see D&C 84:61)—the differences between the Latter-day Saints and the rest of the world, the things which we have to offer to the world—will we make the difference we ought to make in the world. No one desires to be disliked or to be ridiculed for his peculiar beliefs. No one wants to be suspect or to be considered cultic or unchristian. At the same time, we have some truths to tell, truths not had as fully elsewhere. With the dawning of a brighter day, the knowledge of God and the authority to act in his behalf have been delivered to man again; a knowledge of Christ and the fulness of salvation available through him are to be had only by an acceptance of the doctrines and powers vested in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The Book of Mormon is a guide to understanding persons and events in antiquity. The Nephite record provides, as it were, an interpretive lens through which we may view much in the Old Testament, for example, and supply missing or obscure parts to the story. [^2] Much of what we understand about the Old and New Testaments is clear to us because of the Book of Mormon. There are those, however, who are hesitant to "read into" the biblical record what we know from modern revelation, those who feel that to do so is to compromise the "integrity" or unique contribution of the Bible itself. In response to this posture, let me suggest an analogy. If one were eager to locate a valuable site, should he utilize a map which is deficient in detail or inaccurate in layout, simply on the basis of the fact that the map had been in the family for generations and was highly prized? Should he choose to ignore the precious information to be had on a more reliable and complete map, if such were made available? Of course the whole matter is related to the question of whether the traveler is sincerely desirous of reaching his destination: maps have real value only to the degree that they guide us to a destined location. To change analogies, would a scholar in any discipline choose to maintain a position or defend a point of view when subsequent but available research had shed further (and perhaps clarifying) information on the subject? To do so would represent at best naÃ¯vetÃ©, and at worst shoddy and irresponsible scholarship. So it is with the Bible and the Book of Mormon: the latter is a supplementary doctrinal witness as well as a helpful historical guide. "Just as the New Testament clarified the long misunderstood message of the Old," Hugh Nibley observed, "so the Book of Mormon is held to reiterate the messages of both Testaments in a way that restores their full meaning." [^3] Its strengths and supplementary contributions, however, will be fully appreciated only by those who are eager to be led to the fulness of truth, who seek the glory and approbation of God more than the praises of the secular synagogue.

"The Book of Mormon has not been, nor is it yet, the center of our personal study, family teaching, preaching, and missionary work. Of this we must repent," counseled President Ezra Taft Benson. [^4] Our near neglect of the Book of Mormon has been a serious concern for some time. "Your minds in times past," the Lord warned the Saints in 1832, "have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received—which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation." The condemnation, a "scourge and judgment" upon all the children of Zion, is to be lifted only as the members of the Church "remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments" which the Lord has delivered in this day of restoration (D&C 84:54-61). Our modern Church leaders have likewise warned us that the Church is still under condemnation and have thus encouraged us to "daily sup from its pages and abide by its precepts." In so doing, President Benson has promised, "God will pour out upon each child of Zion and the Church a blessing hitherto unknown." [^5]

The Doctrinal Superiority of the Book of Mormon

The Prophet Joseph Smith identified the Book of Mormon as the "most correct of any book on earth." [^6] A modern apostle has declared: "As far as learning the gospel and teaching the gospel are concerned, the Book of Mormon, by all odds, is the most important of the standard works, because in simplicity and in plainness it sets forth in a definitive manner the doctrines of the gospel." [^7] Some things we simply understand better because of the Book of Mormon.

Some years ago at a university in the East I sat in a doctoral seminar on Paul. The course was taught, interestingly enough, by a Jewish professor who obviously did not believe in the divinity of Jesus. In one particular session during the term, we centered our attention on 1 Corinthians 15. As the three-hour session rolled on, it became very clear to me that I was the only person in the group (including, of course, the instructor) who believed that the resurrection was a physical phenomenon, that the resurrected body is a tangible, corporeal entity. I wondered why such a plain and simple matter would have escaped their understandings. Then I read the chapter more carefully. Speaking of the resurrected body, Paul wrote: "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body" (1 Corinthians 15:44). Suddenly it was clear why they misunderstood. But why did I understand that a "spiritual" body was a physical body, a glorified immortal body not subject to death? Only a moment's reflection was needed to remind me that I knew what I knew because of the Book of Mormon and modern revelation (see Alma 11:45; D&C 88:27; Moses 3:9). It was a sobering but soul-satisfying occasion.

Frequently the Bible will tell us what happened, while the Book of Mormon will tell us why it happened. We know from the Bible that there was a fall of Adam, but we learn from the Book of Mormon why there was a fall and thus why an atonement was necessary (see 2 Nephi 2). We learn early in the Old Testament that Jehovah gave a "law of carnal commandments" to rebellious Israel; we turn to the Book of Mormon to discover why he gave the Law of Moses and what the law symbolized (see 2 Nephi 11:4; 25:24-27; Jacob 4:5; Mosiah 13:30; Alma 34:14). We know that Paul and the early apostles preached the gospel, but we may come away from the New Testament lacking understanding on some essentials; the Book of Mormon leaves no doubt as to the meaning of the gospel and what its principles are (see 2 Nephi 31-32; 3 Nephi 27). We are exposed to the doctrine of the election of Israel in the Old Testament and also read in Paul's writings about the status of the house of Israel (e.g., Romans 11), but we turn to the Book of Mormon for a more complete scriptural account concerning the destiny of the Lord's covenant people (see, for example, 1 Nephi 19-22; 2 Nephi 6:4-11; 10:3-8; Jacob 5-6; 3 Nephi 20-21).

And so it goes through most of the doctrines we might consider. In the words of Elder Bruce R. McConkie, in undertaking a serious doctrinal comparison between the stick of Judah and the stick of Joseph, "it will not be long before you know that Lehi and Jacob excel Paul in teaching the Atonement; that Alma's sermons on faith and on being born again surpass anything in the Bible; that Nephi makes a better exposition of the scattering and gathering of Israel than do Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel combined; that Mormon's words about faith, hope, and charity have a clarity, a breadth, and a power of expression that even Paul did not attain; and so on and so on." [^8] Elder McConkie's observation is in no way intended to denigrate the goodness and value of the Bible, but to point out the infinite worth of a supplementary scriptural source.

The Nature of God in the Book of Mormon

The Lord has chosen to bring about the restitution of all things in process of time; the truths of heaven, as well as the priesthoods and powers associated with establishing the kingdom of God, have been delivered to the Latter-day Saints "line upon line, precept upon precept," evidencing the Lord's sensitivity to our "bearing capacity," where the matters of salvation are concerned. What the Prophet understood as he left the Sacred Grove was no doubt a small amount when compared with what he had come to know by the time of his death in 1844. It is just so with the growth and development of the Latter-day Saints collectively: time and patience and maturity resulted in greater understanding. And yet the wisest among the Latter-day Saints—in Joseph Smith's day and certainly in our own—have come to recognize in the Book of Mormon not only a timely guide for living but also a timeless sacred record and rich repository of doctrinal insights.

Some historians and writers have sought to contrast Joseph Smith's theology before 1835 with that which came to be taught in and after the Nauvoo experience. Of these treatments, there have been those who have included the Book of Mormon as a part of the doctrinal development, an aspect of the "early" thinking of the Mormon prophet. Some persons have gone so far as to suggest that the Book of Mormon represents a "trinitarian" concept of God, one beyond which Joseph Smith and the Church gradually evolved. What of such propositions?

One of the things readily apparent to a careful reader of the Book of Mormon is what some would term "anachronistic" elements in the record. Matters such as faith and repentance and baptism, constant mention of Jesus Christ and his atonement, and repeated reference to the gift of the Holy Ghost are found throughout the Book of Mormon in the sermons of prophets who are supposed to have predated the Savior by many centuries. How do we explain such things? If he indeed wrote the Book of Mormon (as some contend), was Joseph Smith so careless or simple-minded as not to recognize that he was mixing time periods?

The answer to this query is quite simple to the person willing to fully accept Joseph Smith and his works and words: the Book of Mormon—with the Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price and Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible—restores many of the "plain and precious truths" lost before the Bible was compiled into its present form. One of the central verities of the Restoration—a matter totally hidden from the religious world until the "times of restitution" began—concerns "Christ's Eternal Gospel," the realization that Christian prophets have declared Christian doctrines and administered Christian ordinances since the days of Adam. In counseling with his errant son, Corianton, in approximately 73 b.c., Alma declared:

"And now, my son, I would say somewhat unto you concerning the coming of Christ. Behold, I say unto you, that it is he that surely shall come to take away the sins of the world; yea, he cometh to declare glad tidings of salvation unto his people.

"And now, my son, this was the ministry unto which ye were called, to declare these glad tidings unto this people, to prepare their minds; or rather that salvation might come unto them, that they may prepare the minds of their children to hear the word at the time of his coming.

"And now I will ease your mind somewhat on this subject. Behold, you marvel why these things should be known so long beforehand. Behold, I say unto you, is not a soul at this time as precious unto God as a soul will be at the time of his coming?

"Is it not as necessary that the plan of redemption should be made known unto this people as well as unto their children?

"Is it not as easy at this time for the Lord to send his angel to declare these glad tidings unto us as unto our children, or as after the time of his coming?" (Alma 39:15-19; see Jacob 4:4). In the same vein, the Lord—after having spoken concerning the purposes for which the Book of Mormon was given to the world—explained in April 1830 what doctrines and principles we now know as a result of the delivery of the Book of Mormon and modern revelation. Concerning the ministry of the Master, the Book of Mormon (with the Bible) testifies that "he was crucified, died, and rose again the third day; and ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the Father, to reign with almighty power according to the will of the Father; that as many as would believe, and be baptized in his holy name, and endure in faith to the end, should be saved." Now note the following, a recitation of truths which are made known primarily through the Book of Mormon and the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in all things, should have eternal life, as well as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and of the Son" (D&C 20:23-27; emphasis added). In short, the Book of Mormon is gospel centered and Christ centered and stands as a witness that all true believers and their scriptural records from the beginning have also been gospel centered and Christ centered.

Because some matters in the Book of Mormon (social, economic, political, religious, philosophical) seem so relevant to modern man—as those who have suggested alternative explanations have pointed out—must we therefore conclude that the book is a product of modern man? Could we not conclude just as easily—given a slight propensity to accept divine intervention, miracles, and angels—that the record was produced by ancient persons with prophetic insight to meet the needs and address issues of a modern time? Is that not what the Book of Mormon compilers/writers intended? In the words of President Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon was written for us today. God is the author of the book. It is a record of a fallen people, compiled by inspired men for our blessing today. Those people never had the book—it was meant for us. Mormon, the ancient prophet after whom the book is named, abridged centuries of records. God, who knows the end from the beginning, told him what to include in his abridgment that we would need for our day." [^14] Moroni, the man who received the records from his father, finished the compilation and writing, and buried the records in Cumorah, said: "Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing" (Mormon 8:35; see 9:30; 1 Nephi 19:21).

In November of 1831 William E. McLellin, who later became one of the original twelve Apostles in this dispensation, criticized some of the revelations received by Joseph Smith. He was invited to write a revelation himself, one on a par with even the least of those recorded by the Prophet (see D&C 67:5-8). McLellin tried and failed miserably. In speaking of this episode, Joseph Smith said: "After the foregoing was received [D&C 67], William E. M'Lellin, as the wisest man, in his own estimation, having more learning than sense, endeavored to write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's, but failed; it was an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord. The Elders and all present that witnessed this vain attempt of a man to imitate the language of Jesus Christ, renewed their faith in the fulness of the Gospel, and in the truth of the commandments and revelations which the Lord had given to the Church through my instrumentality." [^15] It is difficult for me to imagine that a man who would make such a statement about the seriousness of imitating the language of Jesus Christ could be involved in the creation of a story about pre-Columbian Americans or insert Christian doctrine into their mouths. Why should we assume the theology of the Book of Mormon (and particularly, for our purposes here, the doctrines associated with the Godhead) to be a part of the doctrinal development of the modern seer and his followers? Because the Book of Mormon was published in 1830, must it be viewed as "early theology"? Is it not just as reasonable to suppose that the doctrines regarding the Godhead in the Book of Mormon reflect not the contemporary New England religious mind but rather the understanding had by the ancients?

My position is that the doctrine of the Godhead in the Book of Mormon is actually deeper and more penetrating than that found in any other book of scripture; that the Book of Mormon theology was not a part of a line-upon-line unfolding of doctrine in this dispensation; and that if Joseph Smith had been asked, prior to his death, to provide a reading list of recommended works detailing an in-depth look at God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost, the Book of Mormon would have been high on (if not at the top of) that list.

One of the perspectives a reader gains early in the Book of Mormon is the centrality of Jesus Christ, the majestic role he played as both premortal Jehovah and mortal Messiah. The Book of Mormon prophets declare with consistency the fact that Jesus is not only the Christ but also the Eternal God (see title page; 2 Nephi 26:12). In fact, the power and position of Christ are put forward with much more emphasis than in the Bible, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. Though, as we shall see shortly, God the Eternal Father (Elohim) is the ultimate object of worship in the Book of Mormon, Jesus Christ is the focus of the testimonies of all the prophets. Consistent with the teachings of latter-day prophets that all revelation since the fall of Adam has been by and through Jehovah-Christ, [^16] the Nephites talk of Christ, rejoice in Christ, preach of Christ, and prophesy of Christ (see 2 Nephi 25:26). They emphasize that he is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (see 1 Nephi 19:10); that he is the creator and upholder of all things and thus the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth (see Alma 11:39; 3 Nephi 9:15); and that he is the Holy One of Israel, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead (see 1 Nephi 19:14-15; 2 Nephi 9:41; Moroni 10:34). The testimony of Elder Bruce R. McConkie echoes the testimonies of the Book of Mormon prophets:

"Christ-Messiah is God!

"Such is the plain and pure pronouncement of all the prophets of all the ages. In our desire to avoid the false and absurd conclusions contained in the creeds of Christendom, we are wont to shy away from this pure and unadorned verity; we go to great lengths to use language that shows there is both a Father and a Son, that they are separate Persons and are not somehow mystically intertwined as an essence or spirit that is everywhere present. Such an approach is perhaps essential in reasoning with the Gentiles of sectarianism; it helps to overthrow the fallacies formulated in their creeds.

"But having so done, if we are to envision our Lord's true status and glory, we must come back to the pronouncement of pronouncements, the doctrine of doctrines, the message of messages, which is that Christ is God. And if it were not so, he could not save us." [^17]

Nephi wrote: "My soul delighteth in proving unto my people that save Christ should come all men must perish. For if there be no Christ there be no God; and if there be no God we are not, for there could have been no creation. But there is a God, and he is Christ, and he cometh in the fulness of his own time" (2 Nephi 11:6-7; emphasis added).

The depth of the Book of Mormon doctrine of Christ is also to be seen in its treatment of the ministry of Jesus Christ as the Father and the Son. [^18] Consistent with prophets whose testimonies are recorded in the other Standard Works, the Book of Mormon prophets revealed Christ as the Father by virtue of his role as Creator (see Mosiah 3:8; D&C 14:9; Moses 1:33; 7:30), as well as through spiritual rebirth (see Mosiah 5:5-7; D&C 25:1; Moses 6:58-60). Christ is also called Father by divine investiture of authority. In the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price we find numerous occasions wherein the Lord Jesus speaks in the name of his Father, on behalf of the Father, in the first person as though he were the Father (see D&C 29:1, 5; 49:5, 28; Moses 1:4, 6; 6:51-52).

One of the powerful witnesses of the Nephite-Jaredite record is that Jesus Christ is Father because Elohim has literally invested his Son with his own attributes and powers. Our Lord is Father "because he received power from his Father to do that which is infinite and eternal. This is a matter of his Eternal Parent investing him with power from on high so that he became the Father because he exercises the power of that Eternal Being." [^19] Abinadi's penetrating testimony of Christ in Mosiah 15:1-5 might be paraphrased as follows:

a. God himself—Jehovah, the God of ancient Israel—will come to earth, take a body of flesh and bones, and accomplish the work of redemption for all mankind.

b. Because Jesus will have a physical body and dwell in the flesh—he will be known as the Son of God. His growth—like all men's—will be gradual, line upon line, precept upon precept.

c. The will of the Son is to be swallowed up in the will of the Father. That is, the flesh will be subject to the spirit, the mortal subject to the immortal. In short, Jesus will do what the Father would have him do.

d. Thus Christ will be known as both the Father and the Son. He will be called the Father because he was conceived by the power of God and inherited all of the divine endowments, particularly immortality, from his exalted Sire. He will be called the Son because of his flesh—his mortal inheritance from his mother, Mary. Therefore Christ will be both flesh (will have a physical body) and spirit (will possess the powers of the Spirit, the powers of his Father), both man and God, both Son and Father. "And they"—the Father and the Son, the spirit and the flesh, the God and the man—"are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth" (Mosiah 15:4). That is, the elements of mortality and immortality—flesh and spirit, Son and Father, man and God—are blended wondrously in one being, Jesus Christ.

Indeed, the Book of Mormon evidences a highly developed Christology, a doctrine of Christ as God that has no equal in the rest of our scriptural canon. Such views are neither primitive nor out of harmony with what Joseph Smith later taught the Saints, nor with what we teach today.

Secondly, although the Book of Mormon prophets speak of the "oneness" of the members of the Godhead, this does not imply trinitarianism. There were, in fact, large groups of people in the nineteenth century who believed in the oneness of the Godhead but rejected the mysterious notions associated with trinitarianism. One religious leader, David Millard, a minister who organized an Eastern Christian church, published a pamphlet in 1818 in which he attacked the prevailing view of the Trinity. He undertook a scriptural analysis of the New Testament to prove his point. "The whole tenor of scripture," he asserted, "concurs in the testimony, that Christ is verily the Son of God, as really so as Isaac is the son of Abram." He further stressed the illogical nature of the Nicean concept: "Three Gods are not one God, any more than three times one are one or two and one are one: which not only destroys the rules of multiplication and addition, but is flat inconsistency." [^20] Likewise, William Ellery Channing, the Father of Unitarianism, contended in a famous 1819 Baltimore sermon that God can no more be three persons than man can be. [^21]

William W. Phelps wrote a letter dated 19 May 1835 concerning his beliefs before conversion. His perception might well reflect the views of other lay persons in nineteenth-century New England: "I was not a professor at the time, nor a believer in sectarian religion, but a believer in God, and the Son of God, as two distinct characters, and a believer in sacred scripture." [^22] There is no reference in the Messenger and Advocate letter that such a belief was contrary in any way to the teachings of the restored Church; in fact, the statement implies that his preconversion beliefs were in harmony with the teachings of the Latter-day Saints.

The presentation of the Godhead in the Book of Mormon is remarkably similar to that in the New Testament concerning separateness yet oneness of the members of the Godhead. At the same time, and as we have observed already, the Book of Mormon is more complete in regard to establishing the centrality of Jesus Christ as God. The Book of Mormon is a mighty witness of the fact that although the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are separate and distinct individuals, they are infinitely more one than they are separate. They are one God—one Godhead, united in purpose, power, and glory (see 2 Nephi 31:21; Alma 11:44; Mormon 7:7). And yet they are separate Persons. Consider the following areas in which the Book of Mormon establishes their individuality:

a. We pray to the Father in the name of the Son.

"But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul" (2 Nephi 32:9; emphasis added).

"Therefore ye must always pray unto the Father in my name;

"And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you" (3 Nephi 18:19-20).

"O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need" (Mormon 9:27; emphasis added).

"Behold, when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness, and hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid from the foundation of the world from you—yea, when ye shall call upon the Father in my name, with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then shall ye know that the Father hath remembered the covenant which he made unto your fathers, O house of Israel" (Ether 4:15; emphasis added).

"O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it" (Moroni 4:3; emphasis added; see also 5:2; 10:4).

"I am mindful of you always in my prayers, continually praying unto God the Father in the name of his Holy Child, Jesus, that he, through his infinite goodness and grace, will keep you through the endurance of faith on his name to the end" (Moroni 8:3; emphasis added).

b. We worship the Father in the name of the Son.

"And when that day shall come that they [the Jews] shall believe in Christ, and worship the Father in his name, with pure hearts and clean hands, and look not forward any more for another Messiah, then, at that time, the day will come that it must needs be expedient that they should believe these things" (2 Nephi 25:16; emphasis added).

"For, for this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us.

"Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also we worship the Father in his name" (Jacob 4:4-5; emphasis added).

c. Christ received powers from his Father.

"And because he [Christ] dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son—

"The Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and the Son" (Mosiah 15:2-3; emphasis added).

"And remember also the words which Amulek spake unto Zeezrom, in the city of Ammonihah; for he said unto him that the Lord surely should come to redeem his people, but that he should not come to redeem them in their sins, but to redeem them from their sins.

"And he hath power given unto him from the Father to redeem them from their sins because of repentance" (Helaman 5:10-11; emphasis added).

"Know ye that ye must come to the knowledge of your fathers, and repent of all your sins and iniquities, and believe in Jesus Christ, that he is the Son of God, and that he was slain by the Jews, and by the power of the Father he hath risen again, whereby he hath gained the victory over the grave; and also in him is the sting of death swallowed up" (Mormon 7:5; emphasis added).

d. Christ's atonement reconciles us to God.

"For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it isbygrace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Nephi 25:23; emphasis added).

"But God did call on men, in the name of his Son, (this being the plan of redemption which was laid) saying: If ye will repent, and harden not your hearts, then will I have mercy upon you, through mine Only Begotten Son;

"Therefore, whosoever repenteth, and hardeneth not his heart, he shall have claim on mercy through mine Only Begotten Son, unto a remission of his sins; and these shall enter into my rest" (Alma 12:33-34; emphasis added).

"For behold, God knowing all things, being from everlasting to everlasting, behold, he sent angels to minister unto the children of men, to make manifest concerning the coming of Christ; and in Christ there should come every good thing. . . .

"And after that he came men also were saved by faith in his name; and by faith, they become the sons of God. And as surely as Christ liveth he spake these words unto our fathers, saying: Whatsoever thing he shall ask the Father in my name, which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto you.

"Wherefore, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased because Christ hath ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the right hand of God, to claim of the Father his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men?" (Moroni 7:22, 26-27; emphasis added).

e. The voices of the Father and the Son are distinguished.

"And [Christ] said unto the children of men: Follow thou me. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments of the Father?

"And the Father said: Repent ye, repent ye, and be baptized in the name of my Beloved Son.

"And also, the voice of the Son came unto me, saying: He that is baptized in my name, to him will the Father give the Holy Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow me, and do the things which ye have seen me do.

"Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I know that if ye shall follow the Son, with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real intent, repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take upon you the name of Christ, by baptism—yea, by following your Lord and your Savior down into the water, according to his word, behold, then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost; . . . and then can ye speak with the tongue of angels, and shout praises unto the Holy One of Israel.

"But, behold, my beloved brethren, thus came the voice of the Son unto me, saying: After ye have repented of your sins, and witnessed unto the Father that ye are willing to keep my commandments, by the baptism of water, and have received the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost, and can speak with a new tongue, yea, even with the tongue of angels, and after this should deny me, it would have been better for you that ye had not known me. "And I heard a voice from the Father, saying: Yea, the words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved" (2 Nephi 31:10-15; emphasis added).

The above passages are only a sample of a much larger group of scriptures that demonstrate that the Book of Mormon prophets understood very clearly the separate and distinct natures of the Father and the Son. Only eleven days before his death, Joseph Smith the Prophet said: "I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and that the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods." [^23] Any thinking Latter-day Saint should ask the question: Would Joseph Smith expound doctrine—the distinctness of the Father and the Son—that was seemingly at variance with the teachings of a book he claimed to have received from God? [^24] "Clearly," Elder Neal A. Maxwell has written, "this book came through a 'choice seer'—Joseph Smith—but not from that seer.

"Some, desperate for an alternative explanation, almost seem to suppose Joseph was getting help from some theological mail-order supply house.

"To the human mind it is amazing that such rich revelations and translations should come through an untrained individual such as Joseph was. The reason, of course, is that, though Joseph did not spell perfectly, he came to know the grammar of the gospel, because he was God's apt pupil." [^25]

In Perspective

It was in Nauvoo in 1841, during the zenith of his ministry, only three years before his death, that Joseph Smith made the statement that the Book of Mormon was "the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion." [^26] It would seem that by that time in his life and ministry, he could speak not only with authority but also with perspective. After having received literally hundreds of revelations from God, after having seen numerous visions and preached myriad doctrinal sermons, surely the modern Seer knew where truth and light were to be found. And those in this generation who are truly intent on growing in light and truth—those who literally seek for the glory of God (see D&C 93:36)—know where lasting inspiration is to be found. The Book of Mormon is indeed "the book that will save the world and prepare the sons of men for joy and peace here and now and everlasting life in eternity." [^27]

Notes

From a presentation to the BYU Religious Education faculty, Provo, Utah, 1986.

Some persons have even suggested that the Book of Mormon is "Calvinistic" in scope. Such an idea is even more radical than the proposition that the book is trinitarian. Do the Nephite prophets teach such doctrines as the total depravity of man (including man's inability to choose the right)? unconditional election of individuals to eternal life? a limited atonement (reserved only for the elect, those predestined to salvation)? irresistible grace? perseverance of the Saints (one's inability to fall from grace)? These ideas are as remote and foreign to the theology of the Book of Mormon as they could possibly be.

Some persons have even suggested that the Book of Mormon is "Calvinistic" in scope. Such an idea is even more radical than the proposition that the book is trinitarian. Do the Nephite prophets teach such doctrines as the total depravity of man (including man's inability to choose the right)? unconditional election of individuals to eternal life? a limited atonement (reserved only for the elect, those predestined to salvation)? irresistible grace? perseverance of the Saints (one's inability to fall from grace)? These ideas are as remote and foreign to the theology of the Book of Mormon as they could possibly be.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Bible has not come down to us in its pristine purity. Nephi learned from an angel that at one time the Bible contained the "fulness of the gospel of the Lord" that went forth "from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles." He saw, further, "the formation of [a] great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away." These were not the unintended scribal errors—the errors of eye or ear, the errors created and perpetuated through human limitations. The angel explained: "And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men." The mother of abominations not only tampers with the gospel and its meaning, but also "there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God." And because of these plain and precious truths "taken away" and "kept back" by malicious mortals, "an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them" (1 Nephi 13:24-32; emphasis added; see also D&C 6:26). See History of the Church, 1:368.
[^2] The greatest commentary on scripture is scripture. Further, a careful study of scripture brings forth additional light and truth. One of the fascinating discoveries of a careful study of the new translation—and thus one of the reasons the history of the Church cannot be prepared or told without adequate attention to the work with the Bible—is the manner in which matters in the translation, both doctrinal topics and specific phrases, are reflected in the revelations given to the Prophet at about the same time. We have sometimes been too prone to impose artificial distinctions, to study the translations and the revelations as separate endeavors, when in fact they went forward concurrently in the daily activity of the life of Joseph Smith. Generally the knowledge gained through the Prophet's work with the Bible preceded a revelation addressing the same subject. Shortly we will note exceptions to this order—times when the revelations seemed to precede the translations. For now, we will consider some specific illustrations of doctrinal topics first revealed through the JST and later discussed in the Doctrine and Covenants. Ibid., 1:238.
[^3] Revelation comes line upon line to prophets, just as it does to us. There is no question but what Joseph Smith knew far more, worlds more, than he ever revealed to the Latter-day Saints. What is also clear, however, is that very often the Lord required his "choice seer" to labor and ponder and reflect and ruminate upon a doctrinal matter before clarity came. It is one thing to receive a revelation, to come to know the mind and will of God; it is another thing to record what one has learned. Certainly most of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were dictated by Joseph Smith as God spoke through him. On other occasions, such as is the case with the JST, Joseph was required to put into words what God had put into his mind. This is reflected in the different manuscripts of the Old and New Testaments, evidencing a process of inspired but laborious refinement of the JST. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9.
[^4] A passage may be rendered more ways than one. When Moroni first appeared in September of 1823, he quoted numerous passages of scripture to Joseph Smith. He rendered Malachi 4:5-6 differently (see D&C 2). Moroni's rendition did not necessarily invalidate the KJV, but rather Moroni shed light on a doctrine—the "promises made to the fathers"—that is less clearly set forth in the KJV. Indeed, in this case, both renditions are correct and either could be cited, depending upon what point needed to be made at the time. In an epistle written by Joseph Smith at Nauvoo in 1842, the Prophet quoted the KJV of Malachi 4:5-6 in referring to work for the dead. "I might have rendered a plainer translation to this," he then wrote, "but it is sufficiently plain to suit my purpose as it stands" (D&C 128:18). See, for example, Bruce M. Metzger, The New Testament: Its Background, Growth, and Content, 2d ed. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1983), 280-81.
[^5] Loyalty to a living oracle entails an acceptance of what he brings forth. We cannot afford to pick and choose what we will accept and what we will not, even if it is not well received by the learned of the day. So far as I can tell, Joseph Smith (or the Lord, for that matter) did not view the Bible translation as of any lesser worth than he did the Book of Mormon, the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, or the book of Abraham. They are all products of the Restoration, fruits of a modern oracle, evidences of his prophetic call. The JST was no sideline, no prophetic parlor game; it was serious business. In the words of Elder Dallin H. Oaks, it is "a member of the royal family of scripture" and should be "noticed and honored on any occasion when it is present." [^14] As we noted earlier, the Lord explained that through the Bible translation the scriptures would be given, "even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect" (D&C 35:20). Salvation itself is at stake here. The issue is whether or not we will in fact receive and utilize the JST—with enthusiasm, not with tolerance. J. Harold Greenlee, Scribes, Scrolls, and Scripture (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1985), 35-38.
[^6] Bart D. Ehrman, The Orthodox Corruption of Scripture (New York: Oxford, 1993), 3-4.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9-10.
[^8] Ibid., 61.
[^14] Dallin H. Oaks, "Scripture Reading, Revelation, and Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible," in Robert L. Millet and Robert J. Matthews, eds., Plain and Precious Truths Restored: The Doctrinal and Historical Significance of the Joseph Smith Translation (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1995), 13.
[^15] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Doctrinal Restoration," in Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet, eds., The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things (Provo: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), 3.
[^16] Ibid., 15.
[^17] F. F. Bruce, The Books and the Parchments (Westwood, N.J.: Fleming H. Revell Co., 1963), 95-96; see also F. F. Bruce, The New Testament Documents: Are They Reliable? (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1974), 27.
[^18] McConkie, "The Doctrinal Restoration," 15.
[^19] Oaks, "Scripture Reading," 13.
[^20] History of the Church, 6:77-78.
[^21] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 349.
[^22] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 5:83-84.
[^23] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9.
[^24] I am aware of the fact that the early leaders of the Church in this dispensation did not always distinguish as clearly as we do today between the name-titles of Jehovah and Elohim. At the same time, there seems to have been no doubt in their minds as to the separateness of the Father and the Son. The issue is an issue of nomenclature, not theology. See my article, "The Ministry of the Father and the Son" for a more detailed treatment of this matter. I am aware of the fact that the early leaders of the Church in this dispensation did not always distinguish as clearly as we do today between the name-titles of Jehovah and Elohim. At the same time, there seems to have been no doubt in their minds as to the separateness of the Father and the Son. The issue is an issue of nomenclature, not theology. See my article, "The Ministry of the Father and the Son" for a more detailed treatment of this matter.
[^25] Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), 44; emphasis in original. Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1986), 44; emphasis in original.
[^26] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 194. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 194.
[^27] Bruce R. McConkie, in ConferenceReport, October 1983, 107. Bruce R. McConkie, in ConferenceReport, October 1983, 107.
