Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 11

Lessons from the Joseph Smith Translation

Joseph Smith was called of God in this final dispensation to be a prophet, seer, revelator, and translator (see D&C 21:1; 107:92; 124:125). Not only was he ordained to make known truths that had never been given to people on earth before (see D&C 121:26; 124:41; 128:18), but he was also empowered to translate ancient records and restore and clarify doctrine and understanding from previous dispensations. To Oliver Cowdery the Lord said: "Assuredly as the Lord liveth, who is your God and your Redeemer, even so surely shall you receive a knowledge of whatsoever things you shall ask in faith, with an honest heart, believing that you shall receive a knowledge concerning the engravings of old records, which are ancient, which contain those parts of my scripture of which has been spoken by the manifestation of my Spirit" (D&C 8:1). Within a short time, the Savior spoke again to Oliver. He was instructed that when the translation of the golden plates was completed, "other records have I, that I will give unto you power that you may assist to translate" (D&C 9:2). These two revelations refer to the Prophet's work as translator—of the Book of Mormon, the Book of Abraham, and the Bible.

Making the New Translation

Some time prior to June of 1830 the Lord commanded Joseph Smith to begin a serious study of the King James Version of the Bible (KJV). On 8 October 1829 Oliver Cowdery purchased a large pulpit-style edition of the Bible from E.B. Grandin in Palmyra, New York. This was the Bible used in what we have come to know as the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (JST). The Prophet would read from the Bible and, under inspiration, dictate to a scribe, who would then write what was said on manuscript pages. Though the Prophet was assisted briefly in the translation by Oliver Cowdery, Emma Smith, and John Whitmer, the preeminent scribe was Sidney Rigdon. The work with the Bible was done without the aid of the Urim and Thummim. The first thing revealed, dated June 1830, was what we call Moses 1, an account of an experience had by the prophet Moses on an unnamed mountain. Following this account, the Prophet and his scribe began to move through Genesis, making alterations in the text as they were inspired to do so. What we now have as the book of Moses in our Pearl of Great Price is the Joseph Smith Translation of the opening chapters of Genesis. The translators worked with the text of Genesis until 7 March 1831, when a revelation instructed them to begin the translation of the New Testament (see D&C 45:60-62).

Translation activity continued until February of 1833, until the New Testament was completed. Then the translators returned to the Old Testament. On 2 July 1833 the Prophet wrote to the leaders of the Church in Missouri and indicated that he and his scribe had just completed their translation of the Bible. [^1] In fact, Joseph worked with the text for the next eleven years of his life, editing, correcting, refining that which had come to him by revelation. In total, over 3,410 verses from the KJV were altered through corrections, additions, and an occasional deletion. There is no question in my mind but that in many cases these changes represent a restoration of ancient texts that had been corrupted or lost before the compilation of the Bible. This is certainly the case in regard to insight that came to Joseph Smith pertaining to the Creation, Fall, and Atonement and the work of Adam and Eve (Moses 2-6), the life and ministry and translation of Enoch (Moses 6-7), the Christian ministry of Noah (Moses 8), the person and powers of Melchizedek (JST, Genesis 14), and the prophecies of Joseph of old (JST, Genesis 50). In the New Testament, significant doctrinal details concerning the ministry and teachings of John the Baptist (JST, Luke 3), Jesus as the Word (JST, John 1), the baptism of Christ (JST, John 1), the Sermon on the Mount as a kind of missionary training center for the Twelve (JST, Matthew 5-7), and scores of other changes point toward a divinely directed restoration.

It may be that Joseph the Prophet restored conversation and teachings, as well as episodes in the lives of the ancients (in both Old and New Testaments), that actually took place but were never recorded. In addition, we cannot overlook the possibility that in some cases the Prophet's alterations to the KJV represent a type of inspired prophetic commentary on the text, a prophetic prerogative that surely must be received with as much enthusiasm as restorations. And certainly one reason we must take the entire JST seriously is that the Prophet never delineated which changes were restorations, which were harmonizations, which were prophetic commentary, and so forth.

Truths Learned through the Translation of the Bible

Some of the most important truths of our dispensation came as a direct result of the translation of the Bible. Many of these came from the translation itself, while others came in the form of revelations (now recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants) that arose from questions during the translation. In the former category, consider the following matters, from the Old Testament alone, that came directly from the translation:

Â The spirit creation and the spiritual creation (Moses 2-3);

Â The premortal existence of mankind (Moses 4);

Â The revelation of the gospel to Adam by heavenly messengers; the baptism, confirmation, and ordination of Adam (Moses 5-6);

Â The call and prophetic ministry of Enoch; the establishment of the ancient city of Zion and its translation (Moses 6-7);

Â The gospel teachings of Noah (Moses 8);

Â The ministry of Melchizedek and the translation of Salem (JST, Genesis 14);

Â The age of accountability of children (JST, Genesis 17);

Â A difference between the two sets of tablets Moses brought down from Sinai (JST, Exodus 34; JST, Deuteronomy 10). And on and on.

In addition, the following sections of the Doctrine and Covenants came as a direct result of the translation: Section 74 (dealing with 1 Corinthians 7), section 77 (dealing with the Revelation of John), section 91 (dealing with the Old Testament Apocrypha), and section 132 (dealing with eternal and plural marriage). Perhaps most important, Doctrine and Covenants 76, the Vision of the Glories, one of the greatest and most sublime revelations ever received, came as Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon pondered over a change they had made in John 5:29.

The JST proved to be a vital dimension of the spiritual education of Joseph Smith himself. As the Prophet studied the text of the KJV, he came to know by revelation what had been taken, altered, added, etc., what things needed to be changed to open the scriptures more fully to the Latter-day Saints and the world. The Prophet considered this work to be a branch of his calling. [^2] He warned the Saints: "God [has] often sealed up the heavens because of covetousness in the Church. The Lord [will] cut short his work in righteousness and except the Church receive the fulness of the Scriptures that they would yet fail." [^3] The Lord himself took this labor very seriously. To Sidney Rigdon, the preeminent scribe in the JST, He said: "And a commandment I give unto thee—that thou shalt write for him [the Prophet]; and the scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect" (D&C 35:20; emphasis added).

Other Lessons

In addition to the sublime doctrinal messages that came from or through the JST, there are lessons to be learned from this remarkable labor of Joseph Smith. For example:

Most biblical scholars acknowledge that scribal errors inevitably took place in the transmission of the Bible, and even that thousands of errors were introduced purposefully by scribes adding to or taking from the manuscripts. [^4] But because the Bible is all they have, because it is the only sacred scripture in their possession, they feel the need to make statements like the following: "We must trust that the same Holy Spirit who inspired the original text was able to protect it through the centuries of handwritten copying." This same writer then proceeds to acknowledge that while the secular Greek classics, for example, were generally copied by professional scribes "and checked against accepted copies or originals by professional proofreaders," the New Testament texts were probably copied "mostly by ordinary Christians who were not professional scribes but who wanted a copy of a New Testament book or books for themselves or for other Christians." These did not have "the same opportunity as the secular copyists to compare their manuscripts with other manuscripts." He continues by observing that "as scribes copied these copies, they continued to make changes through the centuries. Most of these changes were insignificant; those that were of importance—the ones with which we are concerned—were introduced during the first two centuries after the New Testament was written. . . . The textual variants that concern us, of course, are those that affect the meaning of the New Testament in some way. There are a few thousand of these," he states, and then hastens to add, "but we should be clear on the fact that they affect only a small portion of the New Testament text." [^5]

One New Testament scholar suggested that the theological debates during the first few centuries of the Christian Church had a major impact on the biblical texts. "The New Testament manuscripts were not produced impersonally," he states, "by machines capable of flawless reproduction. They were copied by hand, by living, breathing human beings who were deeply rooted in the conditions and controversies of their day. Did the scribes' polemical contexts influence the way they transcribed their sacred Scriptures?" He contends that "they did, that theological disputes, specifically disputes over Christology, prompted Christian scribes to alter the words of Scripture in order to make them more serviceable for the polemical task. Scribes modified their manuscripts to make them more patently 'orthodox' and less susceptible to 'abuse' by the opponents of orthodoxy." [^6]

Even if biblical scholars should never acknowledge that significant doctrinal matters were excised from the Bible, Joseph Smith explained otherwise: "From Sundry revelations which had been received," he said, "it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled." [^7] "From what we can draw from the Scriptures relative to the teaching of heaven," he declared some two years later, "we are induced to think that much instruction has been given to man since the beginning which we do not possess now. . . . We have what we have, and the Bible contains what it does contain." [^8] In short, "I believe the Bible, as it ought to be, as it came from the pen of the original writers." [^9] That the Prophet Joseph Smith should be "appointed" by God (D&C 42:56; 76:15) and called to undertake a "new translation" of the Bible implies of itself that the message of the Bible, though essentially true, needed clarification, correction, and supplementation at the hands of an inspired translator. The early Latter-day Saints thus exulted in the fact that the Bible was "undergoing the purifying touch by a revelation of Jesus Christ." [^10]

Robert J. Matthews has written: "In the face of the evidence it can hardly be maintained that the exact words were given to the Prophet in the process of a revelatory experience. Exact words may have been given to the Prophet on occasion, but the manuscript evidence suggests that generally he was obliged to formulate the words himself to convey the message he desired. Consequently, he might later have observed that sometimes the words were not entirely satisfactory in the initial writings. They may have conveyed too much or too little. Or they may have been too specific or too vague, or even ambiguous. Or the words may have implied meanings not intended. Thus through (1) an error of recording, (2) an increase of knowledge, or (3) an inadequate selection of words, any passage of the New Translation might be subject to later revision." [^11]

Extensive changes in the JST occur on such matters as God repenting, God hardening people's hearts, predestination, man's capacity to see God, Christian covenants and ordinances in antiquity, and the ministries of such otherwise enigmatic characters as Enoch and Melchizedek. In other places, changes in the JST seem to reflect not a correction so much as a clarification or even a different meaning entirely. For example, when the Prophet translated Hebrews 11 (sometime between February 1832 and February 1833), he altered verse 40 from "God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect" to "God having provided some better things for them through their sufferings, for without sufferings they could not be made perfect." Hebrews 11 is the New Testament's "Who's Who in Faith" chapter, the equivalent to Ether 12 in the Book of Mormon. It is a statement of what was required of the ancients to gain faith unto life and salvation, including enduring suffering and trials. The change in the JST fits perfectly the doctrinal context of the chapter. It seems clear to me that at this point in time the Prophet and the Saints did not yet comprehend the doctrine of work for the dead. It was probably not until the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom (D&C 137), given in January of 1836, that the doctrinal door seemed to open to the idea that men and women could gain the blessings of the gospel after they had departed this life. Later in his ministry, and operating with added light and knowledge concerning this supernal gem in the plan of salvation, Joseph Smith quoted Hebrews 11:40 as scriptural support for the importance of work for the dead (see D&C 128:15). [^12]

The same is true with Revelation 1:5-6. The KJV of this passage refers to the work of Christ the Redeemer who has "made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever." When the Prophet translated this passage (sometime between February 1832 and February 1833) he rendered it as follows: Christ "hath made us kings and priests unto God, his Father." The JST of this passage is true and accurate. It also seems to indicate that the Prophet and the Saints may not have understood the doctrine of the plurality of Gods at this point in time. It was in the Sermon in the Grove, delivered in Nauvoo just eleven days before his martyrdom, that the Prophet quoted Revelation 1:5-6 in the KJV and added: "It is altogether correct in the translation." He then spoke at length of the plurality of Gods. "Where was there ever a son without a father? And where was there ever a father without first being a son? . . . Hence if Jesus had a Father, can we not believe that He had a Father also? I despise the idea of being scared to death at such a doctrine, for the Bible is full of it." [^13]

Why have we been somewhat hesitant to use the JST in the past? Simply stated, for many years we were ignorant of both the process and the product. Over the years we have been a bit prejudiced, have assumed that the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints made changes in the Prophet's work. Robert Matthews's groundbreaking work with the original manuscripts helped to dispel these myths.

In addition, some have suggested that we should not use the JST because the Prophet never finished the work. They quote the following scripture for support: "It is expedient that thou shouldst hold thy peace concerning [the changes in the translation], and not teach them until ye have received them in full" (D&C 42:57). This simply cannot mean, as some have concluded, that Joseph and the Saints were not to teach that which was found in the JST until all changes that were ever to be made in the Bible were made. Earlier in that same revelation, section 42, the Lord had directed that the elders, priests, and teachers of the Church were to teach the principles of the gospel as found in the Bible and the Book of Mormon. In addition, the Saints were to "observe the covenants and church articles to do them, and these shall be their teachings, as they shall be directed by the Spirit. . . . And all this ye shall observe to do as I have commanded concerning your teaching, until the fulness of my scriptures is given"(D&C 42:12-15; emphasis added). "At that time," Elder Bruce R. McConkie noted, "they had only the imperfect King James Version of the Bible and the near-perfect Book of Mormon. These were their only scriptural sources for the principles of the gospel. When the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible—included in this revelation [D&C 42] under the designation 'fulness of my scriptures'—came forth, then teachers were to use it and the various additional direct revelations. This, then, is a command to teach the changes and additions now found in the so-called Inspired Version." [^15]

As indicated, Joseph Smith was not permitted to make every possible change. The fact is, the Prophet did teach from the new translation during his ministry, and many parts of the JST were published during his lifetime—in The Evening and the Morning Star, the Lectures on Faith, and the Times and Seasons. He obviously did not perceive the Lord's command to be other than a warning against sharing the "mysteries of the kingdom" prematurely with those unprepared to receive them. (The Prophet did ask that William W. Phelps not print the New Translation in a serial format in The Evening and the Morning Star. He had plans of publishing it all as a unit; see Moses 1:42; 4:32.) Again from Elder McConkie, who had such strong feelings on this matter, "True, the Joseph Smith Translation, though completed to the point that the early Brethren were going to publish it at one time, has not been completed in the full and true sense. But for that matter neither has the Book of Mormon. I am as anxious to read and study what is in the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon as I am to give the same attention to those parts of the Bible yet to be revealed.

"I am clear in my mind that the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon will not come forth until the Millennium. The same thing is undoubtedly true of the fulness of the Bible, though some additions could well be made before that time.

"Of what will the Bible consist when it is perfected?

"Surely it will contain the writings of Adam and Enoch and Noah; of Melchizedek and Isaac and Jacob; and certainly Abraham wrote much more than the Prophet found on the Egyptian papyrus. The Book of Abraham in our Pearl of Great Price is obviously a restored biblical record.

"Does anyone think we have all of the words of Isaiah or Jeremiah or Malachi? And are there not prophets and apostles without number, whose names we do not even know, who have recorded their teachings and testimonies?" [^16]

The JST and the Canon of Scripture

Why do some feel comfortable accepting the parts of the JST that are in the canon of scripture (the standard works), such as the book of Moses and Joseph Smith—Matthew, but feel less inclined to accept the other JST alterations? There is no question but that we are firmly committed to the canon, the standard works, and that these books of scripture serve as the rule of faith and practice for the Latter-day Saints; they are binding upon us. At the same time, if any people in all the wide world should have reason to be nervous about sealing the canon, it is the Latter-day Saints. For us nothing is more fixed, set, and established than the eternal fact that the canon of scripture is open, flexible, and expanding. What is scripture one day may become part of the canon the next, as was the case in 1976 with the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom (D&C 137) and the Vision of the Redemption of the Dead (D&C 138). These were, according to the definition provided in modern revelation (D&C 68:3-4), scripture from the time they were given; they were just as true before they were canonized in 1976. The same is so in regard to the entire JST before it was printed by the Reorganized Church.

Further, in our study or our inquiry after the mind and will of the Lord, we as a people are not bound by a single collection of sacred books. We are called upon to "live by every word . . . of God" (D&C 84:44), to open ourselves to new truths as they may come forth through proper channels. The addresses delivered by the President of the Church at general conference are not in the canon, nor are such official doctrinal declarations of the First Presidency as "The Origin of Man" (1909) or "The Father and the Son" (1916) or the Proclamation on the Family (1995), but they certainly represent the mind and will and voice of the Lord to the Saints; the members of the Church are expected to "give diligent heed to the words of eternal life" (D&C 84:43) as they come from the lips of the Lord's anointed servants. Does anyone really believe that what is said in scripture by Alma or Paul or John the Beloved is any more binding on the Saints in our day than President Ezra Taft Benson's messages on the Book of Mormon or President Howard W. Hunter's pleas for greater Christian charity and more devoted service in the temples?

In writing on the subject of the biblical canon, the respected Evangelical scholar F. F. Bruce observed that "there is a distinction between the canonicity of a book of the Bible and its authority. Its canonicity is dependent upon its authority. For when we ascribe canonicity to a book we simply mean that it belongs to the canon or list. But why does it so belong? Because it was recognized as possessing special authority. People frequently speak and write as if the authority with which the books of the Bible are invested in the minds of Christians is the result of their having been included in the sacred list. But the historical fact is the other way about; they were and are included in the list because they were acknowledged as authoritative." Bruce concludes: " Both logically and historically, authority precedes canonicity." [^17]

Within our own history there are examples of doctrinal practices that were in effect long before the actual revelation was a part of the canon. For example, the Latter-day Saints were gathering Israel—bringing people into the kingdom through conversion—even before the Church was officially organized. But the keys of the gathering of Israel were not actually conferred until the coming of Moses to the Kirtland Temple in April of 1836. In fact, those keys formalized and empowered a work that was already well under way. Joseph Smith seems to have learned of eternal and plural marriage as early as 1831, as a result of his inspired translation of Genesis. Plural marriage was introduced to some of the Saints in Nauvoo. It remained for Elder Orson Pratt to deliver the first public discourse on the subject in 1852. Section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants was first recorded on 12 July 1843 but was not included in the Doctrine and Covenants until 1876. The practice of plural marriage continued until the Manifesto issued by President Wilford Woodruff called for its cessation in 1890.

Elder McConkie noted in 1984 that the JST "contains various additions, deletions, and emendations to the King James Version. But most importantly it contains the book of Moses and the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew as published in the Pearl of Great Price.

"These portions have been formally canonized by us, which should establish that any changes made by the Prophet are true and should be used. Does anyone think that the pure revelation found in Genesis 14 about Melchizedek or in Genesis 50 about the Nephites and Joseph Smith and the latter days is any less a revelation than Moses 1? Does anyone think the [JST of the] first chapter of John's Gospel is of any less worth than the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew's?" [^18]

We are not bound solely by the written word nor limited by our devotion to texts. It is the spirit of revelation, not specific texts, that leads the Church of Jesus Christ. It is the living voice, not the standard works alone, that directs the kingdom of God. Elder Dallin Oaks observed that "those who will not rely on revelation and who insist on a manuscript so they can concentrate on the original meaning and intent of the words spoken by the author can be expected to ignore the Joseph Smith Translation. In contrast, those who understand that the importance of the scriptures is what the Lord would have us understand today are anxious for revelatory insight into the current significance of scriptural texts and concepts. They understand that some things we have already received are hard to understand without the Lord's help (see 1 Nephi 15:1, 3, 8, 11), and that we can never receive enough of the word of God. Persons with this attitude are anxious to have every source of revelation to help us know what the Lord would have us understand from the scriptures today. Such persons will welcome the revelatory insights—even additions—by the prophets of this dispensation." [^19]

We love the Bible. We cherish the Bible. And we thank God that so many truths in the Bible have been preserved for us. But if it were necessary—and thank God that it is not—we could move forward without the Bible. God has revealed sufficient truth and knowledge through his latter-day prophets for us to be sustained and directed.

Conclusion

Joseph Smith was not a linguist, at least by this world's standards. But he possessed the mind of God, enjoyed all of the gifts of the Spirit, and was in tune with the Infinite. On one occasion he said: "I . . . have witnessed the visions of eternity, and beheld the glorious mansions of bliss, and the regions and the misery of the damned. . . . I . . . have heard the voice of God, and communed with angels, and spake as moved by the Holy Ghost for the renewal of the Everlasting Covenant, and for the gathering of Israel in the last days." [^20] In speaking of his affection for an old German translation of the Bible, he stated: "I thank God that I have got this old book; but I thank him more for the gift of the Holy Ghost. I have got the oldest book in the world; but I [also] have the oldest book in my heart, even the gift of the Holy Ghost." [^21] Thus the Prophet's schooling was of the Spirit. His instructors were heavenly beings. And the light and intelligence by which he operated were pure and undiluted.

In the future we will surely come to understand how the Prophet translated the golden plates, the Egyptian papyri, and the King James Bible. We shall see, one and all, that he was a man of integrity, knew whereof he spoke, and accomplished superhuman tasks by means of divine assistance. In the meantime, an acceptance of Joseph Smith's work as translator transcends what is currently known or available in the world of scholarship and thus enters the realm of faith. If we cannot for the present time understand how he translated Reformed Egyptian from golden plates, we can still taste the sweetness of the fruit. If we cannot reconcile the text of the Book of Abraham with what scholars translate from the facsimiles of the few papyrus fragments in our possession, we can still recognize the spirit of truth in that which he recorded. If we find that the Prophet's Bible translation does not match what may be found on the oldest extant Hebrew or Greek manuscripts, we yet recognize the spirit and genius of a prophet in this sacred labor and treat the JST with the same respect we would treat doctrinal insights from the Book of Mormon or Doctrine and Covenants.

If we are true and faithful to what we believe and know in our hearts, the Lord will yet open our minds and bring forth great discoveries in the land. If, on the other hand, we let what we have discovered by study alone drive our faith and commitment, we close ourselves to a vital realm of reality and block the hand of God. Our study must always be tempered by faith if we desire to be loyal to the work of Joseph Smith. For in Joseph Smith we have a man who walked and talked in the light of divine truth. "His mind was opened by the visions of the Almighty," Elder Wilford Woodruff testified, "and the Lord taught him many things by vision and revelation that were never taught publicly in his day; for the people could not bear the flood of intelligence which God poured into his mind." [^22] A major part of that marvelous flood of intelligence came as a result of his inspired translation of the Bible. The Lord and his preeminent prophetic witness in this dispensation referred to this work as "the fulness of the scriptures" (D&C 42:15; 104:58), [^23] a designation well worth pondering on. That we will receive and believe and utilize all that has come through the "Choice Seer" is my sincere prayer.

Notes

From a Symposium on Ancient Scriptures and the Restoration, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 7 June 1997.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Bible has not come down to us in its pristine purity. Nephi learned from an angel that at one time the Bible contained the "fulness of the gospel of the Lord" that went forth "from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles." He saw, further, "the formation of [a] great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away." These were not the unintended scribal errors—the errors of eye or ear, the errors created and perpetuated through human limitations. The angel explained: "And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men." The mother of abominations not only tampers with the gospel and its meaning, but also "there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God." And because of these plain and precious truths "taken away" and "kept back" by malicious mortals, "an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them" (1 Nephi 13:24-32; emphasis added; see also D&C 6:26). See History of the Church, 1:368.
[^2] The greatest commentary on scripture is scripture. Further, a careful study of scripture brings forth additional light and truth. One of the fascinating discoveries of a careful study of the new translation—and thus one of the reasons the history of the Church cannot be prepared or told without adequate attention to the work with the Bible—is the manner in which matters in the translation, both doctrinal topics and specific phrases, are reflected in the revelations given to the Prophet at about the same time. We have sometimes been too prone to impose artificial distinctions, to study the translations and the revelations as separate endeavors, when in fact they went forward concurrently in the daily activity of the life of Joseph Smith. Generally the knowledge gained through the Prophet's work with the Bible preceded a revelation addressing the same subject. Shortly we will note exceptions to this order—times when the revelations seemed to precede the translations. For now, we will consider some specific illustrations of doctrinal topics first revealed through the JST and later discussed in the Doctrine and Covenants. Ibid., 1:238.
[^3] Revelation comes line upon line to prophets, just as it does to us. There is no question but what Joseph Smith knew far more, worlds more, than he ever revealed to the Latter-day Saints. What is also clear, however, is that very often the Lord required his "choice seer" to labor and ponder and reflect and ruminate upon a doctrinal matter before clarity came. It is one thing to receive a revelation, to come to know the mind and will of God; it is another thing to record what one has learned. Certainly most of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were dictated by Joseph Smith as God spoke through him. On other occasions, such as is the case with the JST, Joseph was required to put into words what God had put into his mind. This is reflected in the different manuscripts of the Old and New Testaments, evidencing a process of inspired but laborious refinement of the JST. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9.
[^4] A passage may be rendered more ways than one. When Moroni first appeared in September of 1823, he quoted numerous passages of scripture to Joseph Smith. He rendered Malachi 4:5-6 differently (see D&C 2). Moroni's rendition did not necessarily invalidate the KJV, but rather Moroni shed light on a doctrine—the "promises made to the fathers"—that is less clearly set forth in the KJV. Indeed, in this case, both renditions are correct and either could be cited, depending upon what point needed to be made at the time. In an epistle written by Joseph Smith at Nauvoo in 1842, the Prophet quoted the KJV of Malachi 4:5-6 in referring to work for the dead. "I might have rendered a plainer translation to this," he then wrote, "but it is sufficiently plain to suit my purpose as it stands" (D&C 128:18). See, for example, Bruce M. Metzger, The New Testament: Its Background, Growth, and Content, 2d ed. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1983), 280-81.
[^5] Loyalty to a living oracle entails an acceptance of what he brings forth. We cannot afford to pick and choose what we will accept and what we will not, even if it is not well received by the learned of the day. So far as I can tell, Joseph Smith (or the Lord, for that matter) did not view the Bible translation as of any lesser worth than he did the Book of Mormon, the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, or the book of Abraham. They are all products of the Restoration, fruits of a modern oracle, evidences of his prophetic call. The JST was no sideline, no prophetic parlor game; it was serious business. In the words of Elder Dallin H. Oaks, it is "a member of the royal family of scripture" and should be "noticed and honored on any occasion when it is present." [^14] As we noted earlier, the Lord explained that through the Bible translation the scriptures would be given, "even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect" (D&C 35:20). Salvation itself is at stake here. The issue is whether or not we will in fact receive and utilize the JST—with enthusiasm, not with tolerance. J. Harold Greenlee, Scribes, Scrolls, and Scripture (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1985), 35-38.
[^6] Bart D. Ehrman, The Orthodox Corruption of Scripture (New York: Oxford, 1993), 3-4.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9-10.
[^8] Ibid., 61.
[^9] Words of Joseph Smith, 256.
[^10] Messenger and Advocate 2 (December 1835): 229.
[^11] Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation":Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary (Provo: BYU Press, 1975), 86.
[^12] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 193, 356.
[^13] Ibid., 369, 373.
[^15] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Doctrinal Restoration," in Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet, eds., The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things (Provo: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), 3.
[^16] Ibid., 15.
[^17] F. F. Bruce, The Books and the Parchments (Westwood, N.J.: Fleming H. Revell Co., 1963), 95-96; see also F. F. Bruce, The New Testament Documents: Are They Reliable? (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1974), 27.
[^18] McConkie, "The Doctrinal Restoration," 15.
[^19] Oaks, "Scripture Reading," 13.
[^20] History of the Church, 6:77-78.
[^21] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 349.
[^22] Wilford Woodruff, in Journal of Discourses, 5:83-84.
[^23] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9.
