Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Doctrine

Chapter 12

Praise to the Man

In speaking of his beloved prophet-leader, Brigham Young declared: "When you hear a man pour out eternal things, how [good] you feel, to what a nearness you seem to be brought with God. What a delight it was to hear brother Joseph talk upon the great principles of eternity; he would bring them down to the capacity of a child, and he would unite heaven with earth." [^1] On another occasion, President Young said, "When I saw Joseph Smith, he took heaven, figuratively speaking, and brought it down to earth; and he took the earth, brought it up, and opened up, in plainness and simplicity, the things of God." [^2] And later, he added: "This should have convinced every person that ever heard of him of his divine authority and power, for no other man was able to teach as he could, and no person can reveal the things of God, but by the revelations of Jesus Christ. When we hear a man that can speak of heavenly things, and present them to the people in a way that they can be understood, you may know that to that man the avenue is open, and that he . . . has communication with the highest intelligence that exists." [^3]

Brigham Young maintained a loyalty to Joseph Smith that people in the modern age cannot even comprehend, and as a result became a mighty man of God in his own right. I want to discuss loyalty, more specifically loyalty to the work Joseph Smith set in motion, as well as to the work as it goes forward today.

Loyalty to His Revelations

The Restoration began by a revelation, a re-revealing of doctrine, principles, and precepts. It started, of necessity, with the First Vision, the beginning of the revelation of God to man. It would be followed by the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. Revelation upon revelation came to and through Joseph Smith, including the restoration of plain and precious truths once taken away or kept back from the Bible.

But there was more—more to come by way of truth, more than theology. The Restoration was destined to be a significant revolution. It must have been a mighty vision that filled the mind of Joseph Smith the Seer when he announced: "I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom [of God envisioned by] Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world." And how was this to be realized? "It will not be by sword or gun that this kingdom will roll on," the Prophet said. "The power of truth is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the gospel." [^4] Joseph Smith's vision of the kingdom of God—and of the power and ultimate reach of the Restoration—was cosmic. It consisted of more than preaching, study, and Sabbath services; it entailed the entire renovation of the order of things on earth, the transformation of man and the elevation of society. The Restoration was to be as broad and as deep as the Apostasy. Eventually the people of Zion would be in a position to know and acknowledge the truth, to discern and dispel error, and to teach and live the truth in all they said and did, in all facets of human endeavor—intellectual, moral, and spiritual. "Behold, I, the Lord, have made my church in these last days like unto a judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations. For it shall come to pass that the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things pertaining to Zion" (D&C 64:37-38).

Largely because of repetitive emphasis by President Ezra Taft Benson in recent years, we have become very much aware of the condemnation, scourge, and judgment that rests upon the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints because of our neglect of the Book of Mormon and modern revelation. The Lord's censure has come because we have "treated lightly the things [we] have received." The solution for ridding ourselves of this curse—extricating ourselves and subsequent generations of Saints—is simple: "They shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant"—or the new Testament—"even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say"—that is, to teach or discuss or declare—"but to do"—to incorporate, to inculcate, to live—"according to that which I have written." The Master also explains: "I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment—that you remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing testimony to all the world of those things which are communicated unto you" (D&C 84:54-61).

Some six centuries before the coming of Jesus in the flesh, Nephi offered a haunting warning. Speaking of those in the last days, he prophesied: "They wear stiff necks and high heads; yea, and because of pride, and wickedness, and abominations, and whoredoms, they have all gone astray save it be a few, who are the humble followers of Christ; nevertheless, they are led"—i.e., many of the humble followers of Christ—"that in many instances they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men" (2 Nephi 28:14; emphasis added). In a modern revelation a similar warning is sounded: "And when the times of the Gentiles is come in"—i.e., our time, the day when the gospel is delivered to the Gentile nations—"a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel; but they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men" (D&C 45:28-29; emphasis added). It should be clear to most of us that this prophecy will not be fulfilled solely through the rejection of Mormonism by non-Mormons. Sadly, it will find its fulfillment also in the lives of those baptized members who choose to live beneath their privileges, who exist in twilight when they could bask in the glorious light of noonday sun (see D&C 95:5-6). The doctrines of the Restoration assist us immeasurably in sifting and sorting through the views and philosophies of men and staying ourselves to that which is true and enduring.

Being loyal to the Restoration entails being ready and willing to bear witness of the truths made known to us, primarily through Joseph Smith, in this latter day. We love the Bible. We cherish its truths, treasure its marvelous stories of faith, and seek to live according to its precepts. But the scriptures of the Restoration carry a spirit all their own, particularly the Book of Mormon. There is a light and an endowment of spiritual power that comes into our lives through searching modern revelation. It can come in no other way. Being loyal to the Restoration entails teaching from and giving preferential treatment to the things that have been delivered to Joseph Smith and his successors.

An acceptance of Joseph Smith's work transcends what is currently known or available in the world of scholarship and thus enters the world of faith. If we cannot for the present time understand how he translated Reformed Egyptian from golden plates, we must still receive his work in all patience and faith. If we cannot reconcile the text of the Book of Abraham with what scholars translate from the facsimiles or the few papyrus fragments in our possession, we must still receive his work in all patience and faith. If we find that the Prophet's Bible translation does not fit with Hebrew or Greek manuscripts, we must still receive his work with all patience and faith. "Search diligently," the Lord implored in a modern revelation, "pray always, and be believing, and all things shall work together for your good, if ye walk uprightly and remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another" (D&C 90:24; emphasis added). The Lord does not ask that we suspend mental activity, that we compromise our integrity, or that we rely upon cunningly devised fables. What he does ask is that we be willing to exercise faith, to believe in the reality of the unseen, and to trust in things beyond the works of our own hands or the wisdom of our own discoveries. If we are true and faithful to what we believe and know in our hearts, the Lord will yet open our minds and bring forth great discoveries in the land. If, on the other hand, we let what we have discovered by study alone drive our faith and commitment, we close ourselves off from a vital realm of reality and block the hand of God. Our study must always be tempered by faith if we desire to be loyal to the work of Joseph Smith.

Loyalty in How We Tell Our Story

Jesus of Nazareth was rejected by some for eating and drinking with publicans and sinners; surely, many thought, no true Messiah would lower himself to affiliate with the scourges of society. Joseph Smith was condemned for wrestling and joking and playing ball; certainly, some insisted, prophets ought to be made of more austere stuff!

Lorenzo Snow said: "I can fellowship the President of the Church, if he does not know everything I know. . . . I saw the . . . imperfections in [Joseph Smith]. . . . I thanked God that he would put upon a man who had those imperfections the power and authority he placed upon him . . . for I knew that I myself had weakness[es], and I thought there was a chance for me." [^5]

Unfortunately, not all Latter-day Saints have been as sensitive or considerate of Joseph Smith and his successors as was Elder Snow. It has become somewhat fashionable, in fact, to emphasize the humanness and weaknesses of those called to lead the Church, to cast aspersions on their motives or character, and to reveal their personal and intricate details, the context and true meanings of which are often lacking.

President Gordon B. Hinckley noted that "we have critics who appear to cull out of a vast panorama of information those items which demean and belittle some men and women of the past who worked so hard in laying the foundation of this great cause. They find readers of their works who seem to delight in picking up these tidbits, in chewing them over and relishing them. . . . My plea is that as we continue our search for truth . . . we look for strength and goodness rather than weakness and foibles in those who did so great a work in their time.

"We recognize that our forebears were human. They doubtless made mistakes. . . . There was only one perfect man who ever walked the earth. The Lord has used imperfect people in the process of building his perfect society. If some of them occasionally stumbled, or if their characters may have been slightly flawed in one way or another, the wonder is the greater that they accomplished so much." [^6]

Prophets are called and approved of God—what further and greater recommendation do we need? We ought to be grateful that God can utilize imperfect beings and that these men—molded into vessels of holiness over time—can prove such a benefit to their fellow imperfect humans. Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, Lorenzo Snow, Joseph F. Smith, or others of our leaders cannot be with us now to answer all the charges against them. But be it remembered again that God called them and God has evidenced his approbation of their labors.

We simply do not have the whole story yet. Joseph and Brigham and John and Wilford are not here to fill in the gaps in our knowledge, nor are the rank-and-file members of the Church from bygone days available for oral interviews and clarifications. We must do all that we can in the present to reconstruct the past, to write the story of the Latter-day Saints and prepare that sacred history, that saga of a message, which will yet touch the hearts and build the faith of many. But we must be patient in writing it, avoiding the temptation to attribute improper motivation or to jump prematurely to conclusions, seeking earnestly to give the leaders of the Church the benefit of the doubt. The Lord, in time, will vindicate the words and works of his anointed servants; of this I have no doubt.

In the meantime we must receive their words, as the revelation declares, "in all patience and faith" (D&C 21:5). Elder Neal A. Maxwell stated: "The finished mosaic of the history of the Restoration will be larger and more varied as more pieces of tile emerge, adjusting a sequence here or enlarging there a sector of our understanding. There may even be a few pieces of the tile which, for the moment, do not seem to fit. We can wait, as we must. . . . The final mosaic of the Restoration will be resplendent, reflecting divine design. . . . At the perfect day, we will see that we have been a part of things too wonderful for us. Part of the marvel and the wonder of God's 'marvelous work and a wonder' will be how perfect Divinity mercifully used us—imperfect humanity. Meanwhile, amid the human dissonance, those with ears to hear will follow the beckoning sounds of a certain trumpet." [^7]

Loyalty to His Successors

The grief associated with the death of the Prophet and the Patriarch in June 1844 must have been almost unbearable. To know that one of such vision and spiritual magnitude as Joseph Smith had been taken from among them must have been a source of great agony for the stunned Saints. Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated: "We do not have language or capacity or ability to extol the greatness and the glory of the ministry and mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. And yet when he was taken the Lord had Brigham Young. Brigham Young stepped forth and wore the mantle of leadership. With all respect and admiration and every accolade of praise resting upon the Prophet Joseph, still Brigham Young came forward and did things that then had to be done in a better way than the Prophet Joseph himself could have done them." [^8]

I believe Joseph Smith would shout "Amen" to that observation of Elder McConkie. We all know that Joseph Smith was vital to this work because he, as the dispensation head, was the preeminent revealer of God and Christ to the world and the legal administrator through which priesthoods and keys and authorities were restored once again to earth. But each prophet-leader has a role to play, and God puts his hand upon the man who holds the fulness of the keys of the priesthood. For us, what is and what is to be is just as significant as what went before.

Because God had raised up Brigham Young to succeed the Prophet Joseph, the Saints in Nauvoo—at least those who enjoyed the spirit of revelation and were in tune with that divine influence that guides this work—were pleased to be able to sustain another whose personality, administrative abilities, and even approach to teaching the gospel were somewhat different than his predecessor. In temporal matters Joseph was not to have strength (see D&C 24:9), but in temporal matters Brigham had great strength. Brigham was not Joseph, but the spirit of Joseph was with Brigham. And so it was with John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff and Lorenzo Snow and Joseph F. Smith and Heber J. Grant and George Albert Smith. And so it is in our own time with David O. McKay and Joseph Fielding Smith and Harold B. Lee and Spencer W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson and Howard W. Hunter. They have worn the mantle of Joseph Smith, the mantle of authority needed to guide the Lord's Church and kingdom in these last days. They worshiped and were led by the same Lord God of Joseph Smith.

As members of the Church at the close of the twentieth century and the beginning of a new millennium, we can be loyal to Joseph Smith only to the degree that we are loyal to the leaders of the Church in our own day. As I have become aware of many movements in our day, I have asked myself, "What would Joseph think?" I believe he would be delighted in:

I also sense that he would be troubled, perhaps even incensed, by certain recent trends such as

efforts to downplay or deny outright the historicity of the Book of Mormon or the book of Abraham;

a failure to take seriously his inspired translation of the Bible or the Lectures on Faith;

efforts to utilize his name, teachings, and ministry to legitimize the aberrant and the unauthorized;

the arrogance of some who suppose they know better how to lead the Church than those who now bear the keys of the kingdom which were originally restored to him.

I think he would grieve over the unnecessary worry, heartache, and burden imposed on today's apostles and prophets by those who seek to run before their file leaders; by those who claim allegiance to Brother Joseph and then walk contrary to the law and order of the Church and kingdom; by self-proclaimed experts, Mormon gnostics, who lay claim to some secret and sacred knowledge available only to those initiated into the mysteries.

The spirit of Brother Joseph is with the leaders of this Church. Of this I have no question. President Joseph F. Smith testified:

"I feel quite confident that the eyes of Joseph the Prophet, and of the martyrs of this dispensation, and of Brigham and John and Wilford, and those faithful men who were associated with them in their ministry upon the earth, are carefully guarding the interests of the Kingdom of God in which they labored and for which they strove during their mortal lives. I believe they are as deeply interested in our welfare today, if not with greater capacity with far more interest, behind the veil, than they were in the flesh. I believe they know more; I believe their minds have expanded beyond their comprehension in mortal life, and their interests are enlarged in the work of the Lord to which they gave their lives and their best service. . . . I have a feeling in my heart that I stand in the presence not only of the Father and of the Son, but in the presence of those whom God commissioned, raised up, and inspired, to lay the foundations of the work in which we are engaged." [^9]

If the leadership of the Church does not feel the need to stress a given point that seems to be an obsession with some, then we would be wise to ask ourselves why such things are not being spoken of by our leaders. Are they unaware? Are they aware but unwilling to reveal these things to us? Though as a people we have miles to go before we rest and much spiritual development ahead of us, I bear witness that the Church is in excellent hands, is in the line of its duty, and is preparing a people for the second coming of the Son of Man. What is spoken by the General Authorities of the Church is what we need to hear, what the Lord would have his Saints know; those messages should become, as President Harold B. Lee once said, "the guide to [our] walk and talk." [^10] If the Lord desires to warn his people, to provide appropriate interpretation of difficult prophetic passages, then that warning will surely come, but it will come through the channels he has established.

In March of 1844 the Prophet Joseph Smith gave an unusual assignment to a group of Church leaders: they were asked to amend the Constitution of the United States, so as to make it "the voice of Jehovah." [^11] Later in the week, Elder John Taylor, as a representative of a special committee of three, responded that no progress had been made toward the preparation of a constitution for the kingdom of God. The Prophet acknowledged their failure, indicating that he knew "they could not draft a constitution worthy of guiding the kingdom of God." [^12] The Prophet himself had gone before the Lord, seeking that such a constitution be made known by revelation. The answer came: "Ye are my constitution and I am your God and ye are my spokesmen, therefore from henceforth keep my commandments." [^13] In a revelation given to President John Taylor on 27 June 1882, the Savior said: "Verily, thus saith the Lord, I have instituted my Kingdom and my laws, with the keys and power thereof, and have appointed you as a spokesman and my Constitution, with President John Taylor at your head, whom I have appointed to my Church and my Kingdom as Prophet, Seer and Revelator." Later in the same revelation the Lord affirmed: "Ye are my constitution, and I am your God." [^14] In short, this Church is to be governed by revelation—current, daily, modern revelation—and not by written documents alone. All of God's purposes for his children cannot be codified. Nothing is more fixed, set, and established than the fact that among the people of God the canon of scripture is open, flexible, and expanding.

As a sign of our loyalty to Joseph Smith, we need to look to the presidency of the Church, heed the counsel of those called and appointed to direct its destiny, and follow the Brethren as they point the way to eternal life. Though there will be individual casualties from the faith as we move toward the end, we need not be anxious about the future of the Church and kingdom of God. We need not be anxious about the leadership of the Church; we need only cultivate the little plot of ground assigned to us and leave the government of the kingdom to the King. The Lord does not ask us to magnify other people's callings.

Conclusion

So much of what I know to be true I know because of what God revealed through Joseph Smith. I know that there is a God—that he is our Father in Heaven, the Father of our spirits, that he has a body of flesh and bones, that he is an exalted Man of Holiness—because of Joseph Smith. I know that there is purpose in life—a plan, a divine timetable, a carefully constructed program for the edification and exaltation of all—because of Joseph Smith. I know that we are eternal beings—that we lived in a premortal existence for endless ages of time, that this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God, and that we shall live forever and ever after mortal death—because of what has been made known through Joseph Smith. I know that Jesus is the Christ—the Savior and Redeemer, the Lord God Omnipotent, the God of the ancients, and that his atonement is infinite and eternal—because of Joseph Smith. I know that the consummate power of God—including the keys of the kingdom of God, the power to seal men and women unto eternal life—is on the earth because of the ministry of Joseph Smith. I know that my wife and I can truly become eternal companions, that my children have indeed been born in the covenant, and that the sweetest joys in time and eternity can be maintained and multiplied—because of what God has revealed in this final dispensation through the Choice Seer, Joseph Smith.

Is it any wonder, then, that we feel to sing praise to the man who communed with Jehovah? Truly, Jesus anointed that Prophet and Seer. In 1837 Wilford Woodruff, one who knew Joseph the Prophet intimately, said:

"There is not so great a man as Joseph Smith standing in this generation. The gentiles look upon him as he is like a bed of gold concealed from human view. They know not his principles, his spirit, his wisdom, his virtues, his philanthropy, nor his calling. His mind, like Enoch's, expands as eternity, and only God can comprehend his soul." [^15]

I pray most sincerely that we will be loyal and true to the memory and ministry of so great a one who has walked among us, and that one day, having demonstrated that loyalty through faithful living, we shall have association with him and the Gods of whom he stands as a preeminent witness.

Notes

From a fireside address in Chicago, Illinois, summer 1993.

---
Notas:
[^1] Promised Messiah, 4-5.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 59-60.
[^3] Ibid., 264.
[^4] Ibid., 168.
[^5] Ibid., 308.
[^6] Doctrines of Salvation, 1:156; emphasis in original.
[^7] B. H. Roberts, Defense of the Faith and the Saints, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1907), 1:512-13.
[^8] Gospel Doctrine, 30, 395, 398-400; see also Journal of Discourses, 15:325.
[^9] Hugh Nibley, The Message of the Joseph Smith Papyri: An Egyptian Endowment (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), xii-xiii.
[^10] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 2:139.
[^11] See also D&C 84:47-48; Gospel Doctrine, 67-68; Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 260-61.
[^12] Gospel Doctrine, 13.
[^13] Statement of the First Presidency, 15 February 1978.
[^14] Fred C. Collier, Unpublished Revelations of the Prophets and Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Collier's Publishing Co., 1979), 132, 134; emphasis added.
[^15] Journal History, entry for 9 April 1837.
