Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 14

The Man Adam

Few persons in all eternity have been more directly involved in the plan of salvation—the creation, fall and ultimate redemption of the children of God—than the man Adam. His ministry among the sons and daughters of earth stretches from the distant past of premortality to the distant future of resurrection, judgment, and beyond. As Michael, the archangel, he led the forces of God against the armies of Lucifer in the War in Heaven. Under the direction of Elohim and Jehovah, he assisted in the creation of the earth. After taking physical bodies, Adam and Eve brought mortality into being through partaking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; with the fall of our first parents came blood and posterity and probation and death, as well as the need for redemption through a Savior, a "last Adam" (see 1 Corinthians 15:45). To Adam the gospel was first preached. Upon Adam the priesthood was first bestowed. From Adam and Eve the message of the gospel of salvation went forth to all the world. Following his death, which occurred almost a millennium after he entered mortality, Adam's watchcare over his posterity continued. Revelations have come and angels have ministered under his direction. Priesthoods have been conferred and keys delivered at his behest.

Before the World Was

Adam's role in the eternal plan of God begins in our first estate. There he was known as Michael, literally one "who is like God." Indeed, "By his diligence and obedience there, as one of the spirit sons of God, he attained a stature and power second only to that of Christ, the Firstborn. None of all the billions of our Father's children equalled him in intelligence and might, save Jesus only." [^1] He was "called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God" (Alma 13:3) to perform his labors on earth. Michael stood with Jehovah in defense of the plan of the Father, the plan of salvation, this in opposition to the amendatory offering of Lucifer, a son of the morning. "The contention in heaven was," Joseph Smith explained, that "Jesus said there would be certain souls that would not be saved; and the devil said he could save them all, and laid his plans before the grand council, who gave their vote in favor of Jesus Christ. So the devil rose up in rebellion against God, and was cast down, with all who put up their heads for him." [^2] Or, as the Revelator saw in vision, "There was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon and his angels fought against Michael; and the dragon prevailed not against Michael. . . . Neither was there place found in heaven for the great dragon, who was cast out; that old serpent called the devil, and also called Satan, which deceiveth the whole world; he was cast out into the earth; and his angels were cast out with him" (JST, Revelation 12:6-8).

Michael was directly involved in the preparation of the physical world in which he and his posterity would undergo a mortal probation. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "Christ and Mary, Adam and Eve, Abraham and Sarah, and a host of mighty men and equally glorious women comprised that group of 'the noble and great ones,' to whom the Lord Jesus said: 'We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell' (Abraham 3:22-24; emphasis added). This we know: Christ, under the Father, is the Creator; Michael, his companion and associate, presided over much of the creative work; and with them, as Abraham saw, were many of the noble and great ones." [^3] The Prophet Joseph Smith thus taught that "the Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Genesis 1:26, 27, 28." [^4]

In Eden

It is appropriate when it came time to initiate our second estate that God our Father should call upon Michael to tabernacle the flesh as earth's first inhabitant. In providing a genealogy of Jesus, the Gospel writer spoke of Cainan, who was "the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God" (Luke 3:38). In the Joseph Smith Translation of Genesis we read of the line of great patriarchs from Adam to Enoch. "And this is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God himself conversed" (JST, Genesis 6:23; see also Moses 6:22). Adam—his very name means "man" or "mankind." Adam—his very title implies the first man of all men, which are many (Moses 1:34).

In the morn of creation, Adam, Eve, and all forms of life existed in a paradisiacal condition. All things were physical. They were spiritual in the sense that they were not mortal, not subject to death (see 1 Corinthians 15:44; Alma 11:45; D&C 88:27). [^5] In the Garden of Eden, Adam and Eve walked and talked with God. Adam was made "lord or governor of all things on earth, and at the same time [enjoyed] communion and intercourse with his Maker, without a vail to separate between." [^6] Our first parents would have remained in this state indefinitely had not circumstances changed (see 2 Nephi 2:22; Moses 3:9). Those circumstances did change as a result of Adam and Eve's partaking of the forbidden fruit.

The Latter-day Saint view of the scenes in Eden is remarkably optimistic when compared to traditional Christian views. We believe that Adam and Eve went into the Garden of Eden to fall, that their actions helped "to open the way of the world," [^7] and that the Fall was as much a part of the foreordained plan of the Father as was the very Atonement. "Adam did only what he had to do," President Joseph Fielding Smith said. "He partook of that fruit for one good reason, and that was to open the door to bring you and me and everyone else into this world, for Adam and Eve could have remained in the Garden of Eden; they could have been there to this day, if Eve hadn't done something." [^8] Because the Fall is one of the three pillars of eternity (with the Creation and the Atonement), and because mortality, death, human experience, sin, and thus the need for redemption grow out of the Fall, we look upon what Adam and Eve did with appreciation rather than disdain. "The fall had a twofold direction—downward, yet forward. It brought man into the world and set his feet upon progression's highway." [^9] As Enoch declared: "Because that Adam fell, we are" (Moses 6:48; see also 2 Nephi 2:25).

Out of Eden

In addition, the Fall opened the door to sin and death. This life became a probationary estate, a time for men and women to prepare to meet God (see 2 Nephi 2:21; Alma 12:24; 34:32; 42:4). With the Fall came also a veil of separation between God and mankind; mortals "were shut out from his presence" (Moses 5:4). After being cast from the Garden of Eden, Adam and his posterity were taught the gospel by the ministry of angels, by the voice of God, and through the power of the Holy Ghost (see Moses 5:1-8, 58). The veil separating Adam from the immediate presence of the Eternal Father did not, however, remove Adam's memory of life in Eden. As Joseph Smith clarified, Adam's transgression "did not deprive him of the previous knowledge with which he was endowed relative to the existence and glory of his Creator. . . . Though he was cast out from the garden of Eden, his knowledge of the existence of God was not lost, neither did God cease to manifest his will unto him." [^10] President John Taylor asked: "How did Adam get his information of the things of God?" He then answered: "He got it through the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . . God came to him in the garden and talked with him . . . and he was the first man upon this earth that had the gospel and the holy priesthood; and if he had it not, he could not have known anything about God or his revelations." [^11]

The Latter-day Saints stand alone in the religious world in certifying that Christ's gospel is eternal—that Christian prophets have taught Christian doctrine and administered Christian ordinances since the dawn of time. [^12] Adam was earth's first Christian. He exercised faith in the redemption of Christ, was baptized in water, received the gift of the Holy Ghost, was "quickened in the inner man," and was received into the order of the Son of God (Moses 6:64-67). Further, Adam and Eve entered into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage and thus placed themselves on that pathway that leads to life eternal. [^13] "Father Adam was called of God," President Wilford Woodruff explained, "and ordained to the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood—ordained to the highest office and gift of God to man on the earth." [^14]

Adam and Eve taught their children and their grandchildren the gospel, as they had received the same from the lips of God and angels. Some of their posterity rejected the light of heaven, "loved Satan more than God," and thus turned away from the truth. Our first parents mourned over the choices of their loved ones (see Moses 5:13, 18, 27, 28), but their mourning was not as those who have no hope. Thus "Adam and Eve, his wife, ceased not to call upon God" (Moses 5:16). Three years prior to his death, Adam gathered his righteous posterity together in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman (the place where he and Eve had settled after their expulsion from Eden [^15] ). Seven generations of faithful patriarchs with their families met to receive prophetic counsel at the feet of him who had come to be known as the "Ancient of Days." There he bestowed upon them his last blessing. In describing a vision he had of this sacred occasion, the Prophet Joseph said: "I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he (Adam) blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation. This is why Adam blessed his posterity; he wanted to bring them into the presence of God." [^16]

Adam was lord over the earth for his own day, but he also stands as earth's presiding high priest, the man who, under Christ, holds the keys of authority for the blessing of mankind and the perpetuation of righteousness in the earth. "The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority." [^17] On another occasion, the Prophet added that Adam was "the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed." [^18] A modern revelation thus states that Jehovah has "appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life" (D&C 78:16).

After Death

The Ancient of Days lived some 930 years on this earth (see Moses 6:12). His death fulfilled the divine decree that in the day he ate of the forbidden fruit—in this case, meaning the day or time as measured according to the Lord—he would surely die (see Moses 3:17; Abraham 5:13). At death Adam entered the postmortal world of spirits and became a part of that abode of the righteous known as paradise (see 2 Nephi 9:13; Alma 40:12; Moroni 10:34). His must have been a glorious reunion with holy beings as he passed from time into eternity. There he ministered and labored among his faithful descendants for some three thousand years. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that Adam "presides over the spirits of all men," [^19] and so his ministry and administrative responsibilities would have continued beyond death's door.

Just as the War in Heaven continues, in a sense, into our own time, even so Adam's efforts to thwart and oppose Satan, the son of the morning, have continued since Adam's mortal death. In the context of counseling the Saints to avoid speaking evil of responsible persons, Jude, the brother of our Lord, observed that "Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee" (Jude 1:9). This appears to be a reference to a rather obscure pseudepigraphic work known as the Assumption of Moses. We know that Moses was translated. It appears that Satan, as lord of the material world, sought Moses' death in order to gain control over his body, so that Moses "would not have a tangible body in which to come—along with Elijah, who also was taken up without tasting death—to confer the keys of the priesthood upon Peter, James, and John" on the Mount of Transfiguration. [^20] In our own day Michael, on the banks of the Susquehanna River, detected "the devil when he appeared as an angel of light" (D&C 128:20). We wonder how many other occasions there may have been in earth's history when Michael the archangel has stood to rebuke and set the bounds of Lucifer the archdeceiver.

There is one other occasion in which Michael as a disembodied spirit may have played a particularly significant role in the plan of our Father. Luke records that on the night of Atonement, following the Last Supper, Jesus bowed in awful alienation and grief in the Garden of Gethsemane beneath the load of the world's sins. He uttered his soul-cry: "Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done. And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him" (Luke 22:42-43). An angel sent from the courts of glory. An angel sent to assist, to support, to sustain the sinless Son of Man in the apogee of his greatest agony. "The angelic ministrant is not named," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written. "If we might indulge in speculation, we would suggest that the angel who came into this second Eden was the same person who dwelt in the first Eden. At least Adam, who is Michael, the archangel—the head of the whole heavenly hierarchy of angelic ministrants—seems the logical one to give aid and comfort to his Lord on such a solemn occasion. Adam fell, and Christ redeemed men from the fall; theirs was a joint enterprise, both parts of which were essential for the salvation of the Father's children." [^21]

President Joseph F. Smith, who was privileged to glimpse in vision the world of the disembodied at the time Jesus entered therein, wrote: "Among the great and mighty ones who were assembled in this vast congregation of the righteous were Father Adam, the Ancient of Days and father of all, and our glorious Mother Eve, with many of her faithful daughters who had lived through the ages and worshiped the true and living God" (D&C 138:38-39). Adam and Eve were among that group who "waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour of their deliverance from the chains of death." When the Lord of Life appeared, he taught and organized his righteous forces and empowered them to take the message of salvation to the wicked, "the ungodly and the unrepentant." The Master ministered to his own "and gave them power to come forth, after his resurrection from the dead, to enter into his Father's kingdom, there to be crowned with immortality and eternal life" (D&C 138:18, 20, 51).

We do not know at what point in time Adam came forth in the first resurrection unto celestial glory, whether, like many of his prophetic colleagues, at the time of Christ's rise from the tomb (see D&C 133:54-55), or whether he remained in the spirit world for a season to oversee or participate in the work of redemption for the dead. That Adam did eventually rise to godhood, to sit with his famous descendants—Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (see D&C 132:37)—and that he shall come forth to dwell in the everlasting burnings associated with celestial glory (see D&C 137:5), is abundantly clear from latter-day revelation. Following his resurrection, "Adam's base of operation would be from wherever such righteous resurrected beings go to await the time when this earth will become celestialized and become their eternal home. Again, we should remember that Adam's priesthood keys go with him—from the premortal world, through his mortal ministry, into the post-earth spirit world, and into the resurrection." [^22]

In the Future

In what would be, without modern revelation, a rather mysterious passage in the book of Daniel, reference is made to an unusual gathering of people. "I saw in the night visions," Daniel wrote, "and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed" (Daniel 7:13-14). Latter-day revelation informs us that the location of this gathering is Daviess County, Missouri, in that area we have come to know as Adam-ondi-Ahman (see D&C 116), the same place where Adam met and counseled with and prophesied to his numerous posterity three years before his death. Of this council, a meeting that will be a preliminary appearance of the Savior (prior to his coming in glory), the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. . . . The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family." [^23]

President Joseph Fielding Smith offered the following explanation: "This gathering of the children of Adam, where the thousands, and the tens of thousands are assembled in the judgment, will be one of the greatest events this troubled earth has ever seen. At this conference, or council, all who have held keys of dispensations will render a report of their stewardship. Adam will do likewise, and then he will surrender to Christ all authority. Then Adam will be confirmed in his calling as the prince over his posterity and will be officially installed and crowned eternally in this presiding calling. Then Christ will be received as King of kings, and Lord of lords. We do not know how long a time this gathering will be in session, or how many sessions may be held at this grand council. It is sufficient to know that it is a gathering of the Priesthood of God from the beginning of this earth down to the present, in which reports will be made and all who have been given dispensations (talents) will declare their keys and ministry and make report of their stewardship according to the parable [see Matthew 25:14-30]. Judgment will be rendered unto them for this is a gathering of the righteous, those who have held and who hold keys of authority in the Kingdom of God upon this earth. . . . This will precede the great day of destruction of the wicked and will be the preparation for the Millennial Reign." [^24]

When the Lord Jesus returns in triumphant glory to initiate the "end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked" (Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:4), the first resurrection, which began with the resurrection of Christ, will resume. Here again Michael-Adam will play a significant role. "Before the earth shall pass away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come forth" (D&C 29:26). In discussing the nature of the keys restored to earth by various angels, Elder Bruce R. McConkie noted that "the holy priesthood will be used in eternity as well as in time. It is not only the power and authority to save men here and now; it is also the power by which the worlds were made and by which all things are. It also could well be that Adam, who brought mortality and death into the world, was also permitted to restore the power that brings immortality and life to his descendants. Christ, of course, in the ultimate sense holds the keys of the resurrection and of raising souls in immortality, but, as we also know, it is his practice to operate through his servants, and righteous persons will, in due course, participate in calling their loved ones forth in the resurrection." [^25] At the end of the earth—meaning at the end of the Millennium (see D&C 88:101; Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:55)—the final great battle between good and evil, known as the "battle of the great God" (D&C 88:114) or the battle of Gog and Magog, [^26] will take place. And once again, the mighty Michael, the eternal captain of Jehovah, will come face to face with his nefarious foe, Satan. "And the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all. For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb. This is the glory of God, and the sanctified; and they shall not any more see death" (D&C 88:114-16). Michael's final victory is in preparation for the celestialization of the earth.

Conclusion

All too often Adam's place and role in the plan of salvation have been misunderstood. To many in the religious world he is an enigma, to others a myth. Some despise him for his actions in Eden. The praise he receives from some others takes the strange form of adoration and even worship. But to misunderstand Adam is to misunderstand our own identity, as well as our relationship to the Lord and his plan. The gospel light has shone forth, and modern seers have made known great and marvelous things pertaining to the past and the future (see Mosiah 8:17); people need not wander in darkness as to who they are, whose they are, and what they may become. Searching the revelations and attuning ourselves to the living oracles in our own day will prepare us for a time when further light and knowledge concerning the Adamic dispensation will be given (see D&C 107:57), a time when the faithful will know "things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—things most precious" (D&C 101:33-34). A knowledge of the origin and destiny of man—as typified in the life and labors of our father Adam—this is the legacy of the Latter-day Saints.

Notes

From "The Man Adam," Ensign, January 1994, 8-15.

---
Notas:
[^1] All mankind are lost and fallen. In what seems to be the very first reference in the Book of Mormon to the Fall, Nephi taught that "six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem, a prophet would the Lord God raise up among the Jews—even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the world. And he also spake concerning the prophets, how great a number had testified of these things, concerning this Messiah, of whom he had spoken, or this Redeemer of the world. Wherefore, all mankind were in a lost and in a fallen state, and ever would be save they should rely on this Redeemer" (1 Nephi 10:4-6; see also Alma 42:6). I am fascinated with the two words so descriptive of mortals—lost and fallen. Truly as Isaiah declared (and as Abinadi quoted), "All we, like sheep, have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way" (Mosiah 14:6; see also Isaiah 53:6). The Good Shepherd thus comes on a search and rescue mission after all of his lost sheep. He who never took a moral detour or a backward step thus reaches out and reaches down to lift us up. We are lost in the sense that we have wandered from a more exalted sphere; in the sense that we do not know our way home without a guide; in the sense that we are alienated from God and separated from things of righteousness. We are fallen in the sense that we have chosen, like our Exemplar, to condescend and enter a telestial tenement; in the sense that our eternal spirit, a spark of divinity struck from the fires of God's eternal blaze, has taken up its temporary abode in a tabernacle of clay; in the sense that we must be lifted up, quickened, and resuscitated spiritually if we are to return to the glorious place from whence we came. Resolving to come unto Christ. Some years ago it was not uncommon to see bumper stickers and placards that read simply "Jesus is the answer." As we suggested earlier, answers are always much more appreciated when we know the question. As was the case anciently in Alma's dealings with the Zoramites, so it is today—the great question is whether there is a Christ and what role he does or should serve in our lives (see Alma 34:5). William R. Bradford, "Message Sublime," in Brigham Young University 1982-83 Fireside and Devotional Speeches (Provo: Brigham Young University, 1983), 156.
[^2] We inherit a fallen nature through conception. God spoke to father Adam in the dawn of history: "Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good" (Moses 6:55; emphasis added). In one sense, to be conceived in sin is to be conceived into a world of sin, to come forth into a telestial sphere, a state in which sin predominates. But there is more to it than that. Conception becomes the vehicle, the means whereby a fallen nature—mortality, what the scriptures call "the flesh"—is transmitted to the posterity of Adam and Eve. In short, to say that we are not responsible for the fall of Adam and Eve is not to say that we are unaffected by it. To say that we do not inherit an original sin through the Fall is not to say that we do not inherit a fallen nature and thus the capacity to sin. Fallenness and mortality are inherited. They come to us as a natural consequence of the second estate. Being reconciled to God through Christ. As indicated above, the Fall brought changes to the earth and all forms of life on earth, changes both cosmic and personal. In the spiritual realm, men and women began life in a new sphere, a new state, a new kind of being. Whereas in Eden, Adam and Eve had enjoyed the blessings of a terrestrial, immortal condition in which things were not subject to death, now on a fallen telestial earth all things began their steady decline toward dissolution. From modern revelation "we learn man's situation at his first creation, the knowledge with which he was endowed, and the high and exalted station in which he was placed—lord or governor of all things on earth, and at the same time enjoying communion . . . with his Maker, without a veil to separate between." [^15] Following the Fall, however, Adam and Eve "heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence" (Moses 5:4; see also D&C 29:41). William R. Bradford, in Conference Report, October 1983, 100-101.
[^3] One may be faithful and pure-hearted and yet still be buffeted by the pulls of a fallen world. Another way of stating this principle is that there is a difference between the natural man (which we will discuss shortly) and the spiritual man who is taunted by the natural world in which he lives. Perhaps there is no better illustration in scripture than Nephi, son of Lehi. Here was a man who was obedient and submissive, a man who was led and empowered by the Spirit of Almighty God. "My soul delighteth in the things of the Lord," he wrote, "and my heart pondereth continually upon the things which I have seen and heard." Now note the following words, spoken by a man who was surely as pure and virtuous as anyone we know: "Nevertheless, notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord, in showing me his great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth: O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities. I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me. And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins" (2 Nephi 4:16-19). Being renewed in Christ. The Book of Mormon is a powerful invitation to come unto Christ and be changed. Indeed, one who chooses Christ chooses to be changed. The plan of salvation is not just a program bent on making bad men good and good men better; in addition, it is a system of salvation that seeks to renovate society and transform the whole of humankind. The gospel of Jesus Christ is intended to make of earth a heaven and of man a god. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 12.
[^4] Little children are innocent by virtue of the Atonement, not by nature. Joseph Smith's teachings concerning the innocence and salvation of little children—drawn from the Book of Mormon, his inspired translation of the Bible, and the revelations we now have in the Doctrine and Covenants—came as a refreshing breeze amidst the arid and sweltering winds of doctrinal corruption and confusion. But even in the restored Church there is some confusion on this matter. We ask: Are little children innocent? The answer is a resounding yes. But that question is not really a debated issue. We all know that little children are innocent. The more difficult point is: Why are little children innocent? Two possibilities suggest themselves. First, there are those who believe little children are innocent because they are that way by nature. They are pure and holy and decent and good and unselfish and solicitous and benevolent and submissive, just by virtue of the fact that they are little children. I don't know about you, but I have not reared any of those types! The answer in the Book of Mormon and in modern revelation is that little children are innocent as one of the unconditional blessings of the Atonement, because Jesus Christ decreed them so. Being reinstated in the Family of God. The Fall not only distances us from righteousness but also alienates us from the family of God. We come into this fallen world nameless and familyless. The Atonement therefore provides the means not only for forgiveness of sins but also of reinstatement in the royal family. Benjamin acknowledged this marvelous truth when he commended his people for their willingness to renew their baptismal covenant and come again unto Christ. "And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters. And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given whereby salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the covenant with God that ye should be obedient unto the end of your lives" (Mosiah 5:7-8; emphasis added; see also 27:25). Matthias Cowley andOrson F. Whitney,Cowley and Whitney on Doctrine, comp. Forace Green (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), 287.
[^5] The natural man is an enemy to God and to all righteousness. "There is a natural birth, and there is a spiritual birth," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written. "The natural birth is to die as pertaining to premortal life, to leave the heavenly realms where all spirits dwell in the Divine Presence, and to begin a new life, a mortal life, a life here on earth. The natural birth creates a natural man, and the natural man is an enemy to God. In his fallen state he is carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature.Appetites and passions govern his life and he is alive—acutely so—to all that is evil and wicked in the world." [^10] The angel explained to Benjamin that "men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent. For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord" (Mosiah 3:18-19). Relying on the merits and mercy of Christ. The Book of Mormon teaches that we are saved by merit, but not by our own merit. "Since man had fallen," Aaron explained to the father of Lamoni, "he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance, and so forth" (Alma 22:14; emphasis added). This requires a bit of explanation. Of course we are expected to receive the ordinances of salvation, work faithfully in the kingdom, perform acts of Christian service, and endure faithfully to the end. Of course we are expected to do the works of righteousness. These things are necessary—they evidence our covenant with Christ to follow him and keep his commandments. They are necessary, but they are not sufficient. See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 346-48; Lectures on Faith, 5:3.
[^6] Retaining a remission of sins. It is a marvelous thing to know that through the cleansing powers of the blood of Christ we may obtain a remission of sins and thus stand spotless before God. The promise of forgiveness is indeed a miracle, a wondrous act on the part of a merciful and all-loving God. We know we are forgiven as the Spirit of the Lord returns and as joy and peace of conscience fill our souls once more (see Mosiah 4:1-3). And yet we stand each day, as it were, precariously on the edge of a cliff: we are subject to subsequent sin. How can we, without trifling with repentance, remain pure? The Book of Mormon prophets provide the answer. They speak of remaining in a justified condition, of maintaining or retaining our spotless standing before God even though we make mistakes. Like the people of Benjamin, we may err after our covenant with the Master, but we have no desire to do so. That is, our heart, our affections, our desires have all been surrendered unto Christ, and we have no desire to stray from our binding covenant with him. As we endure to the end through living constantly in a state of repentance with an ever-present desire to be transformed in Christ, the Savior holds us guiltless (see 3 Nephi 27:16; see also D&C 4:2). Lorenzo Snow's poem, written 11 June 1892, was published in the Improvement Era, June 1919, 660.
[^7] Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), 33.
[^8] Promised Messiah, 244.
[^9] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 2:134.
[^10] Ibid., 8:160.
[^11] Ibid., 10:173.
[^12] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 282; emphasis added.
[^13] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 12:323.
[^14] Ibid., 9:330.
[^15] Peter Kreeft, Back to Virtue (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1992), 83.
[^16] Ezra Taft Benson, Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 361.
[^17] Lectures on Faith, 2:12.
[^18] McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 282.
[^19] Ezra Taft Benson, "A Mighty Change of Heart," Ensign, October 1989, 2-5; emphasis added.
[^20] Bruce R. McConkie, "What Think Ye of Salvation By Grace?" in Brigham Young University 1983-84 Fireside and Devotional Speeches (Provo: Brigham Young University, 1984), 48.
[^21] C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan, 1952), 128-29; emphasis added.
[^22] Larry E. Dahl, "Adam's Role from the Fall to the End—and Beyond," in Joseph F. McConkie and Robert L. Millet, eds., The Man Adam (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990), 121.
[^23] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157.
[^24] Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1964), 481-82; see also McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 578-88.
[^25] Millennial Messiah, 119-20; emphasis added.
[^26] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 280.
