Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 15

The Regeneration of Fallen Man

In a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon is described as "a record of a fallen people" (D&C 20:9). It is certainly a narrative history of the rise and fall of two great civilizations, a sobering chronicle of how pride and secret combinations usher nations into destruction. It is also an ever-present reminder that without divine assistance and the regenerating powers of the atonement of Christ, men and women remain forevermore lost and fallen creatures. "Why is it so vital," Elder William R. Bradford asked, "that we have a record of a fallen people? Why would such a record merit the trial and suffering of those who have sacrificed to bring forth this book, even to the constant and direct intervention of God Almighty?" Elder Bradford then answered: "I submit to you that no one, regardless of race or creed, can ever understand the role of and the need for a savior and a redeemer unless he first knows from what he needs to be saved or redeemed. No person, regardless of his religion or tradition, can understand victory over death and the terms upon which his salvation depends unless he understands the doctrine of fallen man." [^1]

Or, as he stated on another occasion, "The Book of Mormon contains the record of a fallen people. It outlines how man got into a condition which subjects him to death and separation from God. The Book of Mormon also contains the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. It outlines for us in perfect clarity what has been done for us and what we must do ourselves to overcome our fallen condition and return to the presence of God. . . . The Book of Mormon holds out to us a fulness of what we must be saved from. It gives us a complete understanding of the role of, and the need for, a savior. It is another testament of Jesus Christ." [^2] The plight and the promise, the malady and the medication, the Fall and the Atonement—this is the burden of the Book of Mormon.

The Fall and Its Effects

The Latter-day Saint view of the Fall is remarkably optimistic. We believe that Adam and Eve went into the Garden of Eden to fall, that what they did had the approbation of the Gods and thus is termed a transgression and not a sin, and that their Fall was as much a part of the foreordained plan of the Father as was the very Atonement. We believe in the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that "Adam was made to open the way of the world," [^3] that the Fall was a move downward but forward in the eternal scheme of things, and that it "brought man into the world and set his feet upon progression's highway." [^4] We do not believe, like John Calvin, that men and women are, by virtue of the Fall, depraved creatures. We do not believe, like Martin Luther, that men and women are so inclined to evil that they do not even have the capacity to choose good on their own. We do not believe, with much of the Christian world, that because of the Fall little children are subject to an "original sin."

Sometimes as Latter-day Saints we get a little nervous about teaching the Fall, fretting perhaps that we might be misunderstood as being accepting of a belief in universal human depravity. It is true that all men and women are the literal spirit sons and daughters of a divine and exalted Father and that we have the capacity to become as He is. [^5] It is wondrous indeed to contemplate the majesty of President Lorenzo Snow's doctrinal teachings:

As Abra'm, Isaac, Jacob, too,

First babes, then men—to gods they grew.

As man now is, our God once was;

As now God is, so man may be—

Which doth unfold man's destiny.6

Having said all of that, having distanced ourselves from traditional Protestant and Catholic thought regarding the impact of Adam and Eve's transgression, I hasten to add that there was a fall and that the Fall does indeed take a measured toll on all mankind. It is real, and its effects cannot be ignored or its pull on the human heart mitigated by enlightened conversation. One's capacity to become as God is one thing, while his or her inclination to sin is quite another. It is only as men and women overcome many of the effects of the Fall through the atoning blood and ransoming power of Jesus Christ that they place themselves on the path to godhood.

I also add here that to fail to teach the Fall is to lessen the impact of the Atonement. President Ezra Taft Benson observed: "Just as a man does not really desire food until he is hungry, so he does not desire the salvation of Christ until he knows why he needs Christ. No one adequately and properly knows why he needs Christ until he understands and accepts the doctrine of the Fall and its effect upon all mankind." [^6] The Fall and the Atonement are a package deal; one brings the other into existence, and I am not aware of any discussion of the Atonement in the Book of Mormon that is not accompanied, either directly or by implication, with a discussion of the Fall. We do not appreciate and treasure the medicine until we appreciate the seriousness of the malady. One cannot look earnestly and longingly to the Redeemer if he or she does not sense the need for redemption. Jesus came to earth to do more than offer sage advice. He is not merely a benevolent consultant. He is our Savior. He came to save us.

The following represent but a few of the principles that may be derived from the Book of Mormon regarding the effects of the Fall and of the nature of fallen humanity:

Men and women are lost and fallen in that they are subject to spiritual death, the separation from God (see Alma 42:7, 9), the separation from things of righteousness (see Alma 12:16, 32; 40:26). Alma explained to Corianton that after partaking of the forbidden fruit, our first parents were "cut off from the tree of life" and thereby "became lost forever, yea, they became fallen man. And now, ye see by this that our first parents were cut off both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the Lord; and thus we see they became subjects to follow after their own will." Alma pointed out that inasmuch as "the fall had brought upon all mankind a spiritual death as well as a temporal, that is, they were cut off from the presence of the Lord, it was expedient that mankind should be reclaimed from this spiritual death. Therefore, as they had become carnal, sensual, and devilish, by nature, this probationary state became a state for them to prepare; it became a preparatory state" (Alma 42:6-10).

Lehi explained to Jacob that following the Fall "the days of the children of men were prolonged, according to the will of God, that they might repent while in the flesh; wherefore, their state became a state of probation, and their time was lengthened, according to the commandments which the Lord God gave unto the children of men. For he gave commandment that all men must repent; for he showed unto all men that they were lost, because of the transgression of their parents"(2 Nephi 2:21; emphasis added). Abinadi likewise explained to the priests of Noah that yielding to Lucifer's temptation in the Garden of Eden "was the cause of [Adam and Eve's] fall; which [fall] was the cause of all mankind becoming carnal, sensual, devilish, knowing evil from good, subjecting themselves to the devil. Thus all mankind were lost; and behold, they would have been endlessly lost were it not that God redeemed his people from their lost and fallen state." At this point in reading the passage, we might be tempted to breathe a sigh of relief and rejoice in the fact that the Fall is already taken care of because Jesus suffered and died. Unfortunately, Abinadi continues, and in so doing he points out that the fallen nature is not just something we descend into through personal sin, but something out of which we must be extracted through divine regenerating powers. "But remember," he said, "that he that persists in his own carnal nature, and goes on in the ways of sin and rebellion against God, remaineth in his fallen state and the devil hath all power over him. Therefore, he is as though there was no redemption made, being an enemy to God; and also is the devil an enemy to God" (Mosiah 16:3-5; emphasis added).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Adam fell. We know that this fall came because of transgression, and that Adam broke the law of God, became mortal, and was thus subject to sin and disease and all the ills of mortality. We know that the effects of his fall passed upon all his posterity; all inherited a fallen state, a state of mortality, a state in which temporal and spiritual death prevail. In this state all men sin. All are lost. All are fallen. All are cut off from the presence of God. All have become carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature. Such a way of life is inherent in this mortal existence." [^7] Similarly, President Brigham Young noted that a critical and doubting disposition concerning the work of the Lord "arises from the power of evil that is so prevalent upon the face of the whole earth. It was given to you by your father and mother; it was mingled with your conception in the womb, and it has ripened in your flesh, in your blood, and in your bones, so that it has become riveted in your very nature." [^8] On another occasion he explained: "There are no persons without evil passions to embitter their lives. Mankind are revengeful, passionate, hateful, and devilish in their dispositions. This we inherit through the fall, and the grace of God is designed to enable us to overcome it." [^9]

The people of Benjamin were described by their great king as "a diligent people in keeping the commandments of the Lord" (Mosiah 1:11). We would suppose they were members of the Church of Jesus Christ, followers of our Lord and Savior, people who had come out of the world by covenant. Benjamin delivered to his people one of the most significant addresses in all the Book of Mormon. He announced his own retirement and his son Mosiah as his successor; gave an accounting for his reign and ministry; encouraged the people to serve one another and thereby serve God; and counseled them (in the words of an angel) to put off the natural man and put on Christ through the Atonement. The people were electrified by the power of the message. Benjamin "cast his eyes round about on the multitude, and behold they had fallen to the earth, for the fear of the Lord had come upon them." And then this unusual insight: "And they had viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth"(Mosiah 4:1-2; emphasis added). They then cried unto the Lord for forgiveness and deliverance. Interesting, isn't it? A noble people, a diligent people who view themselves in their own carnal state.

In Moroni's abridgment of the Jaredite record, we discover that the brother of Jared has encountered two major problems in his efforts to construct eight seaworthy vessels to transport his people to the promised land—air and light. We presume that the problem of how to ventilate the vessels was architecturally beyond the brother of Jared, for the Lord simply told him how to do it. But in regard to the light, Jehovah essentially asked: "Well, what would you have me to do?" This implies that God expected Moriancumr to do some homework. The Jaredite leader went to the top of Mount Shelem with sixteen transparent stones, eager to have the Lord touch them and thereby light their barges. He presented the stones to the Lord and prayed: "O Lord, thou hast said that we must be encompassed about by the floods. Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become evil continually"(Ether 3:2; emphasis added). He then called upon God for divine assistance.

We can grow in spiritual graces to the point wherein we have no more disposition to do evil but to do good continually (see Mosiah 5:2) and wherein we cannot look upon sin save it be with abhorrence (see Alma 13:12; see also 2 Nephi 9:49; Jacob 2:5). We can, like Nephi, delight in the things of the Lord (see 2 Nephi 4:16). But as long as we dwell in the flesh we shall be subject to the pulls of a fallen world. "Will sin be perfectly destroyed?" President Brigham Young asked. "No, it will not, for it is not so designed in the economy of heaven. . . . Do not suppose that we shall ever in the flesh be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates. . . . I think we shall more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death."11

Benjamin, in citing the message of an angel, declared that "even if it were possible that little children could sin they could not be saved," meaning, presumably, if there had been no Atonement; "but I say unto you they are blessed; for behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins" (Mosiah 3:16; emphasis added). Mormon taught similarly that little children are innocent, "even from the foundation of the world," and that "all little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law" (Moroni 8:12, 22). Modern revelation attests that "little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten" (D&C 29:46), and that "little children are holy, being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ" (D&C 74:7; see also JST, Matthew 18:11; 19:13). We are thus encouraged to become as little children, not only in the sense of becoming submissive, meek, humble, patient, and full of love (see Mosiah 3:19), but also in the sense of becoming innocent through the atoning blood of Christ (see Moroni 8:10).

The natural man is an enemy to God in that he (or she) is operating on another agenda than God's; is doing everything in his or her power to bring to pass their own whims and wishes; in general, has placed his or her will above that of the Captain of our soul. President Brigham Young taught that "the natural man is at enmity with God. That fallen nature in every one is naturally opposed, inherently, through the fall, to God and to His Kingdom, and wants nothing to do with them." [^11] Such persons are thereby operating at cross purposes to the Father's plan for the salvation and redemption of his children and thus prove to be their own worst enemy as well. "All men that are in a state of nature," Alma observed, "or I would say, in a carnal state, are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; they are without God in the world, and they have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness" (Alma 41:11).

The Apostle Paul wrote to the Corinthian Saints that "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:14). In the process of rejoicing in God, Ammon spoke of the gratitude he felt for the fact that he and his brothers had not been cast off forever for going about to destroy the Church of God. "Behold, he did not exercise his justice upon us, but in his great mercy hath brought us over that everlasting gulf of death and misery, even to the salvation of our souls. And now behold, my brethren, what natural man is there that knoweth these things? I say unto you, there is none that knoweth these things, save it be the penitent" (Alma 26:20-21). President Young stated that "the natural man (or as we now use the language, the fallen or sinful man) receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God. . . . In no other way can the things of God be understood. Men who are destitute of the influence of the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of God, cannot understand the things of God; they may read them, but to them they are shrouded in darkness." [^12]

Redemption from the Fall

We have spoken of the malady and now we turn to the cure. We have spoken of the bad news of the Fall and now turn to the good news, the glad tidings, of the Atonement.

Some years ago I sat with my counselors in a bishopric meeting. The session was drawing to a close because sacrament meeting would be starting in just ten minutes. A knock came at the door as we were making our way out of the office into the foyer. A young woman from my ward asked if she could visit with me for a moment. I indicated to her that we could chat for a bit, but that sacrament meeting would be starting soon. She assured me that we would be together for only a minute or two. After we had been seated for a few seconds, she said: "Bishop, I need to confess a sin." I was startled with the suddenness of the statement, but, managing to hold my composure, I offered the following: "Well, that could take some time, couldn't it? Shall we meet after the block of meetings today?" She quickly responded: "Oh no! This will just take a second."

I nodded and asked her to go ahead, and she proceeded to describe in some detail a very serious moral transgression in which she had been involved. It was now about one minute before the meetings were to start, and so I tried again: "Why don't we get together after priesthood and Relief Society meetings." She then staggered me with, "Well, I don't know why we would need to, unless it would be helpful to you, or something." I indicated that such a meeting might prove beneficial to both of us. She agreed to return. Three hours later, and after we had exchanged a few pleasantries, I asked her, "How do you feel about what has happened?" She responded, "Just fine." I must have shown my perplexity, because she added: "For a number of hours I felt bad about what had happened, but it's okay now because I've repented."

I couldn't ask her the question fast enough: "What do you mean when you say that you have repented?" (She had explained to me earlier that the transgression had taken place on Friday night, and it was now Sunday afternoon). At that point, she reached into her purse, rearranged a few items, and retrieved a yellow sheet of legal-size paper. Pointing one by one to various headings that began with an R, she said, "I've done this, and this, and this, and this, and finally I've confessed to you. I've repented."

"It seems to me that you've skipped an R, that your list is missing something," I said. A startled but persistent look was in her eyes, and I noted a slight impatience with me as she said, "No, that can't be. I have everything listed here!"

"The R you're missing," I responded, "is Redeemer. You have no place for Christ on your list. I mean, what does Jesus Christ have to do with your transgression? What does what happened in Gethsemane and on Calvary two thousand years ago have to do with what happened to you two nights ago?"

She answered: "Jesus died for me. He died for my sins."

To almost every question I asked thereafter she gave a perfect answer—at least, a perfectly correct answer. She had been well trained, and her answers reflected an awareness of the doctrines associated with repentance. But the answers were all totally cerebral, straight from memory and mind—not from the heart. She obviously saw no real tie between her own ungodly actions and the infinite actions of a God. We spent a few hours together that day and many days thereafter—searching the scriptures, praying together, and counseling over the way back to the strait and narrow path. We talked often and intently about Jesus Christ. She came in time to know the correct answers—by feeling, that is, from the heart.

Since that time, I have formulated my own brief list of R's, those that tend to point my mind and rivet my affections to Jesus the Messiah. There is nothing sacred about this list (how many, what order, etc.) except that they direct my own heart to sacred things.

Those who labor tirelessly to lighten burdens or alleviate human suffering, but at the same time deny the fact that Jesus Christ is God or that there is no need for a Savior in this enlightened age, cannot have the lasting impact on society that they could have through drawing upon those spiritual forces that center in the Lord Omnipotent. Those in our day who focus endlessly on the moral teachings of Jesus but who downplay the divine Sonship miss the mark dramatically. For some persons, Jesus stands as the preeminent example of kindness, the ultimate illustration of social and interpersonal graciousness and morality. A favorite text for this group is the Sermon on the Mount, while their highest aspiration is the call to live the Golden Rule. A Roman Catholic philosopher has observed: "According to the theological liberal, [the Sermon on the Mount] is the essence of Christianity, and Christ is the best of human teachers and examples. . . . Christianity is essentially ethics. What's missing here?" he asks. "Simply, the essence of Christianity, which is not the Sermon on the Mount. When Christianity was proclaimed throughout the world, the proclamation (kerygma) was not 'Love your enemies!' but 'Christ is risen!' This was not a new ideal but a new event, that God became man, died, and rose for our salvation. Christianity is first of all not ideal but real, an event, news, the gospel, the 'good news.' The essence of Christianity is not Christianity; the essence of Christianity is Christ." [^13]

We come unto Christ not alone to be taught but to be transformed. He is not only our Example but also our Change Agent and our Benefactor. Jesus is not only a convenient resource; he is the vital and indispensible element in our quest for happiness here and eternal reward hereafter. There is no hope and no possibility of reconciliation with the Father except by and through the Savior.

Enos wrestled with his sins until he heard the voice of God declaring, "Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed." "Lord, how is it done?" Enos asked. The Lord answered: "Because of thy faith in Christ, whom thou hast never before heard nor seen. . . . Wherefore, go to, thy faith hath made thee whole" (Enos 1:5-8). In the apogee of his agony—confronted and tortured spiritually through the medium of memory—Alma the younger reported: "And it came to pass that as I was thus racked with torment, while I was harrowed up by the memory of my many sins, behold, I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy unto the people concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God, to atone for the sins of the world. Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death. And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more. And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!" (Alma 36:17-20). Indeed, Jesus Christ is the Source of Solace. Jesus Christ is the Prince of Peace.

A grand key to coming unto Christ is acknowledging the goodness and omnipotence of Christ. It consists of yielding our hearts unto him (see Helaman 3:35), submitting to his wisdom and omniscience. It is an unconditional surrender, an unqualified sacrifice of self on the altar of Christ. It is to hearken to the counsel of Amaleki: "And now . . . , I would that ye should come unto Christ, who is the Holy One of Israel, and partake of his salvation, and the power of his redemption. Yea, come unto him, and offer your whole souls as an offering unto him" (Omni 1:26). "Men and women who turn their lives over to God," President Ezra Taft Benson stated, "will discover that He can make a lot more out of their lives than they can. He will deepen their joys, expand their vision, quicken their minds, strengthen their muscles, lift their spirits, multiply their blessings, increase their opportunities, comfort their souls, raise up friends, and pour out peace." [^14]

The Atonement is that divine act of mercy and grace and condescension by which our Father and God opens the door to reunion. In and through Adam we partake of mortality and death. In and through Christ our Mediator and Intercessor, we partake of immortality and the abundant life. By means of the Atonement we are reconciled to the Father. By means of the Atonement, the finite is reconciled to the Infinite, the incomplete to the Complete, the unfinished to the Finished, the imperfect to the Perfect. Jacob pleaded: "Wherefore, . . . reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved" (2 Nephi 10:24). The Atonement, as an act of grace, demonstrates the love of the Father for his children. Jesus Christ, who lived a sinless and perfect life, claims of the Father "his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men" (Moroni 7:27). Jacob also reminded his people and us: "Wherefore, . . . seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from his hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that he counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all his works. Wherefore, . . . be reconciled unto him through the atonement of Christ, his Only Begotten Son, and ye may obtain a resurrection, according to the power of the resurrection which is in Christ, and be presented as the first-fruits of Christ unto God" (Jacob 4:10-11).

Those who are dead to the things of the Spirit must be quickened, made alive, or born again in order to enter the realm of divine experience. This is not optional but required. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "The spiritual birth comes after the natural birth. It is to die as pertaining to worldliness and carnality and to become a new creature by the power of the Spirit. It is to begin a new life, a life in which we bridle our passions and control our appetites, a life of righteousness, a spiritual life. Whereas we were in a deep abyss of darkness, now we are alive in Christ and bask in the shining rays of his everlasting light. Such is the new birth, the second birth, the birth into the household of Christ." [^16] The new birth is the means by which "the dark veil of unbelief" is removed from our minds and by which the "light of the glory of God" infuses joy into our souls (Alma 19:6). It is the process by which we "lay aside every sin, which easily doth beset [us], which doth bind [us] down to destruction" (Alma 7:15). It is the only way whereby we can receive the image of Christ in our countenances (see Alma 5:14).

The renewal of which we speak is a conversion from worldliness to saintliness, from being lured by the lurid to being enticed by holiness. It comes to us by virtue of the cleansing blood of Jesus and through the medium of the Holy Ghost, who is the Sanctifier. After hearing a powerful address, the people of Benjamin "cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually" (Mosiah 5:2; emphasis added; see also Alma 19:33). This conversion experience was real. It was borne of the Spirit. It was of God. Surely as time passed and as they grew into that meaningful spiritual union with Christ of which the prophets speak, there would be little in the world to recommend itself to them, for their desires were to please the Almighty and enjoy his approbation. We do not suppose, however, that the people of Benjamin never sinned again; this would be impossible in this fallen sphere. No, they sinned and made mistakes thereafter, but they had no desires to do so. And, thanks be to God, we shall not only be judged by our works but also by the desires of our hearts (see Alma 41:3; D&C 137:9).

The testimony of Alma the younger is vital. Having lain immobile for three days and three nights and having come face to face with the heinous nature of his sins, he awoke to a new life. Alma "stood up and began to speak unto them, bidding them to be of good comfort: for, said he, I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit. And the Lord said unto me: Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters; and thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God" (Mosiah 27:23-26; emphasis added).

President Ezra Taft Benson noted that "we must be careful, as we seek to become more and more godlike, that we do not become discouraged and lose hope. Becoming Christlike is a lifetime pursuit and very often involves growth and change that is slow, almost imperceptible." Then, after mentioning the sudden spiritual transformations of such notables as Alma the younger, Paul, Enos, and King Lamoni, he added: "We must be cautious as we discuss these remarkable examples. Though they are real and powerful, they are the exception more than the rule. For every Paul, for every Enos, and for every King Lamoni, there are hundreds and thousands of people who find the process of repentance much more subtle, much more imperceptible. Day by day they move closer to the Lord, little realizing they are building a godlike life. They live quiet lives of goodness, service, and commitment. They are like the Lamanites, who the Lord said, 'were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not' (3 Nephi 9:20)." [^17]

Just as the newborn in our mortal world automatically enters into a family relationship through birth, even so the new birth, the birth of the Spirit, becomes an avenue of life within the family of the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is thus the Father of our awakening into newness of life, the Father of our resurrection, the Father of our salvation. We take his name upon us and seek to be worthy of that holy name. As members of his family we are expected to know who we are and act accordingly—to keep his commandments with fidelity and devotion and to take seriously our divine birthright as Christians. Thus we, as the seed of Christ, hearken unto the word of the prophets, look to Jesus our Lord for redemption, and publish peace after the manner of our Prince of Peace (see Mosiah 15:11-18). He is the Shepherd and we are the sheep of his fold. "Behold, I say unto you, that the good shepherd doth call you; yea, and in his own name he doth call you, which is the name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd" (Alma 5:38).

We are expected to do the best we can, to give our whole service to our Master and our whole heart and soul to the cause of righteousness in the earth. But in the end it will not be enough. We cannot, simply cannot, save ourselves. Our merits, no matter how godlike and consistent, will not qualify us for the highest heaven. Truly, as Lehi explained, "there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah" (2 Nephi 2:8). "Wherefore, I know that thou art redeemed," Lehi explained to his son Jacob. And why was he redeemed? Because of his faithfulness, his submissiveness, his willingness, like Nephi, to follow the counsel of his father? No, Jacob was redeemed "because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer" (2 Nephi 2:3).

The Prophet Abinadi delivered a scathing denunciation of Noah and his priests, particularly of the manner in which they feigned allegiance to the Law of Moses but failed to live in harmony with its moral precepts. Further, he corrected their false impression that salvation could come by the Law alone. "I say unto you," he declared, "that it is expedient that ye should keep the law of Moses as yet; but I say unto you, that the time shall come when it shall no more be expedient to keep the law of Moses, and moreover, I say unto you, that salvation doth not come by the law alone; and were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people, that they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of Moses" (Mosiah 13:27-28). Elder Bruce R. McConkie, in an address to students at Brigham Young University in 1984, suggested a latter-day application of Abinadi's words:

"Suppose we have the scriptures, the gospel, the priesthood, the Church, the ordinances, the organization, even the keys of the kingdom—everything that now is down to the last jot and tittle—and yet there is no atonement of Christ. What then? Can we be saved? Will all our good works save us? Will we be rewarded for all our righteousness?

"Most assuredly we will not. We are not saved by works alone, no matter how good; we are saved because God sent his Son to shed his blood in Gethsemane and on Calvary that all through him might ransomed be. We are saved by the blood of Christ.

"To paraphrase Abinadi: 'Salvation doth not come by the church alone: and were it not for the atonement, given by the grace of God as a free gift, all men must unavoidably perish, and this notwithstanding the Church and all that appertains to it.'"20

The issue is not whether we are saved by works or by grace. Both are necessary. The real questions to be asked are: In whom do I trust? On whom do I rely? If I trust in my own works or rely on the labors of my own hands—no matter how noble they may be—I am propping my ladder against the wrong wall. If my confidence is in my capacity to "handle it myself," then my perspective is skewed and my hope is misplaced. Our reliance must be wholly upon the "merits of him who is mighty to save" (2 Nephi 31:19), alone upon "the merits of Christ, who [is] the author and the finisher of our faith" (Moroni 6:4). We are saved by the grace of Christ after all we can do (see 2 Nephi 25:23), meaning above and beyond all we can do. In the words of C. S. Lewis, those who come unto Christ learn that they cannot do it themselves but must "leave it to God." Lewis goes on to say: "The sense in which a Christian leaves it to God is that he puts all his trust in Christ: trusts that Christ will somehow share with him the perfect human obedience which He carried out from His birth to His crucifixion: that Christ will make the man more like Himself and, in a sense, make good his deficiencies. . . . And, in yet another sense, handing everything over to Christ does not, of course, mean that you stop trying. To trust Him means, of course, trying to do all that He says. There would be no sense in saying you trusted a person if you would not take his advice. Thus if you have really handed yourself over to Him, it must follow that you are trying to obey Him. But trying in a new way, a less worried way." [^18]

Benjamin explained two means by which the Saints are enabled to retain a remission of sins from day to day. First of all, he said: "As ye have come to the knowledge of the glory of God, or if ye have known of his goodness and have tasted of his love, and have received a remission of your sins, which causeth such exceedingly great joy in your souls, even so I would that ye should remember, and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and his goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith of that which is to come, which was spoken by the mouth of the angel.

"And behold, I say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true" (Mosiah 4:11-12; emphasis added; see also Moroni 7:42-44). Acknowledgement of God's greatness and goodness; recognition of our absolute ineptitude without divine assistance; surrender to the sobering verity that our spiritual condition is bankrupt without the Atonement—these are the preconditions for redemption in Christ, the means whereby we retain a remission of sins from day to day. Surely to the degree that we bow in humble reverence before the Lord Omnipotent and trust in his incomparable might, to that degree we open ourselves to the sweet enabling power we know as the grace of God. That power serves not only as a final spiritual boost into exaltation hereafter but also as a significant means for the renovation of our character and personality in this life, the power behind the process wherein we become partakers of the divine nature (see 2 Peter 1:4) and evidence the fruit of the Spirit (see Galatians 5:22-25).

The second means of retaining a remission of sins is set forth by King Benjamin after his lengthy plea with the people of God to look to the care of the needy. "And now, for the sake of these things which I have spoken unto you—that is, for the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their wants" (Mosiah 4:26; emphasis added). Perhaps it is the case that these two matters are really one; that is, the more I look to the Lord, humble myself before him, freely acknowledge his goodness and grace, and strive to be like him, the more I am prone to look to the welfare of my brothers and sisters about me. Being filled with the love of God results in meaningful and lasting service to the children of God.

Mormon spoke of a time in the Nephite church's history when the pride and wickedness of the members proved to be "a great stumbling block to those who did not belong to the church; and thus the church began to fail in its progress." On the other hand, "others were abasing themselves, succoring those who stood in need of their succor, such as imparting their substance to the poor and the needy, feeding the hungry, and suffering all manner of afflictions, for Christ's sake, who should come according to the spirit of prophecy; looking forward to that day, thus retaining a remission of their sins; being filled with great joy because of the resurrection of the dead, according to the will and power and deliverance of Jesus Christ from the bands of death" (Alma 4:10, 13-14; emphasis added).

Conclusion

We might go on and on in listing different R's of regeneration in Christ. But I desire to close this chapter by rejoicing in Christ. Jacob surely sang the song of redeeming love (see Alma 5:26) when he gloried in the wisdom, goodness, greatness, justice, mercy, and holiness of our God (see 2 Nephi 9:8, 10, 17, 19, 20). Ammon boasted, not in his own strength but in the infinite power of his Lord: "Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in his strength I can do all things" (Alma 26:12).

I rejoice in the great plan of happiness and in the satisfaction that comes from the knowledge that God does indeed have a plan and that there is purpose in all we experience in this life. I rejoice in the fact that Adam fell that we might be (see 2 Nephi 2:25) and that because of that fall all of us enter into mortality to undertake the second phase of our eternal journey. I rejoice in the Fall, for it brought forth the Atonement, the means whereby our hearts might be cleansed and our souls transformed and prepared to dwell with Christ and our Eternal Father.

I know of the malady we call the fallen condition and of the heartache that comes to us as we yield to the flesh. I also know of the consummate peace that comes as we strive to put off the natural man through the Atonement and yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit. Thus "we talk of Christ, . . . we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, . . . that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins" (2 Nephi 25:26). Like Nephi, "I glory in plainness; I glory in truth; I glory in my Jesus, for he hath redeemed my soul from hell" (2 Nephi 33:6). Of that supernal truth I testify. For that good news, those glad tidings, I am immeasurably grateful.

Notes

From Nurturing Faith Through the Book of Mormon, The 24th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1995), 119-48.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 370.
[^2] Charles W. Penrose, in Journal of Discourses, 26:23.
[^3] Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 1978 ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), 25.
[^4] See Doctrines of Salvation, 1:54; see also Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 258.
[^5] McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 70.
[^6] See Doctrines of Salvation, 2:269; Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 333.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 187-88.
[^8] Bruce R. McConkie, "Jesus Christ and Him Crucified," 1976 Devotional Speeches of the Year (Provo: BYU Publications, 1976), 399; emphasis added.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 372.
[^11] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:153; emphasis in original.
[^12] Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel and Epistles of John, A Concise Commentary (Collegeville, Minn.: The Liturgical Press, 1988), 37; see also Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel According to John, 2 vols., volumes 29 and 29A in the Anchor Bible Series (New York: Doubleday, 1966), 1:172; F. F. Bruce, The Gospel of John (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1983), 110-11.
[^13] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, October 1981, 18-19.
[^14] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 162.
[^16] Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27 (1 February 1892): 93-94.
[^17] Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 61.
[^18] John Stott, Authentic Christianity from the Writings of John Stott, ed. Timothy Dudley-Smith (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1995), 207.
