Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 16

The Ministry of the Holy Ghost

John the Beloved has delivered to us—in his Gospel, epistles, and Apocalypse—an apostolic witness, a penetrating testimony of his Lord and Savior. John identified himself as "the one that Jesus loved," and that love of the Lord permeates his writings. Indeed, there is a spirit that broods over the works of the Beloved Disciple, a spirit that attests to its essential truthfulness and especially to the reality of its central character, Jesus the Christ. John was a witness of the risen Lord, one who saw and heard and touched (see 1 John 1:1). He knew by the physical senses, and he knew by an inward sense—a sense more real and powerful than anything earthly—that the Word, the supreme messenger of salvation, had come and dwelt among men in the flesh (see John 1:1; D&C 93:8).

A person could profitably devote a lifetime to the study of John's writings and, with each reading, come away refreshed, renewed, and infused with light and truth and added understanding. There is so much that might be said. In this chapter I would like to focus my attention on the work of the Holy Ghost, as set forth in the Gospel and epistles of John. Although the Holy Ghost is a vital figure in each of the other Gospels and writings of the New Testament, there is a reason why the fourth Gospel is often called the "spiritual Gospel," and the central themes of the Gospel of John, many of which attend to the work of the Holy Ghost, carry over consistently into his epistles.

The Light of Christ

The four Gospels are particularly plain in setting forth the true nature of God and the various labors of the members of the Godhead. Indeed, one has to become involved in a stretching series of doctrinal maneuvers in order to derive the concept of Trinity or of a triune God in the New Testament. The simplest reading of the text reveals the supremacy of God the Eternal Father, the divine Sonship of Jesus of Nazareth, and the mission of the Holy Ghost to make known the persons and will of the Father and the Son.

But Latter-day Saints are not limited by what is in the text of the New Testament. Through modern revelation we come to perceive and appreciate precious truths that have been lost to the religious world, insights that bring clarity and conviction to the study of the Bible. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained: "I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and that the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a spirit; and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods." [^1]

The "marvelous flood of light" we know as the Restoration first establishes the essential truthfulness of the Bible (1 Nephi 13:39-40; Mormon 7:9; D&C 20:11) and then makes known the mysteries of God, those revealed doctrines associated with the nature and kind of Beings we worship.

John wrote: "This then is the message which we have heard of [Christ], and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all" (1 John 1:5). We do not travel far in our study of the Gospel of John before we read that Jesus Christ is "the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" (John 1:9). Because Jehovah was the foreordained Redeemer and Savior of worlds (D&C 76:22-24; Moses 1:32-35), the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world (Revelation 5:6; 13:8; Moses 7:47), the Father's plan became his by adoption; the gospel of God (Romans 1:1-3) thus became known as the gospel of Jesus Christ. Likewise, because Elohim has invested his Beloved Son with his own attributes and powers (Mosiah 15:3; D&C 93:4), because the "Father of lights" (James 1:17) has ordained that Christ is to be the Light of lights, the Light of the world, those powers of life and light that we know as the power of God have come to be known as the light of Christ or Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Though there is but passing reference to the light of Christ in the New Testament, the scriptures of the Restoration abound in detail, assisting us immeasurably to understand how and in what manner the light of Christ lights every man and woman born into mortality. We come to know, first of all, that that light is a manifestation of the glory of God, a divine influence that fills the immensity of space, and the means whereby God, a corporeal being who can only be in one place at a time, is omnipresent. Elder Charles W. Penrose declared that "this spirit which pervades all things . . . is the light and life of all things, by which our heavenly Father operates, by which He is omnipotent, never had a beginning and never will have an end. It is the light of truth; it is the spirit of intelligence." [^2]

The light of Christ has both natural and redemptive functions. Elder Parley P. Pratt explained: "It is, in its less refined existence, the physical light that reflects from the sun, moon, and stars, and other substances, and, by reflection on the eye, makes visible the truths of the outward world. It is also in its higher degrees the intellectual light of our inward and spiritual organs, by which we reason, discern, judge, compare, comprehend, and remember the subjects within our reach. Its inspiration constitutes instinct in animal life, reason in man, and vision in the prophets, and is continually flowing from the Godhead throughout all his creations." [^3] The Holy Ghost is a male spirit personage. As an individual spirit personage, he, like the Father, can be in only one place at a time, and thus he utilizes and draws upon the light of Christ to communicate sacred truths and to dispense spiritual gifts to myriad beings separated in time and space (see Moroni 10:17). [^4]

And so the same power that makes it possible for us to see with our physical eyes also makes it possible for us to see with spiritual eyes (see D&C 88:6-13). Discernment—the innate capacity to distinguish good from evil and the relevant from the irrelevant—also comes through this Spirit of Jesus Christ (see Moroni 7:12-19). Further, those who are true to this Spirit within them—including their conscience and thus the canons of right and wrong and decency in society—will be led, either in this life or the next, to the higher light of the Holy Ghost that comes through the covenant gospel (see D&C 84:44-53).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "The light of Christ (also called the Spirit of Christ and the Spirit of the Lord) is a light, a power, and an influence that proceeds forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. . . . It is the agency of God's power and the law by which all things are governed. It is also the agency used by the Holy Ghost to manifest truth and dispense spiritual gifts to many people at one and the same time. For instance, it is as though the Holy Ghost, who is a personage of spirit, was broadcasting all truth throughout the whole universe all the time, using the light of Christ as the agency by which the message is delivered. But only those who attune their souls to the Holy Spirit receive the available revelation. It is in this way that the person of the Holy Ghost makes his influence felt in the heart of every righteous person at one and the same time." [^5]

The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost

By inheritance as well as by perfect obedience, Jesus Christ was entitled to a fulness of the Spirit. Jesus spoke often of his divine inheritance. "Therefore doth my Father love me," John recorded, quoting the Savior, "because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father" (John 10:17-18). Herein is the fundamental truth to be believed if we are to accept the divine Sonship of Christ. Jesus was the son of Mary, a mortal woman, and from her inherited mortality, including the capacity to die. Jesus was the son of God, an immortal resurrected being, and from him inherited the capacity to rise up from the dead in resurrected immortality. In a discourse on the redemption of the Messiah, Lehi emphasized how vital it is to make these truths known "unto the inhabitants of the earth, that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah, who layeth down his life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit, that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise" (2 Nephi 2:8; emphasis added). The Savior thus had "power given unto him from the Father" (Helaman 5:11; Mormon 7:5) to do what he was sent to earth to do.

Though the fulness of the glory of the Father would not be Christ's until after the resurrection (see Matthew 28:18; D&C 93:16-17), [^6] Jesus lived and moved and had his being in the Spirit of God, "for God giveth him not the Spirit by measure, for he dwelleth in him, even the fulness" (JST, John 3:34). It was this fulness that enabled and empowered the lowly Nazarene to resist evil, dismiss Satan from his life, and enjoy constant communion with the Father. "Where is the man that is free from vanity?" Joseph Smith asked. "None ever were perfect but Jesus; and why was He perfect? Because He was the Son of God, and had the fullness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man." [^7] In speaking of becoming perfect in this life, Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed: "We have to become perfect to be saved in the celestial kingdom. But nobody becomes perfect in this life. Only the Lord Jesus attained that state, and he had an advantage that none of us has. He was the Son of God, and he came into this life with a spiritual capacity and a talent and an inheritance that exceeded beyond all comprehension what any of the rest of us was born with." [^8]

The Latter-day Saints teach, and the New Testament affirms, that the Beloved Son was in fact subordinate to his Father in mortality. Jesus came to carry out the will of the Father (see John 4:34). He explained: "I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me" (John 5:30; see also 6:38-40). In addition, the scriptures attest that Elohim had power, knowledge, glory, and dominion that Jesus did not have at the time. Truly, "the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do" (John 5:19). Even what the Son spoke was what the Father desired to be spoken. "For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak" (John 12:49-50). How much more plainly could the Lord speak concerning his subordinate position than when he said, "If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I" (John 14:28)?

On the other hand, the Father and the Son enjoyed much more than what we might call closeness; theirs was a divine indwelling relationship. Because he kept the law of God, Jesus was in the Father, and the Father was in Jesus (see John 14:10, 20; 17:21; 1 John 3:24). Though they were two separate and distinct beings, they were one—infinitely more one than separate. Their transcendent unity but epitomizes what ought to exist between God and all of his children. That is to say, we are under commission to seek the Spirit of God, to strive to be one with the Gods, to be, as the Prophet Joseph explained, "agreed as one," [^9] to have, as Paul wrote, "the mind of Christ" (1 Corinthians 2:16). "Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit" (1 John 4:13). We thus gain the mind of Christ as Christ gained the mind of the Father—through the power of the Spirit.

The Holy Ghost, as the third member of the Godhead, is the minister of the Father and the Son. The Godhead does not consist, as some suppose, of a Supreme Being who operates with the assistance of his two counselors, the Son and the Holy Ghost. Rather, Christ sends the Comforter (see John 15:26; 16:7). That Comforter is not an independent Being in the sense of speaking his own mind and delivering a completely original message. Jesus taught: "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear [presumably, from the Father and the Son], that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you" (John 16:13-14). The three separate members of the Godhead are one—they bear the same witness and teach the same truths (see 1 John 5:7).

For reasons that are not completely clear in the New Testament, the full powers and gifts of the Holy Ghost were not given in the Old World meridian Church until the day of Pentecost. "He that believeth on me," Jesus stated, "as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. (But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive; for the Holy Ghost was promised unto them who believe, after that Jesus was glorified)" (JST, John 7:38-39). While the Bridegroom was present with his disciples in the flesh, he was their Comforter, their Revelator, their Testator. He was their Life and Light, their source of power and might. "Hence, as long as Jesus was with the disciples in person, there was not the full need for them to have the constant companionship of the Spirit that there would be after Jesus left." [^10] But because of the vital role that Spirit would play thereafter in the growth, development, and expansion of the early Christian Church, Jesus said: "It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you" (John 16:7).

Though Jesus loved those among whom he ministered—indeed, the love of the Father and the Son underlies the work of redemption (see John 3:16-17; 1 Nephi 11:22, 25; D&C 34:1-3)—he was neither controlled by men's views nor deterred by their ridicule, taunts, or rejection. "I receive not honour from men," the Master said simply (John 5:41). His sense of worth derived not from the fickle plaudits of myopic mortals, but from the approbation of heaven. "He that sent me is with me: the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him" (John 8:29). That constant closeness is what empowered the Savior to act in quiet confidence and assurance in behalf of his Father. A knowledge of such consummate intimacy also highlights the profound sense of loss, the awful alienation which the Son of Man experienced when in the garden and on the cross he tread the winepress alone, "even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:107).

Jesus explained to the woman at the well at Samaria: "Ye [the Samaritans] worship ye know not what: we [the Jews] know what we worship: for salvation is of the Jews." The true God had been revealed through the prophets of Israel, and salvation comes only to those who worship that divine Being. The Master continued: "But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him. God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth" (John 4:22-24). As you know, these verses, particularly the reference to God being a spirit, have been used often against the Latter-day Saints by those offended with our doctrine of the corporeality of the Father. An alteration in the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired translation of the Bible suggests a problem with this verse, whether textual tampering had taken place or meaning and clarity had simply been lost through the years. In the JST we find that "true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him. For unto such hath God promised his Spirit. And they who worship him, must worship in spirit and in truth" (JST, John 4:25-26).

But even if we were not blessed with this prophetic insight, we could discern that the present rendering of the verse and the typical interpretation are incorrect. "There is a sense," Elder McConkie has written, "in which it might be said, without impropriety, that God is a Spirit. He is most assuredly not a spirit in the sense in which the [Christian] creeds speak. . . . But when it is remembered that a spirit is a personage, an entity, a living personality whose body is made of more pure and refined substance than the temporal bodies of men; and when it is remembered that such spirits live in preexistence, come to earth to gain temporary physical bodies, are separated from those bodies by the natural death, with the assurance that eventually body and spirit will be inseparably connected again in resurrected immortality; and when it is remembered, further, that God himself is an exalted, perfected, glorified, resurrected Man; then it might truly be said that God is a spirit. He is a Spirit Personage, a Personage with a body of flesh and bones. (D&C 130:22.) He is a Spirit in the same sense that all men are spirits [see D&C 93:33], and in the sense that all men eventually will have resurrected or spiritual bodies as contrasted with their present natural or mortal bodies. (1 Cor. 15:42-50; D&C 88:25-28.)" [^11]

Rather than "God is a spirit," a better reading from the Greek is "God is spirit" (New King James Version; New International Version; New Revised English Bible; New Revised Standard Version). Raymond Brown has written concerning this verse: "God gives the Spirit. (We find three great equations in the Fourth Gospel and First John: 'God is spirit'; 'God is light'; 'God is love.' These are not definitions of God's essence, but refer to God's relation to people. He gives them the Spirit; he loves them; he gives them his Son, their light). And the Spirit enables them to worship the Father." [^12]

The New Birth

John records that there came to Jesus by night a man named Nicodemus, a "ruler of the Jews," presumably a member of the Sanhedrin, a man who was "a master in Israel," meaning a master teacher or acknowledged scholar among the Jews. He and others had been impressed with the miracles of Jesus. He said: "Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him." It was as though Jesus then desired to do two things: (1) to point out to Nicodemus that more was required of him than a verbal recognition of Jesus as a miracle worker; and (2) to anticipate the question that must have lurked in the shadows of Nicodemus's mind but that went unasked: "What must I do to inherit eternal life?" Jesus answered: "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God" (John 3:1-3).

This was no new idea, no novel conception revealed for the first time, for the doctrine of rebirth was as old as the world. God spoke to Adam and Eve: "I give unto you a commandment, to teach these things freely unto your children, saying: That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory" (Moses 6:58-59; emphasis added).

Jeremiah had spoken of a time when the Lord would again propose a covenant to his covenant people, when He would "put [his] law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts," and that Jehovah would truly be their God and Israel would be his people (Jeremiah 31:31-34). Likewise, the Lord had spoken through Ezekiel: "Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh" (Ezekiel 36:25-26). Even in the Book of Jubilees, an apocryphal work, the concept of a new birth was to be found: "But after this they will return to me in all uprighteousness and with all of their heart and soul. And I shall cut off the foreskin of their heart and the foreskin of the heart of their descendants. And I shall create for them a holy spirit, and I shall purify them so that they will not turn away from following me from that day and forever. And their souls will cleave to me and to all my commandments. And they will do my commandments. And I shall be a father to them, and they will be sons to me" (Jubilees 1:23-25).

Nicodemus either did not understand what Jesus was teaching, or he sought to prolong an otherwise interesting discussion, for he asked: "How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born?" (John 3:4). According to President Marion G. Romney, Nicodemus "did not know who Jesus was. All he could see in the Son of God was a great teacher. This was all he could be expected to see, however, because he based his knowledge of who Jesus was upon what he had seen and heard of the Master's miracles. . . . Although Nicodemus was wise in the things of the world, he could not understand this simple statement of truth." [^13] Jesus continued: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John 3:5).

The Christian world is largely divided over this matter of the new birth. A large segment of Christianity today believes that being born again consists of having a personal spiritual experience with Jesus. A large segment of Christianity believes that being born again consists of receiving the sacraments (ordinances) of the church. And where are the Latter-day Saints? Where do we stand on this vital issue? Is it enough to receive the revelation that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ? Or is it sufficient to receive the proper ordinances? The Prophet Joseph Smith stated simply but powerfully that "being born again, comes by the Spirit of God through ordinances." [^14] Brother Joseph explained on another occasion that it is one thing to see the kingdom of God and another to enter into that kingdom. One must have "a change of heart" to see the kingdom; that is, he or she must be awakened spiritually to recognize the truth, recognize that the Church of Jesus Christ is the custodian of the truth and of the required ordinances, and recognize that the fulness of salvation is to be had through acceptance of those principles and ordinances. Further, the Prophet taught, a person must "subscribe the articles of adoption"—the first principles and ordinances of the gospel—in order to enter into the kingdom. [^15] True conversion includes acting upon the revealed witness and submitting to those divine statutes that make it possible for us to be born again and thereby adopted into the family of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Daniel Tyler heard the Prophet Joseph explain that the birth spoken of in John 3:3—the birth to see—"was not the gift of the Holy Ghost, which was promised after baptism, but was a portion of the spirit, which attended the preaching of the gospel by the elders of the Church. The people wondered why they had not previously understood the plain declarations of scripture, as explained by the elders, as they had read them hundreds of times. When they read the Bible [now] it was a new book to them. This was being born again, to see the Kingdom of God. They were not in it, but could see it from the outside, which they could not do until the Spirit of the Lord took the vail from before their eyes. It was a change of heart, but not of state; they were converted, but were yet in their sins. Although Cornelius [Acts 10] had seen an holy angel, and on the preaching of Peter the Holy Ghost was poured out upon him and his household, they were only born again to see the Kingdom of God. Had they not been baptized afterwards they would not have been saved." [^16]

Although the new birth is made possible through the atoning blood of our Lord and Savior, the Holy Ghost is vital in bringing about change. The Holy Ghost is a revelator, a comforter, a teacher, a sanctifier, a sealer. Elder Parley P. Pratt wrote that the Spirit "quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passions and affections, and adapts them, by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates, and matures all the fine-toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings, and affections of our nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness, and charity. It develops beauty of person, form, and features. It tends to health, vigor, animation, and social feeling. It invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual man. It strengthens and gives tone to the nerves. In short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being." [^17]

There are some things that cannot be taught by mortals, some lessons that can only be learned through close association with God and his Spirit. Of Christ's young manhood the holy word attests: "And he served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him" (JST, Matthew 3:25). It was certainly not the case that young Jesus was resistant to instruction or that he did not in fact learn a great deal from his parents and teachers; rather, there were eternal verities that could be learned only by entering the realm of divine experience. And so with us. The anointing or unction of the Holy Ghost that comes through the birth of the Spirit places us in a position to acquire new feelings, new insights, new perspectives that no mortal instructor could ever convey to us (see 1 John 2:20, 27). Those who are born of the Spirit begin to embody the "fruit of the Spirit," the patience, longsuffering, gentleness, kindness, meekness, joy, and pure love of Christ that characterize the true sons and daughters of the Lord Jesus Christ (see Galatians 5:22-25; Moroni 7:47-48). Truly, "we know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren" (1 John 3:14). "Beloved, let us love one another," John wrote, "for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God" (1 John 4:7).

"Whosoever is born of God," John the Beloved declared, "doth not commit sin; for his [Christ's] seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God" (1 John 3:9; see also v. 6; 1 John 5:18). This is a troublesome passage, perhaps because I have had the privilege of associating with wonderful people in my life, holy people, men and women of faith who have given their all to God and His work; but they are not perfect, at least they are not perfect in the sense that we generally think about the term—they are not free from sin. To some degree at least, I have been born of the Spirit, have tasted of the sweet fruits of rebirth, have had my mind and heart expanded by the powers of the Holy Ghost, have had my witness of this work deepened and solidified. But I painfully and honestly admit that I am not free from sin. There is nothing I desire more than to be free from sin, nothing I long for more than to be holy before God. But I am not there yet.

The Prophet Joseph altered this verse as follows: "Whosoever is born of God doth not continue in sin; for the Spirit of God remaineth in him; and he cannot continue in sin, because he is born of God, having received that holy Spirit of promise" (JST, 1 John 3:9; emphasis added). One who has walked in the light comes to treasure the light. Should he or she step into the darkness momentarily, they are repulsed by the darkness and yearn to return, as soon as possible, to the light. "The new birth results in new behavior. Sin and the child of God are incompatible. They may occasionally meet; they cannot live together in harmony." [^18] That is, those who have been born of the Spirit learn to repent quickly, to confess and forsake their misdeeds, to move on. Obviously serious sins require more time, but many of our transgressions may be faced head on and dispensed with in no time at all. Thus the Prophet Joseph Smith prayed in the Kirtland Temple: "And when thy people transgress, any of them, they may speedily repent and return unto thee, and find favor in thy sight, and be restored to the blessings which thou hast ordained to be poured out upon those who shall reverence thee in thy house" (D&C 109:21).

Our challenge is to learn to abide in Christ. Jesus taught in the fifteenth chapter of John that he is the vine and we are the branches. We tend to get ourselves in trouble sometimes when we see ourselves as the producers of fruit. We are at best the bearers of fruit. In that sense, may I suggest that we do all we can do by way of living a good life but remember that it is not difficult to live the Christian life. It is impossible! At least it is impossible by ourselves. It is only as the Lord assists us in that endeavor that we are able to bring to pass great things. An Evangelical minister noted: "If you do not learn to abide in Christ, you will never have a marriage characterized by love, joy, and peace. You will never have the self-control necessary to consistently overcome temptation. And you will always be an emotional hostage of your circumstances. Why? Because apart from abiding in Christ, you can do nothing. . . .

"Jesus makes a clear delineation between the vine and the branch. The two are not the same. He is the vine; we are the branches. The two are joined, but not one. The common denominator in nature is the sap. The sap is the life of the vine and its branches. Cut off the flow of the sap to the branch, and it slowly withers and dies. As the branch draws its life from the vine, so we draw life from Christ. To abide in Christ is to draw upon His life." [^19]

The Promise of Eternal Life

It was in the Last Supper that the Savior delivered some of the most profound teachings of his ministry concerning the work of the Holy Ghost in leading souls to salvation. Jesus had been with his disciples for three years, had taught them, empowered them, and prepared them for what was to come. He had been their Tutor, their Comforter. "If ye love me," he taught his chosen followers, "keep my commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you" (John 14:15-17; emphasis added). The word another literally implies "another of the same kind," that is "someone, like Jesus Himself who will take His place and do His work." [^20] The Greek word translated in the King James Version as Comforter is paraclete, literally "one called to stand along side of." Other meanings include "a friend, especially a legal friend." [^21] The word refers to "a counselor who supports a defendant at a trial. The Spirit, then, will be a great defender of the disciples." [^22] Thus other translations render the passage as "another Helper" (New King James Version), "another Counselor" (New International Version), and even "another Advocate" (New Revised Standard Version; see also the Revised English Bible). While ultimately Christ is our Advocate with the Father (see D&C 45:3-5), the Savior has sent his Spirit to convict us of sin, convince us of the truth, and direct us toward righteousness (see John 16:8-11). The paraclete was "any person who helped someone in trouble with the law. The Spirit will always stand by Christ's people." [^23] The Holy Ghost, "one called alongside to help" would be that member of the Godhead who "encourages and exhorts" the Saints. [^24]

This other Helper or Advocate, the Holy Ghost, is called the First Comforter. He is the First Comforter in the sense that his sacred influence is preparatory, fundamental, and foundational to all spiritual growth; by means of the powers of the Spirit, men and women gain the witness of the divinity of Jesus Christ and come to know the things of eternity (see 1 Corinthians 12:3). One cannot enjoy the blessings of the Second Comforter without having first received and cultivated the gifts of the First Comforter. The Savior later added: "These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you" (John 14:25-26). In the opening verses of the majestic revelation we know as the Olive Leaf (D&C 88), Jesus informed the early Saints that "the alms of your prayers have come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, and are recorded in the book of the names of the sanctified, even them of the celestial world. Wherefore, I now send upon you another Comforter, even upon you my friends, that it may abide in your hearts, even the Holy Spirit of promise; which other Comforter is the same that I promised unto my disciples, as is recorded in the testimony of John" (D&C 88:2-3).

The Holy Spirit of Promise is, of course, the Holy Ghost, the Holy Spirit promised the Saints. [^25] The Lord continued: "This Comforter is the promise which I give unto you of eternal life, even the glory of the celestial kingdom" (D&C 88:4). It is by that Holy Spirit of Promise that the Saints of the Most High receive what the Apostle Paul called the "earnest of our inheritance" (Ephesians 1:13-14; see also 2 Corinthians 1:21-22; 5:5), by which they come to know that their lives are in order, that they are on course and in covenant, that they are "in Christ" and thus in line for eternal life. It is through that Holy Spirit of Promise that the people of God receive their reward, "even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23). Elder Marion G. Romney observed that "the fulness of eternal life is not attainable in mortality, but the peace which is its harbinger and which comes as a result of making one's calling and election sure is attainable in this life." [^26] That peace, unlike anything the world has to offer (see John 14:27), a peace that "passeth all understanding" (Philippians 4:7), comes through the Spirit.

We quoted the Savior earlier concerning the Comforter: "He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you" (John 14:26). In a sermon delivered in 1839, the Prophet Joseph Smith paraphrased the Lord as follows: The Holy Ghost "shall bring all things to remembrance, whatsoever things I have said unto you. He shall teach you until ye come to me and my Father." [^27] This statement implies that the Holy Ghost is given to the Saints to mature them, motivate them, empower and prepare them to eventually come into the presence of God. Perhaps this is what is intended in the Prophet Joseph's words in the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple: "And do thou grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in this house may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books, and that they may seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as thou hast said; and that they may grow up in thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost" (D&C 109:14-15; emphasis added).

Thus the Lord said to his disciples at the Last Supper: "I will not leave you comfortless"—or, more properly, "I will not leave you orphans"—"I will come to you" (John 14:18). To be orphaned is to be left alone, comfortless, without the Spirit, without familial ties that foster warmth and security. Jesus continued: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. . . . If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him" (John 14:18, 21, 23). The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that after a person has been baptized and receives the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is the First Comforter; after they continue to hunger and thirst after righteousness and covenant to remain true and faithful no matter what is required of them; they will eventually make their calling and election sure. That is, they will receive the assurance of eternal life. The Prophet went on to say that if they then continue faithful—for continual striving and an additional measure of faith is required—they may qualify for the highest of revelations in this life: the privilege of seeing the face of the Lord. [^28] This unspeakable blessing, the scriptures attest, comes to us according to the Lord's timetable, for he knows best our capacity to bear sacred things. "Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will" (D&C 88:68).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "It is the privilege of all those who have made their calling and election sure to see God; to talk with him face to face; to commune with him on a personal basis from time to time. These are the ones upon whom the Lord sends the Second Comforter. Their inheritance of exaltation and eternal life is assured, and so it becomes with them here and now in this life as it will be with all exalted beings in the life to come. They become the friends of God and converse with him on a friendly basis as one man speaks to another. . . .

"There are, of course, those whose callings and election have been made sure who have never exercised the faith nor exhibited the righteousness which would enable them to commune with the Lord on the promised basis. There are even those who neither believe nor know that it is possible to see the Lord in this day, and they therefore are without the personal incentive that would urge them onward in the pursuit of this consummation so devoutly desired by those with spiritual insight." [^29]

Truly, those who are "in Christ" become "new creatures" of the Holy Ghost (2 Corinthians 5:17). It is by the power of the Spirit that we come to know the Lord. "And this is life eternal," the Master explained just prior to departing the Upper Room for Gethsemane, "that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (John 17:3). Note the following testimony of John: "We know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness. And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life" (1 John 5:19-20). As expanded in modern revelation: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory. For strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world neither do ye know me. But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation; that where I am ye shall be also. This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law" (D&C 132:21-24). Or, as the Prophet Joseph Smith explained: "Make your calling and election sure. Go on from grace to grace until you obtain a promise from God for yourselves that you shall have eternal life. This is eternal life—to know God and his Son Jesus Christ. It is to be sealed up unto eternal life and obtain a promise for our posterity." [^30]

Conclusion

Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the Restoration, explained that "everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator." [^31] Clearly we owe everything to our Heavenly Father who created us. In addition, our everlasting gratitude must always be offered to our Lord and Savior who was sent to earth on a search and rescue mission—to retrieve the wandering sheep and to redeem us from death and hell and endless torment. Had there been no atonement, no amount of labor on our part could ever, worlds without end, compensate for the loss. Truly, as Jesus proclaimed at the Last Supper, without him we can do nothing (see John 15:1-5). And finally, one of the priceless blessings extended to the Saints is the gift of the Holy Ghost, a sacred endowment of power, a supernal privilege of enjoying companionship with a member of the Eternal Godhead. Thanks be to God that that Spirit, about which the world knows precious little (see John 14:17), is sent to quicken, inspire, teach, testify, reprove, sanctify, comfort, and seal.

We cannot, simply cannot face the challenges of life and triumph over the flesh without divine assistance. And so we worship and we pray, we labor and we trust in the merits and mercy of the Holy Messiah. And we rejoice in the reality that the Holy Ghost is given to prepare us for association with God and holy beings hereafter. "Man's natural powers are unequal to this task," Elder B. H. Roberts pointed out; "so, I believe, all will testify who have made the experiment. Mankind stand in some need of a strength superior to any they possess of themselves, to accomplish this work of rendering pure our fallen nature. Such strength, such power, such a sanctifying grace is conferred on man in being born of the Spirit—in receiving the Holy Ghost. Such, in the main, is its office, its work." [^32]

Notes

From an address given at the 27th Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 19 September 1998.

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 185.
[^2] Orson Pratt, Orson Pratt's Works (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1945),48.
[^3] See Lectures on Faith, 1:13-17; 7:2; compare Hebrews 11:3.
[^4] See McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 167, 191-92, 206.
[^5] See Lectures on Faith, 1:15-17; 7:2.
[^6] McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 209.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 148.
[^8] Harold B. Lee, as quoted in Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), 184.
[^9] McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 169.
[^10] Lectures on Faith, 7:8.
[^11] Ibid., 7:17.
[^12] Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel and Epistles of John, A Concise Commentary (Collegeville, Minn.: The Liturgical Press, 1988), 37; see also Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel According to John, 2 vols., volumes 29 and 29A in the Anchor Bible Series (New York: Doubleday, 1966), 1:172; F. F. Bruce, The Gospel of John (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1983), 110-11.
[^13] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, October 1981, 18-19.
[^14] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 162.
[^15] Ibid., 328.
[^16] Daniel Tyler, "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27 (1 February 1892): 93-94.
[^17] Parley P. Pratt, Key to the Science of Theology, 61.
[^18] John Stott, Authentic Christianity from the Writings of John Stott, ed. Timothy Dudley-Smith (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1995), 207.
[^19] Charles Stanley, The Wonderful, Spirit-Filled Life (Nashville: Thomas Nelson Publishers, 1992), 64.
[^20] The MacArthur Study Bible, ed. John MacArthur (Nashville: Word, 1997), 1614.
[^21] Leon Morris, The Gospel According to John (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1971), 649.
[^22] Brown, Gospel and Epistles of John, 76.
[^23] The New International Version Study Bible, ed. Kenneth Barker (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1985), 1625.
[^24] MacArthur Study Bible, 1614.
[^25] See Doctrines of Salvation, 1:55.
[^26] Marion G. Romney, in Conference Report, October 1965, 20.
[^27] Words of Joseph Smith, 14-15; emphasis added; punctuation corrected.
[^28] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51.
[^29] Promised Messiah, 584, 586.
[^30] Words of Joseph Smith, 334; spelling and punctuation corrected.
[^31] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 190.
[^32] B. H. Roberts, The Gospel: An Exposition of Its First Principles and Man's Relationship to Deity (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1966), 170.
