Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 17

The Doctrine of Faith

The Book of Mormon is a singular scriptural record. It is a gift of God, given to the people of our dispensation, to bear witness of the divine Sonship of Christ and to restore plain and precious truths that have been taken away or kept back from the Bible (see 1 Nephi 13:20-42).

Faith is the complete trust, confidence in, and reliance upon the merits, mercy, and grace of Jesus Christ for salvation. It is a gift of the Spirit (see Moroni 10:11), a divine endowment that affirms to the human heart the identity and redemptive mission of the Savior. Though one might speak of faith in a broad sense as the underlying reason why people live and move and go about their daily activities, the faith of which the scriptures speak, especially the Book of Mormon, is faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Need for Faith

The fall of Adam and Eve, though an essential part of the eternal plan of the Father (see 2 Nephi 2:25; Moses 6:48), brought dramatic changes to man and to all forms of life on earth. Because of the Fall, man is alienated from the Father and from things of righteousness; he is subject to spiritual death (see Alma 12:16, 32; 42:9). As Aaron taught the father of King Lamoni, "since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself" (Alma 22:14). No matter how noble his own efforts to overcome spiritual death, to love and serve others, or to keep the commandments of God, man will forevermore fall short of the divine standard. His works, though acceptable to God, will always be insufficient to save him (see 2 Nephi 25:23).

In short, had there been no means of bridging the chasm between sinful man and a sinless God, nothing that man could do would make up for the loss. Thus there is a need for an atonement, a means of reconciling finite man with an infinite Deity, of repairing the breech between earth and the heavens. Man cannot save himself or rely upon his own merits. Truly, by the works of the law no flesh is justified (see 2 Nephi 2:5). Because "all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" (Romans 3:23), man cannot be justified—pronounced innocent or free from sin—by law or by works. Man's only option is to be justified by faith, to lean upon one who did in fact keep the law of God perfectly. It is only through the name of Jesus Christ—meaning his power or authority, his atoning mission and work—that salvation comes to the children of men (see 2 Nephi 9:24; Mosiah 3:17; 26:22; Alma 22:13; Helaman 14:13; Acts 4:12). In the words of Amulek, the atonement of Christ "bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:15).

Elements of Faith

God the Father is the ultimate object of our worship (see 2 Nephi 25:16; Jacob 4:5; D&C 18:40; 20:19; JST, John 4:25-26). Jesus worshiped the Father, and so must we. Our faith is therefore in the Father, just as it is in the Son. To have faith in the Son of God is to have faith in God, and so it is that many references in the Book of Mormon to faith or belief or trust or reliance mention God as often as they do Christ. Thus "as Christ is the way to the Father, faith centers in him and in his redeeming sacrifice and goes thereby to the Father, who is the Creator." [^1]

The Apostle Paul wrote that "faith is the substance ["assurance," according to the JST] of things hoped for, the evidence [or proof] of things not seen" (Hebrews 11:1). Our faith must be in something substantial, something of worth. "All belief is founded on evidence," Elder Orson Pratt explained. "A true faith is founded on true evidence; a false faith on false evidence. And in no case can a man have faith, either true or false, unless it is the result of true or false evidence. The greater the evidence, the greater will be the faith resulting from that evidence." [^2] Korihor had every reason to have faith in God; as Alma pointed out, he had evidence from the prophets and the scriptures, as well as the order of the cosmos (Alma 30:44; see also D&C 88:45-47). But he chose not to receive and incorporate those evidences into the construction of his house of faith, and he thereby laid the foundation for his own demise. Near the end of the Nephite saga, Mormon prayed with all his heart for the deliverance of his people, but his prayers were "without faith, because of the hardness of their hearts" (Mormon 3:12). That is, Mormon was unable to exercise faith in their behalf because his people offered no evidence of repentance whatsoever.

Alma declared to the Zoramites that to have faith is "not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true" (Alma 32:21; see also Ether 12:6; Hebrews 11:1). Sincerity and devotion to a cause are not sufficient; saving faith can only be exercised in that which is true. Thus no matter how committed the Zoramites were to their unusual liturgy atop the Rameumptom (see Alma 31), their false beliefs concerning God could not result in faith unto life and salvation. Their refusal to believe in the coming condescension of God the Son precluded salvation, no matter how consistently they cried out to their deity in their weekly ritual.

We see also from this passage that faith is intimately connected with hope: to have true faith in Christ is to have hope in Christ. When we come to know who Jesus is, how great and marvelous are his powers and his knowledge, and the nature of his sacrificial offering—when we gain faith in Christ—then we gain a hope in Christ. No one can attain unto faith except he shall then have hope. We need not speak of faith as something one either has in its fulness or does not have. Gaining faith is a process. And so it is with hope. Individuals like the Zoramites begin with the simple hope that there is a Savior (see Alma 32:27). On the other end of the continuum are those who know their Lord, have treasured up his word, and have been valiant in their witness. Their hope is for eternal life, for exaltation in the celestial kingdom.

"And what is it that ye shall hope for?" Mormon asked. "Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the promise. Wherefore, if a man have faith he must needs have hope; for without faith there cannot be any hope" (Moroni 7:41-42). The disciple of Christ has hope, not in the worldly sense (wishing or yearning), but rather in the sense of anticipation, expectation, and assurance that through the Divine Redeemer he will be saved in the highest heaven. He is motivated and directed, not by self-confidence, but by his confidence or hope in Christ.

Belief, Trust, and Reliance

In the scriptures, there is no distinction made between true faith and true belief; belief is a synonym for faith. To have faith in Christ is to believe in Christ, to "believe that he is, and that he created all things, both in heaven and in earth; [to] believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth" (Mosiah 4:9). The Nephite prophets labored diligently to invite their people "to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God" (2 Nephi 25:23), "for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in his Son, who is the Holy One of Israel" (2 Nephi 30:2). The Nephites were called upon to "believe in Christ, and view his death, and suffer his cross and bear the shame of the world" (Jacob 1:8). Truly, "whosoever shall believe on the Son of God, the same shall have everlasting life" (Helaman 14:8). In summarizing the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, Mormon wrote: "And if it so be that ye believe in Christ, and are baptized, first with water, then with fire and with the Holy Ghost, following the example of our Savior, . . . it shall be well with you in the day of judgment" (Mormon 7:10).

Trust and reliance are likewise synonyms for faith. To have faith in Christ is to trust in him, to rely completely upon him. The Lord Jesus extends his arm of mercy towards those who trust in him (see Mosiah 29:20). Those who come unto Christ trust in his arm, meaning his power, rather than the arm of flesh (see 2 Nephi 4:34), for "whosoever putteth his trust in him the same shall be lifted up at the last day" (Mosiah 23:22). Of the two thousand stripling warriors, Helaman noted: "Now this was the faith of these of whom I have spoken; they are young, and their minds are firm, and they do put their trust in God continually" (Alma 57:27). Nephi explained that the Saints of God were able to come unto Christ through "relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save" (2 Nephi 31:19). Moroni likewise wrote that people are nourished by the good word of God, "to keep them in the right way, . . . relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith" (Moroni 6:4). Jacob added the sobering conclusion to the matter: only those who have "perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel"—meaning, presumably, a wholehearted belief in, a complete trust in, and a total reliance upon his redeeming blood—can be saved in the kingdom of God (see 2 Nephi 9:23). Again, because we cannot save ourselves, our absolute dependence cannot be in ourselves, no matter how impressive our accomplishments, but in Him who bought us with his blood. Like Jacob, we are redeemed "because of the righteousness of [our] Redeemer" (2 Nephi 2:3).

A Principle of Power

Faith is more than a tenet, more than a doctrine. It was the Prophet Joseph Smith who taught that faith is a principle of power, the power by which gods and men bring to pass divine purposes. [^3] When the former-day Saints, especially those in the Book of Mormon, operated by faith, they operated according to the mind and will of God. [^4] Faith is not merely the power of suggestion, the power of positive thinking. The faithful, though filled with hope in Christ, are not just more optimistic than the world. People do not exercise faith by wishing and willing something to be. Men and women operate by faith when they first seek to know the mind of God on a matter and then proceed confidently; they first obtain their "errand from the Lord" (Jacob 1:17) and then move forward with a quiet but dynamic assurance that God will work his wonders through them.

For example, Nephi was "led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which [he] should do" (1 Nephi 4:6). He could move into otherwise frightening circumstances, including life-threatening situations, without knowing the details of his assignment. Why? Because he knew what was most important; though he did not know the how, he knew why he was to proceed. Nephi knew what God wanted him to do, and so his confidence was centered in God. Nephi demonstrated faith in going and doing the things that God had commanded, knowing in his heart that he would not be asked to do so unless the Almighty would open the way (see 1 Nephi 3:7).

Abinadi evidenced his faith in the Savior when he sealed his messianic witness with his life's blood (Mosiah 11:20-17:20), just as Zenos (Helaman 8:19) and Zenock (Alma 33:15-17) had done many years before. Ammon, Aaron, Omner, and Himni exercised their faith in the redemption of Christ, volunteered for missionary service, and were able to be instruments in the hands of God in leading many thousands of Lamanites to the covenant gospel (Mosiah 28:1-9; Alma 17-23). Alma and Amulek were delivered from captivity through their faith (Alma 14:28; Ether 12:13), while Nephi and Lehi, sons of Helaman, both men of profound faith and spiritual maturity (Helaman 3:21; 11:19), participated in the spiritual rebirth of a large number of Lamanites (Helaman 5; Ether 12:14). Because of the faith of the Brother of Jared, he was able to remove a mountain. In addition, the Brother of Jared "could not be kept from beholding within the veil" (Ether 3:19); indeed, "the Lord could not withhold anything from him, for he knew that the Lord could show him all things" (Ether 3:26; see also Ether 12:20, 30).

Fruits of Faith

There are numerous fruits of faith, attitudes and actions that derive from believing, trusting, and relying upon Christ. We have already mentioned hope. First of all, it is through faith that forgiveness comes, by which the soul is cleansed and sanctified (1 Nephi 12:10-11), and by which people are made alive in Christ (2 Nephi 25:25). Faith leads to joy and peace of conscience (Mosiah 4:3; Helaman 5:47). It is by faith that men and women undergo a mighty change of heart through the gospel covenant (Mosiah 5:7; Alma 5:12). People are made whole through their faith in Christ, through their reliance upon One they have never before seen or heard (Enos 1:8).

Faith and patience result in deliverance (1 Nephi 1:20; 7:17; Mosiah 24:16; Alma 14:26-28). Jacob encouraged his people to "look unto God with firmness of mind, and pray unto him with exceeding faith, and he will console you in your afflictions, and he will plead your cause, and send down justice upon those who seek your destruction" (Jacob 3:1). Helaman wrote how "the Lord our God did visit us with assurances that he would deliver us; yea, insomuch that he did speak peace to our souls, and did grant unto us great faith, and did cause us that we should hope for our deliverance in him" (Alma 58:11). So often the One in whom we trust does not remove the burden from our backs; rather, he lifts and lightens the burdens, so that we do not feel them (see Mosiah 24:11-14). Through faith, deliverance comes not only from physical bondage but also from temptation and from Satan's grasp. Alma instructed his son Helaman to teach the people "to humble themselves and to be meek and lowly in heart; teach them to withstand every temptation of the devil, with their faith on the Lord Jesus Christ" (Alma 37:33).

Further, true faith always manifests itself in faithfulness, in sustained obedience and endurance to the end (see 1 Nephi 7:12; Alma 44:4; 48:15). The Risen Lord declared that "no unclean thing can enter into [God's] kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end" (3 Nephi 27:19). Ammon pointed out that "he that repenteth and exerciseth faith, and bringeth forth good works, and prayeth continually without ceasing—unto such it is given to know the mysteries of God" (Alma 26:22).

Spiritual gifts, signs, and wonders are also fruits of faith in Christ (2 Nephi 26:13; 27:23). Jesus announced to the Nephites that signs "follow them that believe" (Mormon 9:22-24). Mormon explained that "it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men" (Moroni 7:37; see also Mosiah 8:18; 3 Nephi 19:35). Before listing the various gifts of the Spirit, Moroni exhorted his readers to "deny not the power of God; for he worketh by power, according to the faith of the children of men, the same today and tomorrow, and forever" (Moroni 10:7).

Faith and Knowledge

Some have supposed that faith and knowledge are on opposite ends of a continuum, that once a person has knowledge he no longer has or needs faith. Actually, faith and knowledge build upon one another. A certain degree of knowledge is necessary in order to exercise faith, even "a particle of faith" (Alma 32:27). Then, after one has begun to develop faith, new and added knowledge comes—new feelings and desires, new insights, new perspectives. There is a sense in which one might speak, as Alma did to the Zoramites, of one's faith being replaced by knowledge whenever a testimony of a particular principle has been obtained (see Alma 32:34; Ether 3:19). In reality, however, faith has not disappeared but instead been added upon.

Faith is a principle of power and thus a divine attribute possessed by God in perfection; God is the embodiment of faith, just as he is the embodiment of love and justice and judgment and mercy. [^5] And so mortals are not working toward that day when they will no longer live and act by faith, but rather toward that day, beyond the resurrection, when they operate by perfect faith. "In the eternal sense," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written, "because faith is the power of God himself, it embraces within its fold a knowledge of all things. This measure of faith, the faith by which the worlds are and were created and which sustains and upholds all things, is found only among resurrected persons. It is the faith of saved beings." [^6]

Growing in Faith

Thus the people of God work and labor and sacrifice and serve in order to build their faith and thus expand the power of God in their lives. The Book of Mormon teaches clearly how faith comes and thus how it develops and is perfected. First of all, faith comes as one encounters the word of God, whether the spoken or written word. "Faith comes by hearing the word of God," Joseph Smith taught, "through the testimony of the servants of God; that testimony is always attended by the spirit of prophecy and revelation." [^7] Nephi read the words of Isaiah to his people in order that he "might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer" (1 Nephi 19:23).

Alma called upon the Zoramites to plant the word in their hearts—to ponder upon and pray over the idea that Christ should come to earth and offer salvation to all men (see Alma 32:26-31; 33:14-23; 34:4-5). In this famous sermon on faith (see Alma 32-33), Alma described the process by which the faithless develop in time the saving faith in Christ that leads to life eternal. That process entailed belief, action, and spiritual confirmation or witness. One begins through demonstrating a willingness to experiment upon the idea of a Savior, to plant that idea in his heart. He then performs the actions appropriate to spiritual investigation, such as prayer, scripture study, association with the people of God, and meaningful service to fellowman. He then gains a confirmation, the peaceful but powerful assurance that the word is good, that in fact Jesus is the Christ and Redeemer of the world and that salvation comes through him. There also follows the corollary change of nature that flows from faith in the Lord. The believer begins over time to embody and exemplify Christlike attributes, for "every seed bringeth forth unto its own likeness" (Alma 32:31). This process of assurance and validation continues throughout one's life.

Mormon spoke of a time when the Nephites "did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God" (Helaman 3:35). Aminadab taught that faith comes as people repent and cry unto God, so that "the cloud of darkness [is] removed from overshadowing you" (Helaman 5:41). Further, Moroni set forth the mighty truth found also in the New Testament, the doctrine that we gain faith and come to knowas we do (see John 7:16-17). He confirmed that "faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6). President Harold B. Lee taught that we must be willing to "walk to the edge of the light, and perhaps a few steps into the darkness, and you will find that the light will appear and move ahead of you."8

The final great fruit of faith is eternal life. In the first estate man walked by sight and by faith. Those who were valiant in the premortal existence demonstrated "exceeding faith and good works" there and were foreordained and foreappointed to significant assignments here (Alma 13:1-6). In this life man walks by faith (see 2 Corinthians 5:7). That is, he proceeds through life with the Spirit-given assurance that his actions are approved of God and will result in the salvation of his soul. To see with an "eye of faith" (Alma 5:15; 32:40) is thus to act according to the witness of the Spirit, to act as though one had seen and thus had perfect knowledge. The Saints of God view things with an eye of faith in this life, until one day, because of their faithful endurance, they see "with their eyes the things which they had beheld with an eye of faith" (Ether 12:19).

"The very nature of the kind of life [God] lives is eternal life, and thus eternal life consists in living and being as he is. In other words, eternal life is to gain the power of God, which power is faith, and thus to be able to do what he does and to live as he lives. And the great and eternal plan of salvation that he has ordained and established consists of those laws, ordinances, and powers whereby faith is acquired and perfected until it is possessed in the same degree and to the same extent that it exists in Deity. Faith will thus dwell independently in every person who gains eternal life." [^8]

Conclusion

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "when men begin to live by faith they begin to draw near to God; and when faith is perfected they are like him; and because he is saved they are saved also; for they will be in the same situation he is in, because they have come to him; and when he appears they shall be like him, for they will see him as he is." [^9] In this sense, the plan of salvation is "a system of faith—it begins with faith, and continues by faith; and every blessing which is obtained in relation to it is the effect of faith, whether it pertains to this life or that which is to come. To this all the revelations of God bear witness." [^10]

I feel a great surge of gratitude for the revelations of the Restoration, particularly the Book of Mormon. The Bible chronicles acts of faith and deeds of wonder in both the Old and New Testaments, and there are a few places wherein the principle of faith is discussed. But it is to the Book of Mormon that we turn if we are serious about gaining faith like the ancients. In the Book of Mormon we have restored to us, first of all, the knowledge of the God of miracles, the God of revelation, the God of the ancients. Having established these fundamental truths, all other doctrinal matters are then revealed in their pristine purity and fitted into place in the grand scheme of restoration. We learn from the Book of Mormon what faith is, the object upon which it rests, and the fruits that flow from it. The Book of Mormon is not just a book about faith. It is a book that describes the process of faith, illustrates that process, and invites us, by the power of the Holy Ghost, to be active participants, first, in the acquisition of faith unto life and salvation, and, second, in the dissemination and perpetuation of faith throughout the earth.

Alma taught that if we will nourish the word—especially the proposition concerning the redemptive reality of Jesus the Christ—that the fruits of faith will be forthcoming in our lives, that the seed of faith in Christ "shall take root; and behold it shall be a tree springing up unto everlasting life. And because of your diligence and your faith and your patience with the word in nourishing it, that it may take root in you, behold, by and by ye shall pluck the fruit thereof, which is most precious, which is sweet above all that is sweet, and which is white above all that is white, yea, and pure above all that is pure; and ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye are filled, that ye hunger not, neither shall ye thirst" (Alma 32:41-42).

Notes

From an address delivered at the Twenty-eighth Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, November 1999.

---
Notas:
[^1] Orson Pratt, Orson Pratt's Works (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1945), 48.
[^2] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 7:178; emphasis added.
[^3] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 1:90.
[^4] See Lectures on Faith, 3:2-5.
[^5] Ibid., 2:44.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 148; see also Romans 10:17.
[^7] Lectures on Faith, 4:11, 12.
[^8] David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), 390.
[^9] Lectures on Faith, 6:7; emphasis added.
[^10] Hugh B. Brown, as quoted in Truman G. Madsen, The Highest in Us (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1978), 49.
