Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 20

The Revelation of the Doctrine of Zion

It must have been a mighty vision that filled the mind and heart of Joseph Smith the Seer when he announced: "I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom of [God envisioned by] Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world." And how was this to be realized? "It will not be by sword or gun that this kingdom will roll on," the Prophet said. "The power of truth is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the gospel." [^1]

Joseph Smith's vision of the kingdom of God was cosmic. It consisted of more than preaching and study and Sabbath services; it entailed the entire renovation of the order of things on earth, the transformation of man and the elevation of society. And at the heart of that sublime scene was the doctrine of Zion, a doctrine and a worldview that would shape the early Church and point the Saints of the last days toward the eschatological ideal. This chapter will focus on the idea of Zion as a people or community of believers, Zion as a specific place, and Zion as a state of being—the pure in heart.

The Discovery of Zion

Joseph Smith seems to have first encountered the concept of Zion (in a sense other than the holy mount or holy city in Jerusalem) in his translation of the Book of Mormon. The Book of Mormon prophets spoke of Zion as a holy commonwealth, a society of the Saints, a way of life that was to be established or brought forth under God's direction; those who fought against it were to incur God's displeasure. The municipals "labor for the welfare of Zion" rather than for money. In addition, in the words of the resurrected Savior, Zion was identified as a specific place in the land of America, a land of promise and inheritance for the descendants of Joseph of old (see 1 Nephi 13:37; 2 Nephi 10:11-13; 26:29-31; 28:20-24; 3 Nephi 16:16-18).

Evidence suggests that a key moment in Church history in regard to the discovery of the concept of Zion came during the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired translation of the King James Bible. By the time Sidney Rigdon joined the Prophet in December 1830 and became the principal scribe in the Bible translation, particulars concerning the patriarch Enoch and his ancient city of Zion were first made known. A King James text of three verses on Enoch and his people was expanded by revelation to more than one hundred verses, restoring knowledge concerning such things as the manner in which an entire society of antedeluvians was spiritually awakened and stimulated to transcendent righteousness; the means by which this ancient people, formerly bent upon selfishness and pride, had their souls changed, saw to the needs of the poor, and became "of one heart and one mind"; and how, through the application of such a divine philosophy, they were translated, taken from the earth into the bosom of God (see Moses 7). Enoch's Zion became the pattern, the scriptural prototype for the Latter-day Saints. In the months that followed, several revelations that we now have in the Doctrine and Covenants spoke of the ancient Zion of Enoch and also provided the broad framework whereby the Latter-day Saints, through the principles of consecration and stewardship, could lay the foundation for a modern society of Zion.

Among the earliest revelations given in this dispensation, now found in the Doctrine and Covenants, was the repeated command, "Now, as you have asked, behold, I say unto you, keep my commandments, and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion" (D&C 6:6; see also 11:6; 12:6; 14:6). Zion thus came to be associated with the restored Church and the grander work of the Restoration, and the faithful could take heart in the midst of their troubles, for Zion was the city of God (see D&C 97:19). Indeed, in speaking of the sacred spot where the people of God congregated, the Lord said: "Behold, the land of Zion—I, the Lord, hold it in mine own hands" (D&C 63:25). Surely the King of Zion (see Moses 7:53) would deal mercifully with his subjects.

Zion As a Place

The idea that there was a specific location for the city of Zion within North and South America was made known very early. The Lord explained to Oliver Cowdery in his September 1830 call to preach among the Lamanites that "it is not revealed, and no man knoweth where the city Zion shall be built, but it shall be given hereafter." The Lord then added that the location "shall be on the borders by the Lamanites" (D&C 28:9). It was on 20 July 1831, just as the leaders of the Saints had begun to arrive in Missouri, that the word of the Lord came concerning the specific location of Zion. The Savior declared that the land of Missouri was "the land which I have appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints. Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. . . . The place which is now called Independence is the center place" (D&C 57:1-3).

Zion As an Ensign

Zion is spoken of in scripture as a banner or ensign around which a weary or beleaguered people may rally. It is also a standard against which the substance and quality of all things are to be evaluated. The Saints are expected to judge all things by a set of guidelines obtained from a source beyond that of unenlightened man. Note the language of the revelation: "Behold, I, the Lord, have made my church in these last days like unto a judge sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations. For it shall come to pass that the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things pertaining to Zion" (D&C 64:37-38). As an illustration of this principle, Elder Joseph Young explained that Joseph Smith the Prophet "recommended the Saints to cultivate as high a state of perfection in their musical harmonies as the standard of the faith which he had brought was superior to sectarian religion. To obtain this, he gave them to understand that the refinement of singing would depend upon the attainment of the Holy Spirit. . . . When these graces and refinements and all the kindred attractions are obtained that characterized the ancient Zion of Enoch, then the Zion of the last days will become beautiful, she will be hailed by the Saints from the four winds, who will gather to Zion with songs of everlasting joy."2

In addition, Zion was and is to be the focus, the convergence, and the concentration of all that is good, all that is ennobling, all that is instructive and inspirational. In Zion all things are to be gathered together in one in Christ (see Ephesians 1:10). In short, according to President Brigham Young, "every accomplishment, every polished grace, every useful attainment in mathematics, music, in all science and art belong to the Saints."3 The Saints "rapidly collect the intelligence that is bestowed upon the nations," President Young said on another occasion, "for all this intelligence belongs to Zion."4

Zion As the Pure in Heart

Zion is people, the people of God, those people who have come out of the world of Babylon into the marvelous light of Christ. In this vein the Lord encouraged his little flock: "Verily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion—the pure in heart; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked shall mourn" (D&C 97:21). Thus Zion is a state of being, a state of purity of heart that entitles one to be known as a member of the household of faith. President Brigham Young therefore spoke of the Saints having Zion in their hearts: "Unless the people live before the Lord in the obedience of His commandments," he said, "they cannot have Zion within them." Further, "As to the spirit of Zion, it is in the hearts of the Saints, of those who love and serve the Lord with all their might, mind, and strength."5 On another occasion President Young affirmed: "Zion will be redeemed and built up, and the saints will rejoice. This is the land of Zion; and who are Zion? The pure in heart are Zion; they have Zion within them. Purify yourselves, sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and have the Zion of God within you."6 Finally, President Young asked: "Where is Zion? Where the organization of the Church of God is. And may it dwell spiritually in every heart; and may we so live as to always enjoy the Spirit of Zion."7

Zion As the Place of Gathering

Isaiah the prophet had spoken some seven hundred years before Christ of the "mountain of the Lord's house" being established in the tops of the mountains (Isaiah 2:2). In July 1840 Joseph Smith declared (in harmony with the Savior's teachings in the Book of Mormon—see 3 Nephi 16:16-18) that "the land of Zion consists of all North and South America, but that any place where the Saints gather is Zion."8 The latter part of this statement—that Zion represented more than a place or a single location but rather any locus of gathering—is significant. It broadens the notion of Zion to include areas around the world where the people of the covenant congregate. The Lord surely foresaw this larger vision of Zion when he said in the midst of the Missouri persecutions, "Zion shall not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are scattered. They that remain, and are pure in heart, shall return, and come to their inheritances, they and their children, with songs of everlasting joy, to build up the waste places of Zion—and all these things that the prophets might be fulfilled. And, behold, there is none other place appointed than that which I have appointed; neither shall there be any other place appointed than that which I have appointed, for the work of the gathering of my saints—until the day cometh that there is found no more room for them; and then I have other places which I will appoint unto them, and they shall be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion"(D&C 101:17-21; emphasis added). In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet pleaded in behalf of the Saints, "that they may come forth to Zion, or to her stakes, the places of thine appointment, with songs of everlasting joy" (D&C 109:39; emphasis added). The revelations are explicit in their pronouncement that safety and refuge are to be found in the stakes of Zion. "Arise and shine forth," the Lord implored, "that thy light may be a standard for the nations; and that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:5-6; emphasis added).

As to the future of Zion, the New Jerusalem, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "The center place! Let Israel gather to the stakes of Zion in all nations. Let every land be a Zion to those appointed to dwell there. Let the fulness of the gospel be for all the saints in all nations. Let no blessing be denied them. Let temples arise wherein the fulness of the ordinances of the Lord's house may be administered. But still there is a center place, a place where the chief temple shall stand, a place to which the Lord shall come, a place whence the law shall go forth to govern all the earth in that day when the Second David reigns personally upon the earth. And that center place is what men now call Independence in Jackson County, Missouri, but which in a day to come will be the Zion of our God and the City of Holiness of his people. The site is selected; the place is known; the decree has gone forth; and the promised destiny is assured."9

At the same time that the Church will establish a significant presence in Independence, Missouri, and although Jackson County will become a gathering place, indeed the Center Place, yet there will always be, as suggested above, a need for the stakes of Zion throughout the earth far and wide, a need for the Saints to gather to their own lands and congregate with their own people. President Spencer W. Kimball explained: "Now, the gathering of Israel consists of joining the true Church and . . . coming to a knowledge of the true God. . . . Any person, therefore, who has accepted the restored gospel, and who now seeks to worship the Lord in his own tongue and with the Saints in the nations where he lives, has complied with the law of the gathering of Israel and is heir to all of the blessings promised the saints in these last days."10 In addition, President Kimball taught: "The First Presidency and the Twelve see great wisdom in the multiple Zions, many gathering places where the Saints within their own culture and nation can act as a leaven in the building of the kingdom—a kingdom which seeks no earthly rewards or treasures. Sometimes, inadvertently, we have given artificial encouragement to individuals to leave their native land and culture and, too often, this has meant the loss of the leaven that is so badly needed, and the individuals involved have sometimes regretted their migrations."11

In this spirit—the spirit of an expansive concept of Zion—it is wrong to suppose and misleading to suggest that all of the Saints from all over the world will in a future day gather physically to Missouri. Elder McConkie observed, "As we are aware, the building of the New Jerusalem lies in the future, at a time yet to be designated by revelation. There is no present call for the saints to purchase land or to live in Jackson County or in any place connected therewith. The revealed word relative to the gathering to Independence and its environs will come through the prophet of God on earth. When it does come—with the consequent return of the saints to that Zion which shall not be moved out of its place—that call will not be for the saints in general to assemble there. The return to Jackson County will be by delegates, as it were. Those whose services are needed there will assemble as appointed. The rest of Israel will remain in their appointed places. The Lord's house is a house of order, and faithful saints do as they are told and go at the bidding of their prophet, for his voice is the voice of the Lord."12

Conclusion

Like the true and living church of which we are a part, the concept of Zion has grown and expanded as we have been humble and teachable enough as a people to perceive the plans and purposes of the Almighty. Elder Erastus Snow pointed out in 1884 that when the early Saints "first heard the fullness of the Gospel preached by the first Elders, and read the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, our ideas of Zion were very limited. But as our minds began to grow and expand, why we began to look upon Zion as a great people, and the Stakes of Zion as numerous. . . . We ceased to set bounds to Zion and her Stakes."13 Likewise, Elder Joseph Young explained that many Saints of the nineteenth century—moved upon by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, such that future events appeared close at hand—misconstrued and miscalculated on a number of matters, including the time when the Saints should return to Missouri and redeem Zion. "The Holy Spirit brought many things close to their minds—they appeared right by, and hence many were deceived. . . . I knew that faith and the Holy Ghost brought the designs of Providence close by, and by that means we were enabled to scan them, . . . but we had not knowledge enough to digest and fully comprehend those things."14 Indeed, as Joseph Smith himself explained: "The things of God are of deep import; and time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out."15 And so it is in regard to the doctrine of Zion. Careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts—informed and inspired by the revelations of the Restoration, the words of living oracles, and the personal guidance of the Holy Spirit—can lead us to grasp and share the Prophet Joseph's vision of this holy enterprise.

Zion is a place. Zion is a people. Zion is a holy state of being. In the words of President Spencer W. Kimball, Zion is "the highest order of priesthood society."16 It is the heritage of the Saints. "The building up of Zion," Joseph Smith taught, "is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory."17 This is the destiny of those who endure faithfully to the end. In that sense, as Joseph Smith stated, "We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object."18

Notes

From "The Revelation of the Doctrine of Zion," in Regional Studies in Latter-day Saint Church History: Missouri (Provo, Utah: Department of Church History and Doctrine, Brigham Young University, 1994), 233-40.

---
Notas:
[^1] Boyd K. Packer, "Teach the Scriptures," in Charge to Religious Educators, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1982), 21.
