Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 24

Standing in Holy Places—As Individuals and Families

I like to think of the home as a sanctuary. A sanctuary is a holy place, a place where sacred things are felt and experienced, a place where men and women, boys and girls are linked to the divine and thus reacquainted with those tender and sweet associations we once knew. A sanctuary is also a defense, a refuge, a covert from the storms that descend upon all of us, whether in the form of temptation or false and degrading beliefs and practices. The disciples of Christ are commanded to stand in holy places and be not moved, "until the day of the Lord come; for behold, it cometh quickly, saith the Lord" (D&C 87:8; see also 45:32).

Foundational Truths

I want to state unequivocally that I believe in God. I know that he lives, that he listens, that he longs for us to live in such a manner as to gain peace and happiness, both individually and as families. I know that he has a plan for his sons and daughters, that life is meant to be lived in harmony with that divine system of salvation, and that misery and unhappiness are the inevitable results of seeking to do things in our own way. I know that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God, the Savior and Redeemer of humankind, the One sent of the Father to bind up the brokenhearted and liberate the captives (see Isaiah 61:1). I have the perfect assurance that that upon which Christ places his hand, whether distraught individuals or dysfunctional families, will be healed and re-created.

I am also bold to testify of the enemy of righteousness, even Satan or Lucifer, the father of all lies. He is real. I know this from personal experience. He is an actual being from the unseen world who wields great power in this generation. He is, in reality, the god of this world (see 2 Corinthians 4:4). From the beginning, he and his minions have sought to deceive and blind men and women, to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto the voice of God (see Moses 4:4). In the words of Elder Dallin H. Oaks, "although Satan and his followers have lost their opportunity to have a physical body, they are permitted to use their spirit powers to try to frustrate God's plan. . . . Satan's most strenuous opposition is directed at whatever is most important to the Father's plan. Satan seeks to discredit the Savior and divine authority, to nullify the effects of the Atonement, to counterfeit revelation, to lead people away from the truth, to contradict individual accountability, to confuse gender, to undermine marriage, and to discourage childbearing (especially by parents who will raise children in righteousness)." [^1]

These are fundamental truths. They are essential to an understanding of individuals and of families. They are basic to any efforts to rectify the wrongs of society and minister to the wounded and scarred souls all about us. We ignore them at our peril. Most of our efforts to deal with social-emotional problems, to provide therapeutic remediation—independent of those absolute truths concerning God, Christ, Satan, and the eternal nature of men and women—will be at best deficient and at worse perverse. I assure you that such an attitude is neither naive nor ill-informed. I agree with C. S. Lewis, who observed that once we begin to mature spiritually, we realize that everything that really needs to be done in our souls can be done only by God. [^2]

Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has said: "We need to turn to God. We need to reaffirm our faith, and we need to reassert our hope. Where necessary we need to repent, and certainly we need to pray. It is the absence of spiritual fidelity that has led us to moral disarray in the twilight of the twentieth century. We have sown the wind of religious skepticism, and we are reaping the whirlwind of existential despair.

"Without religious faith," Elder Holland continued, "without recognizing the reality andnecessity of spiritual life, the world makes no sense, and a nonsense world is a place of horror. Only if the world has meaning at a spiritual level is it possible for human beings to keep going, to keep trying." [^3]

If in fact the religious dimension to human personality or the spiritual indices underlying the success of the family are not something with which we feel we can deal, then I suggest that the Latter-day Saints have nothing to offer the world in this field. To teach and practice solely according to the canons of the behavioral sciences, without the clarifying and illuminating lenses of the Restoration, is to live beneath our privileges and to wander at dusk when we could walk in the light of the noonday sun. "I see no justification," President Marion G. Romney stated, "for us who have the clear light of the revealed Gospel of Christ, to spend our lives stumbling around through the mists following the uncertain glimmer of a flickering candle lighted by the wisdom of men. It seems to me that we should devote our energies to spreading the true light, and leave the mists to those who do not claim to see that light." [^4]

The Storms That Rage

Every person builds a house of faith. We do so knowingly or unknowingly. And every builder soon learns that a good building with a bad foundation is worse than useless; it is dangerous. I wish to mention certain ideologies, certain trends in our society to which I feel the doors of our hearts and our homes must be forever closed if we expect to enjoy the approbation of heaven. Then we will consider some simple principles of truth and righteousness upon which we must build our lives if we are to stand in holy places and be not moved.

We live in a day when the religious solutions to problems and questions, if they are given any credence at all, are among the least and last considered. With the growth of the behavioral sciences during the last century, we have witnessed repeated efforts to identify causes and label solutions that are independent of Jesus Christ and the discipleship to which he has called us. It is noteworthy that as the number of psychological and sociological explanations provided for misconduct or distress enlarges, as the complexity of the explanation for the problem increases, spiritual indices and roots of the behavior begin to be disregarded or to be ignored entirely.

We are reminded continually of what a tense and stress-filled world we live in. The complexity of life and the competition to not only stay afloat but also get ahead have resulted in a host of psycho-physiological disorders, maladies that would have been unknown to our forebears. Many people preoccupy themselves needlessly with self-inspections; they are compulsively taking their own emotional or spiritual temperatures to assure that they are happy or stable or "together" or worthy. Others spend a lifetime (and too often a fortune) seeking to love themselves or to "find themselves."

There is, of course, another side to this story. In order to live in harmony, we must become the kind of people who are not constantly looking to take offense. Each of us could easily waste our lives striving to make our associates offenders for a word. Many times a day we could take offense with the way we are spoken to (or not spoken to), the way we are introduced, the way someone mispronounces our name, or the way we feel we are ignored or overlooked. Our society's inability to be fully Christian has led to a staggering increase in the number of court cases. We have become a litigious people, a nation that thinks first of justice and later (if at all) of reconciliation or even forgiveness. [^6] Our tendency to look for and take offense has made it extremely difficult to function in society, even to the point where individuals are frightened to speak, anxious about saying anything, for fear that their language or their approach may not be "politically correct." One of the ironies of our day is that an overmuch dose of multiculturalism and an exaggerated emphasis on diversity can create a type of ethnicity that will in time contribute to the segregation and disunity of our society. Such separatism "nourishes prejudices, magnifies differences and stirs antagonisms." [^7]

There can be no question but that women have been the object of abuse and indignity for centuries, and that even today many women—in and out of the Church—live under circumstances that range from the uncomfortable to the intolerable. Men have too often been cruel and uncaring, insensitive to women—their needs, their desires, and their voices. In that sense the effort on the part of women to reassert their value and their critical place in society has been needed. Sadly, however, many women have turned to brands of radical feminism that have brought more heartache than help. "What is so frustrating," one woman has written, "looking back on all this, is how unnecessary and destructive it all was. American women in the fifties needed feminism, real feminism, feminism that would embrace both its career women and its career mothers. . . . A real feminism would have affirmed them both, searched for ways to allow each to be more secure and more valued in what she had chosen to do. Instead, the false feminism we got declared war on mothers. . . ."

She continues: "Thus it was that in the wake of the defeat of the ERA and the growth of the prolife movement, many feminist organizations, especially the National Organization for Women, woke up to 'family issues.' I would like to say that was a hopeful sign. The Lord only knows, we need some constructive thinking about family issues.

"All indications, however, are that nothing much has changed, except the rhetoric. Not a single one of the major mainstream feminist organizations is willing to consider marriage and motherhood as anything but a problem. Not one of them is interested in helping women who want to make that choice pursue it in dignity. Everyone wants to make that choice a near or total impossibility. Being 'just a housewife' still gets you no respect, especially from feminists. . . . For a movement dedicated so stridently to choice, they are remarkably selective in the choices they are willing to allow other women to make.

" . . . It's no wonder that the new woman of the nineties has no self-respect. You cannot devalue motherhood without devaluing everything else women do. You cannot declare the primarywork of most women throughout most of history to be beneath serious consideration withoutsending women the covert message that it is really women who are beneath serious consideration.

"You cannot train a whole generation of women in contempt for their mothers without training them in contempt for themselves. . . ."

And then comes the following pointed and painful conclusion: "The New Woman of the nineties didn't need a society full of sexist men to make her believe she was worth nothing. She had the new wave of American feminism to do it for them." [^8]

In general we could say that men and women, in and out of the Church, have been sold a bill of goods. They have been taunted by and titillated with views concerning man, woman, priesthood, and family that are at odds with the revealed word and thus with things as they really are and as they really will be. Confusion and conflict have ensued, and a few have forsaken the faith because they chose to give heed to seductive voices. No person, not here or in eternity, can be happy or find real fulfillment who revolts against the divinely established role and calling he or she was given before the foundations of this earth were laid.

The erosion of moral absolutes is highly correlated with what we consume in terms of literature, movies, music, and entertainment of many kinds. Young people in our day need not search out alleys and backstreets to become involved in the lurid and the obscene; they need only pay the box office price or flip the television channel. As movie critic Michael Medved has written, "Hollywood's crisis is, at its very core, a crisis of values. It's not 'mediocrity and escapism' that leave audiences cold, but sleaze and self-indulgence. What troubles people about the popular culture isn't the competence with which it's shaped, but the messages it sends, the view of the world it transmits." Continuing, Medved stated: "Hollywood no longer reflects—or even respects—the values of most American families. On many of the important issues in contemporary life, popular entertainment seems to go out of its way to challenge conventional notions of decency." [^11] Likewise, "a survey of influential television writers and executives in Hollywood has shown that they are far less religious than the general public and 'diverge sharply from traditional values' on such issues as abortion, homosexual rights and extramarital sex." [^12]

Some young Latter-day Saints discover inconsistency in the values purported by their parents; the mom and dad who would never allow the children to view this or that movie or video have little or no hesitation in doing so themselves. Surely no person interested in spiritual things could believe that what is morally taboo for the youth is fully acceptable for their elders. "One might well wonder," Elder Richard L. Evans warned, "about the term 'adult entertainment.' Could it be that something unclean or immoral which is not fit for children is wholesome for adults? Is 'adult evil' acceptable? How consistent is it to have a double standard?" [^13] We should not be surprised if we find that our children or grandchildren wander about in a type of moral malaise. One philosopher has noted that "if a child's moral growth does not keep pace with his physical growth, there may soon be no child. Could this explain why the most common age for suicide today is adolescence? The human race is now in its adolescence and standing on the edge of a cliff." [^14]

A Sure Foundation

It is easy for us to be cynical, to step back and take potshots at America or the larger world. And it is often the case that those who cry doom and despair the loudest seldom offer remedies for a society that suffers from a sickness of the soul. I do not believe the way ahead will be easy, but I do sense keenly that most of the answers to life's most troublesome questions are simpler than we think. These answers call for a retrenchment, a return to our spiritual and moral moorings, a return to virtue, a return to the faith of our fathers and mothers.

"I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me" (John 5:30).

"I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me" (John 6:38).

"My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me" (John 7:16).

"He that sent me is with me: the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him" (John 8:29).

"I and my Father are one" (John 10:30).

As President Ezra Taft Benson has explained, a wholesome view of self is "best established by a close relationship with God." [^15] Surely a more significant undertaking than discovering ourselves is coming to know God and gaining his approval. The journey of self-discovery, the quest for self-esteem—these are elusive and man-made, far more fascinating than fruitful. We can feel and become all that we were intended to feel and be, but it will come about in the Lord's own way, through laboring in his cause, serving others, and seeking through him to become a new creature in Christ. The Savior's commission to "love thy neighbour as thyself" (Matthew 19:19) has little to do with loving oneself; it has much to do with loving others as one would desire to be loved, to fulfill the Golden Rule (see Matthew 7:12; 3 Nephi 14:12). There is no divine directive to spend time developing self-love or becoming obsessed with self-esteem. Rather, one of the solemn ironies of existence is the principle found in the words of the Master: "Whosoever will save his life in this world, shall lose it in the world to come. And whosoever will lose his life in this world, for my sake, shall find it in the world to come" (JST, Matthew 16:27-28; emphasis added).

As C.S. Lewis has suggested, "until you have given up your self to Him you will not have a real self. . . . The very first step [in giving up one's self] is to try to forget about the self altogether. Your real, new self (which is Christ's and also yours, and yours just because it is His) will not come as long as you are looking for it. It will come when you are looking for [Christ]." [^16] Or, as another writer expressed it: "When we turn away from and reject self and turn unto Jesus, the very first thing that he gives to us is a new, lofty personal identity in him. No longer must we 'find ourselves' in the various means of identification offered by this world. No longer do we need other people to bolster our flagging sense of self-worth. Our endless quest to be somebody and to gain power, influence, fame, and fortune comes to an end. The identity that God gives us in Christ Jesus lifts us far higher than anything this world can offer." [^17]

Alma's counsel to Helaman to "look to God and live" (Alma 37:47) has as much to do with our sense of personal security as it does with our ultimate salvation. It is to Christ that we look. From him we receive strength. In him is found peace and quietude of soul. As Bruce Hafen has written: "When we place our confidence in God rather than in ourselves, our need for self-esteem takes care of itself. . . . The heart of it all is not self-confidence. It is confidence in him, and in his power to make us into creatures far beyond the reach of what our goal-setting and goal-achieving can ultimately accomplish in the process of becoming as he is." [^18]

I have come to know that we need not be offended, that one of the most important signs of spiritual growth is a refusal to take offense. We need not be angry or bitter or insulted. We need not make our sister or our brother an offender for a word. It really is not too difficult to look at a person's heart, to try to understand what they meant to do rather than what they did, or what they meant to say rather than what they said. Sometimes this entails simply looking the other way and assuming the best. Sometimes it requires forgiveness. President Gordon B. Hinckley pointed out that there is no virtue more needed in our day than forgiving and forgetting. "There are those who would look upon this," he said, "as a sign of weakness. Is it? I submit that it takes neither strength nor intelligence to brood in anger over wrongs suffered, to go through life with a spirit of vindictiveness, to dissipate one's abilities in planning retribution. There is no peace in the nursing of a grudge." [^19] In addition, as Elder Boyd K. Packer has taught, "some frustrations we must endure without really solving the problem. Some things that ought to be put in order are not put in order because we cannot control them. Things we cannot solve, we must survive." [^20]

It may well be that forgiveness is one of the most difficult labors of the disciple, but one that makes us more like the Merciful One than anything else we might do. The German theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer observed: "While it is true that only the sufferings of Christ are a means of atonement, yet since he has suffered for and borne the sins of the whole world and shares with his disciples the fruits of his [sufferings], the Christian also has to undergo temptation; he too has to bear the sins of others; he too must bear their shame and be driven like a scapegoat from the gate of the city. . . . My brother's burden which I must bear is not only his outward lot, his natural characteristics and gifts, but quite literally his sin. And the only way to bear that sin is by forgiving it in the power of the cross of Christ in which I now share." [^21] To truly forgive others—especially those who have inflicted pain on us—is in a very real way to take up our cross, to become "a Christ-figure," one who, as Bruce and Marie Hafen have written, is willing "to absorb a terrible trauma of the spirit" in order to "help the sinner." [^22]

As we observed earlier, whatever Christ puts his hand upon is healed. That is true of homes as well as hearts. Most of us will require a special endowment of spiritual strength, and in some cases a spiritual transformation, in order to put things behind us. But I bear witness that there is a Balm in Gilead, a healing Balm not of this world, a soothing and sanctifying Balm that works mighty changes in the hearts and minds of those who put their trust in the Great Physician.

Without absolute truths, without set and established principles and practices within our personal and social experience, life would have little meaning, and, in fact, there would be few things on which we could depend with certainty. President Rex Lee explained to BYU students that "there is nothing more important for each of you to do than build a firm, personal testimony that there are in this life some absolutes, things that never change, regardless of time, place, or circumstances. They are eternal truths, eternal principles, and . . . they are and ever will be the same yesterday, today, and forever." [^24]

No matter the regularity of society's chants or the decibels of special interest groups' demands, some things are forever proper and right, and some things are eternally wrong. Popular vote or consensus are not the means of ascertaining truth. We turn instead to the scriptures, to revelation, to those called and anointed to make known to the Church and the world the mind and voice and will of the Lord. President Kimball taught that "right and wrong, righteousness and sin, are not dependent upon men's interpretations, conventions and attitudes. Social acceptance does not change the status of an act, making wrong into right." And then, as a very timely illustration, he noted: "If all the people in the world were to accept homosexuality, as it seems to have been accepted in Sodom and Gomorrah, the practice would still be deep, dark sin." [^25] President Kimball also testified: "The world may have its norm; the Church has a different one. . . . The world may countenance premarital sex experiences, but the Lord and his Church condemn in no uncertain terms any and every sex relationship outside of marriage, and even indecent and uncontrolled ones within marriage. And so, though many self-styled authorities justify these practices as a normal release, the Church condemns them." [^26]

Conclusion

It has occurred to me many times in the last several years that one of the most important gifts to be sought for and acquired in this complex age is the gift of discernment—not alone the capacity to distinguish good from evil, as important as that is, but also the ability to discern what matters from what doesn't matter quite so much. I shudder at the possibility that I might finish my life and then have the Lord explain to me that I had spent my time laboring largely in secondary causes.

Indeed, one of the signs of the times, one of the evidences that all is not well in this world, is that so many of our priorities seem to be perverted. "The fight to stop nuclear power is far more trendy than the fight to save the nuclear family; reducing the level of pollution seems to be a higher priority than reducing the level of teenage promiscuity." [^29] As George Will lamented: "America today is capable of terrific intolerance about smoking or toxic waste that threatens trout. But only a deeply confused society is more concerned about protecting lungs than minds, trout than black women." [^30] Elder Boyd K. Packer warned: "As we test the moral environment, we find the pollution index is spiraling upward. . . . God grant that we will come to our senses and protect our moral environment from this mist of darkness which deepens day by day. The fate of all humanity hangs precariously in the balance." [^31]

C. S. Lewis, in his masterwork, The Screwtape Letters, has one of the archdevils, Screwtape, giving instruction to his nephew, Wormwood, about how to deceive those who have become Christians: "The real trouble about the set your patient is living in is that it is merely Christian. They all have individual interests, of course, but the bond remains mere Christianity. What we want, if men become Christians at all, is to keep them in the state of mind I call 'Christianity And.' You know—Christianity and the Crisis, Christianity and the New Psychology, Christianity and the New Order, Christianity and Faith Healing, Christianity and Psychical Research, Christianity and Vegetarianism, Christianity and Spelling Reform. If they must be Christians, let them at least be Christians with a difference. Substitute for the faith itself some Fashion with a Christian colouring. Work on their horror of the Same Old Thing." [^32]

The devil doesn't need to persuade us to steal or lie or commit adultery. You and I need merely undersell, understate, and thus underestimate the powers, appropriateness, and relevance of the gospel. One challenge we face in a world that is expanding dramatically in regard to information, discovery, and technology is to hold fast to that which is fundamental, to rivet ourselves to the simple. In many cases new discoveries have paved and will yet pave the way to the amelioration of human suffering and the removal of so many of life's struggles. But there are some things that never change, some problems whose resolution is brought to pass only through divine intervention. The Apostle Paul taught us that in Christ "dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality and power" (Colossians 2:9-10; emphasis added).

I wish to reaffirm that the hope of the world lies in the person and powers of Jesus Christ, who is the Hope of the Ages. He is the "Wonderful Counselor" (Isaiah 9:6). [^33] I am very much aware that certain kinds of mental or social-emotional problems result from a chemical imbalance, and that others may require intensive therapy. But I have studied and worked in the fields associated with individual and family therapy enough to know that we are foolish to suppose that we can bring about lasting change in human personalities or family relationships solely through the theories and philosophies of men and women, even men and women of good will. The blood of Christ, the transforming power of his love, the Spirit of God, and the blessings of the holy priesthood—these are remarkably therapeutic and must not be taken lightly, lest we place ourselves under condemnation (see D&C 84:54-61). In the words of a modern prophet, Ezra Taft Benson, "the Lord works from the inside out. The world works from the outside in. The world would take people out of the slums. Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they take themselves out of the slums. The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, whothen change their environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can changehuman nature. . . . Yes, Christ changes men, and changed men can change the world." [^34]

There are, as latter-day prophets have declared, many tight places through which the people of the covenant will be required to pass in the days ahead. Peace and protection and progress will be ours as we stand in holy places—as individuals and families—as we learn to be selective, as we sift and sort through the sordid and even the subsidiary. Some things simply matter more than others. The family is the most important unit in time and in eternity, and the home is the most sacred of all the holy places in which we are privileged to stand. Of this eternal institution, the Lord might well say, as he did to Moses: "Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground" (Exodus 3:5).

Notes

From an address delivered at the BYU Family Expo, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 4 April 1994.

---
Notas:
[^1] The trivialization of religion. Whereas a hundred years ago religion was central to the outlook of most Americans, we have in the last three decades become prey to a growing secularism, a world view that seeks to make sense of life without reference to God or the divine. If there is no real purpose to life, no God, no system of salvation, no hope of a life beyond the grave, and no divine parameters by which to distinguish right from wrong—in short, if anything goes—then eventually everything goes. Gabriel Vahanian, as quoted in Jackson Lee Ice and John J. Carey, eds., The Death of God Debate (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1967), 16.
[^2] The loss of a moral sense. Certain problems arise whenever people either deny or ignore absolute truths. One Protestant writer has stated: "I believe that one of the prime reasons this generation is setting new records for dishonesty, disrespect, sexual promiscuity, violence, suicide, and other pathologies, is because they have lost their moral underpinnings; their foundational belief in morality and truth has been eroded. . . . At one time, our society, by and large, explained the universe, humanity, and the purpose of life from the Judeo-Christian tradition: a belief that truth existed, and everyone could know and understand it. A clear understanding of what was right and wrong gave society a moral standard by which to measure crime and punishment, business ethics, community values, character, and social conduct. . . . Stephen L. Carter, The Culture of Disbelief: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious Devotion (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, Inc., 1993), 6-7, 13, 23; emphasis in original.
[^3] A denial of personal responsibility. The growth of the behavioral sciences in the last century has been phenomenal. Humankind seems at least as eager to understand the behavior and motivation of men and women as they are to understand light waves and black holes and the mysteries of DNA. The application of scientific principles to the study of human behavior—in an effort to formalize and objectify that study—has resulted in the superimposition of a cause-effect model on man and woman. Though it may be healthy and in some cases helpful to search for root causes, the cause-effect, stimulus-response model for understanding man will forevermore yield deficient and perhaps even perverse results, so long as we ignore the role of moral agency in that process. I say that, not only in regard to behaviorism, but also any other system—humanistic or Freudian—that attempts to define the cause of human behavior solely in terms of inner mechanisms, self-actualization, id or ego functions, or even genetic predisposition. Josh McDowell and Bob Hostetler, Right from Wrong (Dallas: Word Publishing, 1994), 12-13.
[^4] Emphasizing ethics over doctrine. In the absence of the real thing—the fulness of the gospel—there are many ideas and movements that seek to occupy center stage. James Wilson, The Moral Sense (New York: Macmillan, Inc., 1993), 5, 9.
[^6] Wilson, Moral Sense, 10.
[^7] John F. MacArthur, Jr., The Vanishing Conscience (Dallas: Word Publishing, 1994), 21; emphasis in original.
[^8] Ibid., 22-23.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 699-700.
[^13] Bruce C. Hafen, The Broken Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), 196-97; emphasis added.
[^14] C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan, 1952), 53-54; emphasis added.
[^15] Neal A. Maxwell, "This Is a Special Institution," inaugural address at BYU-Hawaii, Laie, Hawaii; as quoted in Profile Magazine, December 1994, 9; emphasis added.
[^16] Boyd K. Packer, "The Great Plan of Happiness," Seventeenth Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium, Provo, Utah, 10 August 1993, 3.
[^17] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1986, 20.
[^18] Bruce C. Hafen, The Broken Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), 120; emphasis in original.
[^19] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Of You It Is Required to Forgive,"Ensign, June 1991, 2, 4.
[^20] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, October 1987, 20; emphasis added.
[^21] Dietrich Bonhoeffer, The Cost of Discipleship (New York: Macmillan, 1967), 79-80.
[^22] Bruce C. and Marie K. Hafen, The Belonging Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994), 123.
[^24] Rex E. Lee, "Things That Change and Things That Don't," 1991-92 BYU Fireside and Devotional Speeches of the Year (Provo: Brigham Young University Publications, 1992), 54.
[^25] Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), 79.
[^26] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974), 175.
[^29] Medved, Hollywood vs. America, 340.
[^30] George Will, "America's Slide into the Sewer," Newsweek, 30 July 1990, 64.
[^31] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, April 1992, 91, 95; emphasis in original.
[^32] C. S. Lewis, The Screwtape Letters (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 115-16; emphasis in original.
[^33] See Donald W. Parry, Jay A. Parry, and Tina M. Peterson, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1998), 96.
[^34] Ezra Taft Benson, in Conference Report, October 1985, 5; emphasis added.
