Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 30

Pursuing a Sane and Balanced Course

One of the signs of our spiritual maturity is steadiness, our capacity to navigate the strait and narrow path in a stable and fairly consistent manner, to work with zeal but patient maturity, to stay in the mainstream of the Church. God does not expect us to work ourselves into spiritual, emotional, or physical oblivion, nor does he desire that the members of the true church be truer than true. There is little virtue in excess, even in gospel excess. In fact, as members of the Church exceed the bounds of propriety and go beyond the established mark, they open themselves to deception and ultimately to destruction. Imbalance leads to instability. If Satan cannot cause us to lie or steal or smoke or be immoral, it just may be that he will cause our strength—our zeal for goodness and righteousness—to become our weakness. He will encourage excess, for surely any virtue, when taken to the extreme, becomes a vice.

Excessive Zeal and Gospel Hobbies

A friend of mine shared the following experience. More than forty years ago he and his wife became acquainted with an older couple in their ward. This couple were about as devoted to the Church as people could be. The wife had been raised in the Church, while her husband had come in contact with the missionaries and been baptized while in the military. Like most of us, this couple had had their ups and downs in the faith, had struggled with a commandment here and there, but had managed to put much of the foolishness of youth behind them. In their eagerness to "make up" for all the times they may have disappointed the Lord, they determined upon a course to do everything they could to live the laws of the gospel with perfectness. They would leave no stone unturned, no i undotted. If the Lord through his Church asked for ten percent of their income as a tithing, they would pay fifteen percent. If Church members were asked to fast once per month, they would fast once per week. If most people studied the scriptures an hour per day, they would search and ponder and pray over holy writ for two hours. And so on and so on.

My friend mentioned one other aspect of this couple's zeal—their observance of the Word of Wisdom. They not only abstained from alcohol, tobacco, tea, coffee, and harmful drugs, they felt it was important to avoid white bread, as well as chocolate. They insisted that their children also follow such a course, which brought no end to frustration and contention in the home. What had in the beginning been merely a simple effort to demonstrate their willingness to keep all the commandments became, in time, an arduous task, a burdensome and uncomfortable labor. Resentment grew in the hearts of the children. Neighbors felt uncomfortable around them. In the area of Word of Wisdom observance, what had begun as a matter of health became a matter of "religious" fanaticism; the children (and the neighbors) were taught to avoid chocolate with at least as much enthusiasm as the Saints had been taught to avoid sexual immorality. Subtle suggestions to comply with this "higher law" were soon transformed into divine directives. Persons who chose to observe the commandments in a more traditional way were viewed as lacking in valiance. The couple withdrew into themselves and away from others who did not share their zeal. It was only a matter of time before Satan capitalized on their imbalance and led them to the brink of spiritual destruction. Only through the love, patience, and vigilance of priesthood leaders, loved ones, and friends were they delivered from their error and enabled to begin the slow and painful return to the true strait and narrow path.

We all know that we would be better off physically if we avoided chocolate, or at least if we ate it in moderation. But this is not the issue. In this case, and in too many others, persons who determine upon a course which will take them beyond the expected, above the required, inevitably begin to expect the same of others. It becomes a "religious" principle, one to which persons are proselyted. The overzealous tend to judge others by their own standard. I have known persons who are so completely committed to family history and temple work that they constantly badger and criticize others who are not in a position to do as much as they are. Obviously such work is a vital part of our ministry as Latter-day Saints; we neglect it at the peril of our eternal salvation. I also know, as Elder Dallin H. Oaks has pointed out, that there is a time and a season for all things, that a person's specific contributions to the kingdom are and must be private consecrations, between the individual and God. This is why the leaders of the Church have discouraged quotas and pre-established goals for temple work. "Our efforts to promote temple and family history work," Elder Oaks has noted, "should be such as to accomplish the work of the Lord, not to impose guilt on his children. Members of this Church have many individual circumstances—age, health, education, place of residence, family responsibilities, financial circumstances, accessibility to sources for individual or library research, and many others. If we encourage members in this work without taking these individual circumstances into account, we may do more to impose guilt than to further the work. . . . There are many different things our members can do to help in the redeeming of the dead, in temple and family history work. Some involve callings. All are expressions of devotion and discipleship. All present opportunities for sacrifice and service." [^1]

One could take a simple observance such as fasting or praying and soon find, with just the slightest amount of extra zeal, that these wonderful principles, given for the blessing and benefit of mankind, can contribute to error. I spoke once to a temple president who described what had happened over the years in the temple in which he and his wife had served. He said that there was a particular room set aside as a prayer room, a place where patrons of the temple could retire for pondering and meditation, where they could go to seek inspiration or guidance on personal matters. For the longest time, he said, the room served a useful purpose: it reminded the patrons that temples were places of learning and revelation, holy edifices where we go to attend to sacred matters for the living as well as the dead. In time, however, the room became such a popular spot that long lines were often seen winding their way around the celestial room, where hosts of people stood awaiting their turn. "Brother Millet," the president observed, "sometimes people went into the room and we simply couldn't get them out. Some of them," he added, "would pray themselves into a frenzy, until we had to pack them out unconscious!"

What we are describing here is a phenomenon known as "gospel hobbies," the tendency to take a good thing and run it into the ground. We are speaking of the evils of excess, even in noble and worthwhile causes. Gospel hobbies lead to imbalance. To instability. To distraction. To misperception. They are dangerous and should be avoided as we would any other sin. President Joseph F. Smith said: "We frequently look about us and see people who incline to extremes, who are fanatical. We may be sure that this class of people do not understand the gospel. They have forgotten, if they ever knew, that it is very unwise to take a fragment of truth and treat it as if it were the whole thing." [^2] To ride a gospel hobby is to participate in and perpetuate fanaticism. Harsh words, but true ones. On another occasion President Smith taught: "Brethren and sisters, don't have hobbies. Hobbies are dangerous in the Church of Christ. They are dangerous because they give undue prominence to certain principles or ideas to the detriment and dwarfing of others just as important, just as binding, just as saving as the favored doctrines or commandments.

"Hobbies give to those who encourage them a false aspect of the gospel of the Redeemer; they distort and place out of harmony its principles and teachings. The point of view is unnatural. Every principle and practice revealed from God is essential to man's salvation, and to place any one of them unduly in front, hiding and dimming all others is unwise and dangerous; it jeopardizes our salvation, for it darkens our minds and beclouds our understandings. . . .

"We have noticed this difficulty: that Saints with hobbies are prone to judge and condemn their brethren and sisters who are not so zealous in the one particular direction of their pet theory as they are. . . . There is another phase of this difficulty—the man with a hobby is apt to assume an 'I am holier than thou' position, to feel puffed up and conceited, and to look with distrust, if with no severer feeling, on his brethren and sisters who do not so perfectly live that one particular law." [^3] In other words, an emphasis upon excellence in gospel living—as manifest in gospel hobbies—can result in pride, the father of all other sins. President Harold B. Lee explained that "at . . . times people who pride themselves on their strict observance of the rules and ordinances and ceremonies of the Church are led astray by false spirits, who exercise an influence so imitative of that which proceeds from a divine source that even these persons, who think they are the 'very elect,' find it difficult to discern the essential difference." [^4] True excellence in gospel living—compliance with the established laws and ordinances in a quiet and patient manner—results in humility, in greater reliance upon God, and a broadening love and acceptance of one's fellow man. There is a principle here: what I am doing in the name of goodness ought to bring me closer to those I love and serve, ought to turn my heart toward people, rather than causing me to turn my nose up in judgmental scorn and rejection. The greatest man to walk the earth, the only fully perfect human being, looked with tenderness and compassion upon those whose ways and actions were less than perfect. He is the Exemplar.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has similarly written: "It is . . . my experience that people who ride gospel hobbies, who try to qualify themselves as experts in some specialized field, who try to make the whole plan of salvation revolve around some field of particular interest to them—it is my experience that such persons are usually spiritually immature and spiritually unstable. This includes those who devote themselves—as though by divine appointment—to setting forth the signs of the times; or, to expounding about the Second Coming; or, to a faddist interpretation of the Word of Wisdom; or, to a twisted emphasis on temple work or any other doctrine or practice. The Jews of Jesus' day made themselves hobbyists and extremists in the field of Sabbath observance, and it colored and blackened their whole way of worship. We would do well to have a sane, rounded, and balanced approach to the whole gospel and all of its doctrines." [^5]

Not unrelated to excessive zeal and overmuch righteousness is the tendency by some to attempt to force spiritual things. What would we think of a father who said to his fourteen-year-old son: "Larry, if you really love me you will be tall. I have been short all my life. I love basketball and have always wanted to be a star forward on a successful team. But it's never worked out. If you love me, if you have any respect for me as your father, you will grow to be six foot eight." Strange, isn't it? In fact, such a request would be cruel and unkind, especially given the fact that Larry has little control over how tall he will be. He can eat the right foods, train and work out, and do everything within his power to be big and strong, but he cannot control how tall he will be. In a way, it's just the same with spiritual growth. We cannot program it. We cannot specify and delineate and produce. We cannot prepare formulae and plans that will result in specific spiritual phenomena. We cannot say with certitude that if a man or woman does X and Y and Z that a dream or vision will be forthcoming; that if he or she does A or B or C consistently, they will be able to prophesy or speak in tongues. We can prepare the soil, if you will; we can provide a setting for development. But that is all. We must exercise patience and trust in the Lord and his purposes.

I knew one man who claimed that he would be perfect by the age of thirty. He set out on a deliberate program, organized his goals according to a ten-year, five-year, one-year, monthly, weekly, and daily plan. He pushed and pulled and stretched and reached spiritually, as much so as any person I have known. But he was not perfect at thirty. You cannot force spiritual things. I am acquainted with a woman who announced to several of our friends that she would make her calling and election sure by the time she was fifty years old. She has been faithful in the Church. She has long since passed the age of fifty and is terribly discouraged because the goal of her existence, so far as she knows, has not been realized. You cannot force spiritual things. Endless prayers, lengthy scripture vigils, excessive fasting—all of these, though at first well-intended, may come to be more a curse than a blessing. Gospel growth must come slowly, steadily, gradually. Elder Boyd K. Packer has warned: "Such words as compel,coerce,constrain,pressure,demand do not describe our privileges with the Spirit. You can no more force the Spirit to respond than you can force a bean to sprout, or an egg to hatch before its time. You can create a climate to foster growth; you can nourish, and protect; but you cannot force or compel: You must await the growth. Do not be impatient to gain great spiritual knowledge. Let it grow, help it grow; but do not force it, or you will open the way to be misled." [^6]

For years I wrestled with the meaning of the parable of the ten virgins, as contained in the twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew. The scene seemed so wrong, the message so counter to all that the Master taught. Why couldn't the wise virgins just break down and share their oil? If each one just contributed a little, I reasoned, perhaps everyone, or at least some of the "foolish" ones, could make it to the wedding to meet the Bridegroom. And then an experience taught me the answer to my query. While I was serving as a priesthood leader, a husband and wife came to see me. They were both distressed about the state of their marriage and family; things seemed to be coming apart in their lives. "How can I help?" I asked. "We need more spirituality in our home," the wife answered. I asked a few questions. "How often do you pray as a family?" They answered that their schedules precluded any kind of family prayer. "Have you been able to hold family home evening?" "Bill and I bowl on Monday nights," was the response. "Do you ever take occasion to read the scriptures as a family or as individuals?" The answer from the husband: "Reading hurts my eyes." "Well, then, how can I help you?" I asked. Again came the reply: "We want the Spirit in our lives."

It was as though they were saying to me, "Brother Millet, could you reach down into your heart and loan us five years of daily prayer, ten years of regular scripture study, and fifteen years of family spiritual activities?" I couldn't do it. I realized dramatically that there are simply some things that we cannot share. I also came to appreciate that, like the small oil lamps of the Middle East that require a careful and methodical and slow effort to fill, so in our own lives we need to build our reservoirs of faith and spiritual experience gradually and consistently. Consistent gospel growth—that was the answer. A colleague of mine drew my attention to these words of President Spencer W. Kimball: "The foolish asked the others to share their oil, but spiritual preparedness cannot be shared in an instant. . . . This was not selfishness or unkindness. The kind of oil that is needed to illuminate the way and light up the darkness is not shareable. . . . In our lives the oil of preparedness is accumulated drop by drop in righteous living." [^7]

Finally, in our eagerness to prepare and do all that is required, we must be careful that our personal expectations, though rigorous, are realistic. Zion of old became a society of the pure in heart "in process of time" (Moses 7:21), and, with but few exceptions, members of the Church become Saints of the Most High in similar fashion. Except for a limited number of cases that are so miraculous they are written up in scripture, being born again is a process; we are born again gradually, from one level of spiritual grace to a higher. Almost always people are sanctified—made clean and holy and pure through the blood of Christ by the medium of the Holy Ghost—in gradual, line-upon-line fashion. Thus ultimate perfection and salvation are processes. One of the great challenges we face in our quest for spiritual maturity is to balance a type of divine discontent, a constant yearning for improvement and growth, with what Nephi called a "perfect brightness of hope" (2 Nephi 31:20), the assurance born of the Spirit that although we are not perfect—we have much sanctification and perfection ahead of us—we have a hope in Christ, a quiet confidence that in and through him we shall in time overcome all things and go on to eternal life.

Mormon Gnosticism

Alexander the Great's empire, as a political entity, did not long survive his death in 323 b.c. But the cultural empire he founded lasted for nearly one thousand years, until the rise of Islam and the Arab conquests in the seventh century a.d. Greek or Hellenistic influence was profound—upon the Roman empire, upon the world of Judaism, and, unfortunately, upon the early Christian Church. As Zenos had declared in prophetic vision, the grafting of branches from the "wild olive tree" (Gentile influence) resulted in a season of strength for the Church (see Jacob 5:17). But it was only a matter of time before the doctrines of the prophets and the ideas of the philosophers came in conflict; those with eyes to see were aware that attempts to merge the revelations of the temple of God with the doctrines of Plato would be abortive to the true Christian faith. Ecumenism would lead to shared impotence. And so it did.

In the first few centuries of the Christian era there grew up a movement which came to be known as Gnosticism. The word gnosis connoted knowledge, not a general kind of knowledge, but rather a special, saving knowledge. The Gnostics were a group who claimed to be possessors of the esoteric teachings of Jesus, the supposedly sacred and secret messages reserved only for those who sought to rise above the mundane and liberate themselves from the fetters of ignorance and a confining physical world. They decried and defied, for the most part, what they believed to be a stifling and restrictive priesthood hierarchy of the orthodox church. Salvation was an individual experience that came through spiritual illumination of the mysteries of godliness. Theirs was an emphasis upon the damning nature of this fallen world (and the physical body) and the supernal treasures to be had through transcending our condition here and ascending to pure spirit. Some of the Gnostics, known as Docetists (from a Greek word meaning "appears" or "seems"), went so far as to claim that Jesus did not really come to earth with a corporeal body, but—since the body was something to be shunned and overcome—it only appeared that he had a physical tabernacle. (It is interesting, therefore, to consider the significance of John's teachings in 1 John 4:1-3 and 2 John 1:7.) We have heard much over the years about the impact of Roman persecution on the early Christian Church, but in reality the death knell for Christianity came through hellenization—the mingling of Greek philosophy with the scriptures and teachings of the earliest Christian Church. There was lost in and through the perpetuation of this hybrid heresy the true knowledge of God, of man, and of the purpose of life. The great apostasy followed.

In the times of restitution we have not been without our own little Gnostic groups. There was Hiram Page, who sought to reveal things about Zion (see D&C 28); Mrs. Hubble, who claimed to be receiving divine direction for the Saints (see D&C 43); some who spoke of secret commissions and ordinations under the hands of Joseph Smith; and others today who make much of special callings or unusual insights. We have watched with much interest and pain as a surprising number of the Lord's people are lured away by voices that beckon for their attention. Some charismatic figures boldly declare that only those properly trained or with the right credentials can interpret scripture or lead the way. Some speak openly of visions, dreams, or revelations that entitle them to turn the Church in a direction different than its present course. Frequently we hear from some well-meaning Saints that we must reinstitute the united order or bring back this idea or that practice. Where is our safety? How can we know who to follow?

The prophets have been especially vocal in their warnings against such movements. As we begin to mature in our citizenship in the kingdom, we find ourselves less attracted to such things, less enamored by the strange, the sensational, or the exotic; rather, we become more prone to focus upon and delight in the fundamental principles and doctrines of the gospel, more prone to teach and act with simplicity, more prone to stress the things the Lord's servants stress. We take seriously the scriptural charge to say "none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and that which is taught [us] by the Comforter through the prayer of faith" (D&C 52:9; see also verse 36). We begin to realize that there are no secret doctrines, no private ways of life, nothing that the General Authorities believe or practice that is not readily accessible to every member of the Church. Elder Boyd K. Packer spoke of the problem of claims to special ordination. "There have been too many names presented," he stated, "too many sustaining votes taken, too many ordinations and settings apart performed before too many witnesses; there have been too many records kept, too many certificates prepared, and too many pictures published in too many places for anyone to be deceived as to who holds proper authority. Claims of special revelation or secret authority from the Lord or from the Brethren are false on the face of them and really utter nonsense! The Lord never operated that way; these things were not done in a corner (see Acts 26:26); there is light on every official call and every authorized ordination, and it has always been that way." [^8]

Safety and security in the midst of a babble of voices (even some voices from Latter-day Saints) are to be found in following the Brethren, in giving heed to the counsel and direction we receive from our leaders at the general conferences of the Church and in the official organs and publications of the Church. As members of the true church, we really ought to read and know and teach from the conference addresses as much as we do from the standard works. I know from personal experience of the remarkable spiritual presence that accompanies our teaching and our presentations as we cite or quote the Brethren. We thus evidence our respect and appreciation for the words of the living oracles. When we are loyal to this principle, we would never seek to run before our file leaders, to suggest that the Saints should do this or that when in fact those responsible for guiding the destiny of the Church and kingdom have not so spoken. President Joseph F. Smith observed that "no man possessing a correct understanding of the spirit of the gospel and of the authority and law of the Holy Priesthood will attempt for a moment to run before his file leader or to do anything that is not strictly in harmony with his wish and the authority that belongs to him. The moment a man in a subordinate position begins to usurp the authority of his leader, that moment he is out of his place, and proves by his conduct that he does not comprehend his duty, that he is not acting in the line of his calling, and is a dangerous character." [^9]

A vital part of maturing in the faith is coming to acknowledge the position of those called to lead us, on both a general and local level. Few people would go astray, would find themselves in apostasy or in the center of controversy, if they simply sought and followed the counsel of their Church leaders. People are not necessarily called to positions of responsibility because they are the most qualified, the most talented, or the most gifted gospel scholars. Our challenge is to sustain—that is, give our full loyalty and support to—people who are often less than perfect, even people that we might feel to be less capable than ourselves. "Here is a lesson for all of us in this Church," President David O. McKay said. "Let us . . . recognize the local authority. The bishop may be a humble man. Some of you may think you are superior to him, and you may be, but he is given authority direct from our Father in heaven. You recognize it. Seek his advice, the advice of your stake president. If they cannot answer your difficulties or your problems, they will write to the General Authorities and get the advice needed. Recognition of authority is an important principle." [^10]

Indeed, those who, through pride or an elevated sense of self-worth, feel to ignore or reject the counsel of bishops or stake presidents will lose the Spirit of the Lord and be left to themselves. It is a small thing to take counsel from a local leader, but it is vital to our eternal welfare. In fact, as the scriptures attest, it is by small means that great things are brought to pass (see 1 Nephi 16:29; Alma 37:6-7; D&C 64:33). "You can put it down in your little black book," Elder Boyd K. Packer taught, "that if you will not be loyal in the small things, you will not be loyal in the large things. If you will not respond to the so-called insignificant or menial tasks which need to be performed in the Church and Kingdom, there will be no opportunity for service in the so-called greater challenges. A man who says he will sustain the President of the Church or the General Authorities, but cannot sustain his own bishop, is deceiving himself. The man who will not sustain the bishop of his ward and the president of his stake will not sustain the President of the Church." [^11] We must never forget that the organization of the Church—the officers and teachers and the manuals and other helps—have been provided "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ"—meaning, of course, the members of the Church. "Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect [fully formed, mature] man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, and by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ" (Ephesians 4:11-15; emphasis added).

There are ways of knowing the truth, of discerning the veracity and fruitfulness of a doctrine or a point of view. Joseph Smith pointed out that nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when we suppose we have the Spirit of God. [^12] If someone comes to us claiming a special appointment, special knowledge which is not available to most members, special training and abilities which entitle him or her to interpret scripture or clarify doctrine beyond what has been given by the authorized servants of God, we might ask the following:

Principles That Preserve

The scriptures set forth certain principles which, if we are sensitive to their implications, will keep us on course and thus assist us in our quest for spiritual maturity. In his response to Satan's temptation to use divine powers for personal gain, the Savior answered: "It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God" (Matthew 4:4; compare D&C 84:44). Every word. Not every other word, not those words that are most acceptable and pleasing, not those words that support my own peculiar views. Every word. Members of the Church would seldom become embroiled in doctrinal disputes, controversial dialogues, or gospel hobbies if they truly sought to live by every word that has come from the Lord, the scriptures, and the servants of God. To live by every word of God also implies the need to read and study widely, to be seeking for at least as much breadth in our gospel scholarship as we have depth, to seek to have the big picture. It has been wisely said that the greatest commentary on the scriptures is the scriptures themselves.

In preaching to his American Hebrews, the resurrected Lord delivered the doctrine of Christ, the need for all men and women to have faith, repent, be reborn, and to endure faithfully to the end. He then declared: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and whoso buildeth upon this buildeth upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against them. And whoso shall declare more or less than this, and establish it for my doctrine, the same cometh of evil, and is not built upon my rock; but he buildeth upon a sandy foundation, and the gates of hell stand open to receive such when the floods come and the winds beat upon them" (3 Nephi 11:39-40; emphasis added). In a modern revelation, the Lord spoke of bringing forth the Book of Mormon, another testament of Jesus Christ, in order that he might establish his gospel to put down contention and disputation. "Behold, this is my doctrine—whosoever repenteth and cometh unto me, the same is my church. Whosoever declareth more or less than this, the same is not of me, but is against me; therefore he is not of my church" (D&C 10:67-68; emphasis added). We need to live the gospel in such a way that we seek neither to add to nor take away from that which comes by and through the appointed channels of revelation for the Church.

This is not unrelated to the indictment sounded by Jacob against the ancient Jews. "The Jews were a stiffnecked people," he stated; "and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for God hath taken away his plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot understand, because they desired it. And because they desired it God hath done it, that they may stumble" (Jacob 4:14; emphasis added). What a fascinating situation! A people despised, or perhaps spurned or little appreciated, the words of plainness. They sought things that they could not understand, perhaps meaning that they pushed themselves well beyond what had been revealed and thus what men and women could appropriately grasp. They became blind by "looking beyond the mark." That is, they missed the point! They missed the main message! In the case of the Jews, they looked beyond the mark when Christ was the mark. They focused on the minutiae of the commentary on the Law, when Christ was the message of the Law. They confused means with ends, tokens with covenants, ritual with religion.

Elder Dean L. Larsen offered the following insights into this unusual scriptural passage: "Jacob speaks of people who placed themselves in serious jeopardy in spiritual things because they were unwilling to accept simple, basic principles of truth. They entertained and intrigued themselves with 'things that they could not understand' (Jacob 4:14). They were apparently afflicted with a pseudosophistication and a snobbishness that gave them a false sense of superiority over those who came among them with the Lord's words of plainness. They went beyond the mark of wisdom and prudence, and obviously failed to stay within the circle of fundamental gospel truths, which provide a basis for faith. They must have reveled in speculative and theoretical matters that obscured for them the fundamental spiritual truths." [^20] We begin the process of spiritual maturity as we come to treasure up the word of the Lord, a sure means of avoiding deception (see Joseph Smith- Matthew 1:37); as we find satisfaction and great delight in poring over and discussing the fundamental doctrines of the gospel; and as we wait upon the Lord to make us into new creatures and to reveal his purposes, all in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will (see D&C 88:67-68).

In summary, it may be well to state again that this is the Lord's church; he is at the helm. Revelation for the guidance of the Church as a whole will come through the ministry of those called as prophets, seers, and revelators (see D&C 21:4-6; 28:2; 43:3-6; 90:3-5). If it were the church of a man, then perhaps we might be justified in fretting and stewing over the status or directions of the Church. But it is in good hands. Though individuals may lose the Spirit and fall away, there will never again be an apostasy of the Church. In 1905 the First Presidency (Presidents Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund) issued a statement entitled "One Mighty and Strong." Let me conclude things in this chapter by quoting a portion of the final two paragraphs of this important document:

"In conclusion, we would say that the Latter-day Saints by this time, should be so well settled in the conviction that God has established his Church in the earth for the last time, to remain, and no more to be thrown down, or destroyed; and that God's house is a house of order, of law, of regularity, that erratic disturbers of that order of men of restless temperament, who, through ignorance and egotism become vain babblers, yet make great pretensions to prophetic powers and other spiritual graces and gifts, ought not to have any influence with them, nor ought the Saints to be disturbed in their spirit by such characters and their theories. The Church of Christ is with the Saints. It has committed to it the law of God for its own government and perpetuation. It possesses every means for the correction of every wrong or abuse or error which may from time to time arise, and that without anarchy, or even revolution; it can do it by processes of evolution—by development, by an increase of knowledge, wisdom, patience and charity.

"The presiding quorums of the Church will always be composed of such men, they will be chosen in such manner, that the Saints can be assured that solid wisdom, righteousness, and conscientious adherence to duty, will characterize the policy of those who are entrusted with the administration of the affairs of the Church." [^21]

Notes

From an address delivered at Brigham Young University Education Week and Know Your Religion series, 1989-91.

---
Notas:
[^1] Heber C. Kimball, as quoted in Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 4th ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1973), 446, 449-50; emphasis added.
[^2] Gospel Doctrine, 13.
[^3] Joseph F. McConkie and Robert L. Millet, The Holy Ghost (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 45.
[^4] Boyd K. Packer, "That All May Be Edified" (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 335.
[^5] Harold B. Lee, "Be Loyal to the Royal within You," 1973Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year (Provo: Brigham Young University Publications, 1974), 103; emphasis added.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 148.
[^7] Packer, "That All May Be Edified," 339-40; emphasis in original.
[^8] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 138; emphasis added.
[^9] Spencer W. Kimball, unpublished address delivered in Los Angeles, California, 2 January 1969, 9, as cited in Testimony, comp. H. Stephen Stoker and Joseph C. Muren (Salt Lake City:Bookcraft, 1980), 139; emphasis added.
[^10] Howard W. Hunter, "Eternal Investments," address given to Church Educational System personnel, Salt Lake City, Utah, 10 February 1989, 3; emphasis in original.
[^11] Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), 275.
[^12] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 313.
[^20] Dean L. Larsen, in Conference Report, October 1987, 12.
[^21] Messages of the First Presidency, 4:120.
