Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 34

Communion with the Infinite

I have felt the need to discuss the matter of spirituality, the degree to which, as President David O. McKay stated, we have a "consciousness of victory over self" and enjoy "communion with the Infinite." [^1] In this chapter I would like to discuss ways in which we can enjoy greater "communion with the Infinite" through refining and improving our prayer life, the way we communicate with God.

Why We Pray

Why do we pray? First, we believe our Heavenly Father is a Man of Holiness (see Moses 6:57), a glorified and exalted being, to be sure, but a resurrected and redeemed man who is literally the father of our spirits. He knows us, one by one, and has infinite love and tender regard for each one of us. He has a physical body, parts, and passions. He feels. He yearns. He feels pain and sorrows for our struggles and our wanderings and, like his Beloved Son, is touched with the feeling of our infirmities (see Hebrews 4:15). He delights in our successes. He responds to petitions and pleadings. He is neither untouchable nor unapproachable. Thus our prayers allow us to express to God our needs, our challenges, our deepest feelings and desires, and to ask sincerely for his help. The more prayerful a man or a woman becomes, the more dependent he or she is upon God and thus the more trusting and reliant upon spiritual powers beyond the person's own. Prayer thus builds spiritual strength by pointing us beyond our limited resources to him who has all power. In short, we pray to better understand who we are and who God is. We pray to better understand what we can do on our own and what we can do only with divine assistance.

Second, prayer allows us to communicate with Deity, to open ourselves to conversation with divinity. If indeed the quality of a person's life is largely a product of the kinds of associations they enjoy, then we may rest assured that a man or woman who spends much time in prayer will in time blossom in personality and rise above pettiness, littleness of soul, and mortal jealousies and fears. We cannot have regular contact with influences that are degrading without being affected adversely, almost as though the words and deeds of the depraved become a part of us. On the other hand, a person who regularly calls upon God, pours out the soul in prayer, and yearns for genuine communion with Deity—such a person cannot help but be elevated and transformed by that association. The very powers of God, coming to us through his Holy Spirit, make us into men and women of purpose, of purity, and of power. In short, we pray in order to receive an infusion of power, to draw strength from an omnipotent Being.

Oh, may my soul commune with thee And find thy holy peace; From worldly care and pain of fear, Please bring me sweet release. Oh, bless me when I worship thee To keep my heart in tune, That I may hear thy still, small voice, And, Lord, with thee commune. Enfold me in thy quiet hour And gently guide my mind To seek thy will, to know thy ways, And thy sweet Spirit find. Lord, grant me thy abiding love And make my turmoil cease. Oh, may my soul commune with thee And find thy holy peace.2

Roadblocks to Communion

There are certain roadblocks or barriers to communion with the Infinite, things that get in the way and prevent us from enjoying the kind of closeness with our Heavenly Father that we could have. We all could volunteer examples of such roadblocks. Let me suggest but a few.

Public Prayer

It's a marvelous thing—although I am certain we do not think about it very much—to be called upon to offer prayer in a public meeting. It's an honor to address the Almighty God but an especial honor to be asked to do so in behalf of a group of fellow believers. We damage ourselves spiritually, rob ourselves of a small but significant opportunity to grow, when we refuse to pray. Some of us feel shy or afraid. Take heart, brothers and sisters, for we are all in this together. No one of us has all of the answers, and no one of us has so achieved spiritually that he or she is in a position to judge another's prayer, no matter how simple or halting it might be. Others may refuse to pray because they do not feel worthy to do so. With the exception of those who are under Church discipline and have thus been asked by priesthood leaders not to participate openly in public meetings, all are in a position to pray if called upon.

Nephi explained the source of the attitude of one who refuses to pray. "If ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray," he wrote, "ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray" (2 Nephi 32:8). The officers of the Church are charged to "visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties" (D&C 20:47; see also verse 51). Elsewhere the Savior instructs the Saints: "I command thee that thou shalt pray vocally as well as in thy heart; yea, before the world as well as in secret, in public as well as in private" (D&C 19:28; see also 23:6; 81:3).

There are some things we ought to keep in mind when we pray vocally. My father was fond of saying that we should "pray for the occasion." I think that means that we ought to consider why we are gathered together, what is needed most, and how we might best express those needs to our Father in Heaven. For one thing, public prayers, with perhaps the exception of temple dedicatory prayers, are and should be relatively short. There is an apocryphal story to the effect that Heber C. Kimball was famous for his extremely long prayers. It was said that some of his children—and he had many—would often sneak away during family prayer, play for a while, and then make it back in time to kneel before being discovered. One story has it that one of the boys sneaked away, lost track of time, realized what had happened, and then hurriedly made it back. Dad was still praying. The breathless and concerned young man let out a sigh of relief and whispered to one of his brothers that he had been afraid he had stayed away too long. The brother responded: "No, you're okay. Father hasn't even gotten to the ten tribes yet!"

Well, I suppose there are times when it is necessary to take more time in prayer than usual, but such is rarely the case in public meetings. My wife, Shauna, and I can still remember attending a missionary farewell almost thirty years ago. A man and his wife had been called to serve a full-time mission. A large number of people were called upon to speak (those were the days when sacrament meetings were an hour and a half long), but Grandpa was not asked to speak. He was, however, asked to offer the opening prayer. And Grandpa was not to be denied. I can still remember our two children, Angie and David, who were just learning to bow their little heads and keep their eyes closed for more than a snap, glancing up with a puzzled look in their eyes as the elderly gentleman spoke in great detail in his prayer of Christ, the different dimensions of the Atonement, and a variety of other doctrinal topics. That prayer lasted for seventeen minutes and seemed a bit out of place. Our prayers are not sermons; they are not public discourses. They are not addressed to the other Saints, but to God. Elder Francis M. Lyman taught: "It is not necessary to offer very long and tedious prayers, either at opening or closing. It is not only not pleasing to the Lord for us to use excess of words, but also it is not pleasing to the Latter-day Saints. Two minutes will open any kind of meeting, and a half minute will close it." [^4]

Two of the keys to meaningful prayer, even public prayer, are sincerity and simplicity. We have no one to impress, no one's judgment to fear. Our words are addressed to him who knows all things, including the desires of our hearts (see D&C 6:16). It is thus wise to speak the words that we really feel. In Shakespeare's play Hamlet, Claudius stopped praying because his heart was simply not in his prayers. He said: "My words fly up, my thoughts remain below; Words without thoughts never to heaven go." [^5] The Prophet Joseph Smith taught in regard to prayer: "Be plain and simple, and ask for what you want, just like you would go to a neighbor and say, 'I want to borrow your horse to go to the mill.'" [^6] As a part of his own prayer to God, Zenos exclaimed: "Yea, thou art merciful unto thy children when they cry unto thee, to be heard of thee and not of men, and thou wilt hear them" (Alma 33:8).

I hope as we are called upon to pray that we will slow down, take our time, and pray from our hearts. I am often pained as people hurry through a prayer as though it were a formality or even something that needed to be dispensed with as painlessly as possible. This is particularly true for the end of the prayer. I sincerely hope that we will close our prayers with the dignity and transcendent respect that we ought to have for the name of him who bought us with his blood, the Savior of all mankind. Sometimes people are so eager to be done with the prayer that they race through the name of Jesus Christ as though they were sprinting toward a finish line. I assure you that this is not pleasing to his Father, who is also our Father. I promise you that if you and I will pray sincerely, from our hearts, speaking our words soberly and distinctly—especially the concluding words, "in the name of Jesus Christ"—we will begin to feel a power and a sacred influence in our lives that attests that the Lord hears us and is pleased with us.

Serious Communion

One of the things most needed in our prayer lives is consistency and regularity. Some people find it helpful to pray often in the same place. One man I know set aside a special place in his home, a place which over the years came to be like unto a personal sacred grove. It seemed when he entered that room that he felt a hallowed presence. In fact, that is exactly what had happened over the years; because some of the most profound insights and some of the sweetest feelings and impressions had come to him in that room, it had come to represent almost a holy of holies within his home, which was his temple.

Almost forty years ago a man taught me something that has changed my life. He said simply: "When you get out of bed in the morning, never let your feet touch the floor first. Always let your knees touch first." I recommend that bit of practical wisdom to you, especially if you find it difficult to have a regular, meaningful morning prayer. I have been surprised at how many people who would never, ever consider going to bed without praying in the evening have not managed to develop a consistent pattern of prayer in the mornings. Perhaps my practical side comes through here, but I have thought that there are very few harmful or hazardous things that could happen to me between the time I lay my head on the pillow at night and the time I get up. But there are many challenges and temptations and decisions I must face throughout the day, and I need all the help I can get. Evening prayers are extremely important, and morning prayers are vital.

Two of my colleagues at BYU, Brent Top and Bruce Chadwick, tell me that their studies of morality and faithfulness in Latter-day Saint youth throughout the Church reveal some interesting things. Those LDS young people who remained steadfast and solid and straight in the midst of serious temptation were those whose parents had helped their children to somehow internalize the gospel, to make personal scripture study and especially personal prayer high priorities in their lives. The following are some comments from active Latter-day Saint young people who have made it through the challenges without losing their way, at least so far:

"I am so blessed now because my parents encouraged me to pray and read the scriptures on my own."

"My dad always reminds me, 'Say your prayers.' This reminds me that it is not enough to have family prayer. I must pray on my own."

"My parents taught me how important personal revelation is and how I could find answers in the scriptures and receive answers to my prayers."

"It was my parents' example that had the most effect on me. . . . They would give thoughts and advice, but they left it up to me. But they would always counsel me to turn to the Lord and find out his will. In doing this it helped me to start to have spiritual experiences in my own life." [^7]

These comments affirm the promise of President Ezra Taft Benson, who said to the youth: "If you will earnestly seek guidance from your Heavenly Father, morning and evening, you will be given the strength to shun any temptation." [^8] I think we all know that such a promise applies equally well to the rest of us.

Awake, ye Saints of God, awake! Call on the Lord in mighty prayer That he will Zion's bondage break And bring to naught the tempter's snare. Though Zion's foes have counseled deep, Although they bind with fetters strong, The God of Jacob does not sleep; His vengeance will not slumber long. With constant faith and fervent prayer, With deep humility of soul, With steadfast mind and heart, prepare To see the eternal purpose roll. Awake to righteousness; be one, Or, saith the Lord, "Ye are not mine!" Yea, like the Father and the Son, Let all the Saints in unison join.10

Wrestling with God

There are prayers and then there are prayers. Sometimes we need to pray with a light spirit and without heavy and deep need weighing upon us. At other times, we long for the kind of spiritual contact and association that demand our most strenuous and disciplined efforts. Jacob of old wrestled with an angel until the breaking of day and thus obtained a blessing from God (see Genesis 32:24-32). Hungering and thirsting after righteousness, Enos wrestled with the Lord in prayer all day and into the night, until the holy voice declared that his sins were forgiven (see Enos 1:1-8).

Even our Lord and Savior came to know something about prayer that he could not have known before his entrance into mortality. In the Garden of Gethsemane the Savior began to feel the loss of his Father's sustaining Spirit. "And being in an agony," Luke records, "he prayed more earnestly" (Luke 22:44). In writing of this singular occasion, Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed: "Now here is a marvelous thing. Note it well. The Son of God 'prayed more earnestly'! He who did all things well, whose every word was right, whose every emphasis was proper; he to whom the Father gave his Spirit without measure; he who was the only perfect being ever to walk the dusty paths of planet earth—the Son of God 'prayed more earnestly,' teaching us, his brethren [and sisters], that all prayers, his included, are not alike, and that a greater need calls forth more earnest and faith-filled pleadings before the throne of him to whom the prayers of the saints are a sweet savor." [^9] Indeed, some thorns in the flesh call forth prayers of great intensity (see 2 Corinthians 12:7-10), supplications and pleading that are certainly out of the ordinary. Such vexations of the soul are not typical, not part of our daily prayer life. Just as it would be a mistake to suppose that Jacob or Enos wrestled with God in prayer every day, so you and I are not expected to involve ourselves with the same tenacity, to be involved in the same bending of the soul on a regular basis. But now and then in the eternal scheme of things, we must pass through the fire in order to come through life purified and refined and thus prepared to dwell one day in everlasting burnings with God and Christ and holy beings.

Prayer in Spirit

If we are willing to move beyond a casual relationship with God, willing to spend the time and exert the energy necessary to make of our prayer life something more than it is now, great things await us. For one thing, in time and with experience, our prayers can become more than petitions, as important as it is to petition the Lord. Our prayers can lead to our receiving instruction: they can be the means whereby God can reveal great and important things to us. The Apostle Paul taught us that "the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with [strivings] which cannot be [expressed]." [^10] That is to say, if we are quiet and attentive, the Spirit of the Lord can, on some occasions, lead us to pray for things that were not on our personal agenda, things deep down, things that pertain more to our eternal needs than our temporal wants. In such settings we find our words reaching beyond our thoughts, praying for people and circumstances and eventualities that will surprise us. President Marion G. Romney was fond of saying: "I can always tell when I have spoken by the power of the Holy Ghost, because I learn something from what I have said." And so it is with praying in Spirit.

"God sees things as they really are," Elder Neal A. Maxwell wrote, "and as they will become. We don't! In order to tap that precious perspective during our prayers, we must rely upon the promptings of the Holy Ghost. With access to that kind of knowledge, we would then pray for what we and others should have—really have. With the Spirit prompting us, we will not pray 'amiss.'

"With access to the Spirit, our circles of concern will expand. The mighty prayer of Enos began with understandable self-concern, moved outward to family, then to his enemies, and then outward to future generations." [^11]

Willing to Submit

In the first estate, the premortal world, the great Jehovah declared: "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2). In Gethsemane, as the hours of atonement began, he said in prayer: "Not my will, but thine, be done" (Luke 22:42; see also Matthew 26:39; Mark 14:36). As he breathed his last breath on the accursed cross of Calvary, Jesus said, as the capstone to his incomparable life: "Father, it is finished, thy will is done." He then "yielded up the ghost" (JST, Matthew 27:54). That sacred submission—coupled with his divine inheritance from the Eternal Father—is what made him who he was. That sublime relinquishment of will enabled him to do what no other mortal could do. That quest to know the will of the Father and then follow it opened him to incomprehensible powers of God. There is a lasting lesson here for us. Spiritual maturity manifests itself in our prayers as we become more and more willing to submit, more and more anxious to learn and carry out the will of him who knows best what to do with us. Through divine grace and assistance (see D&C 109:44), we are enabled to see things as they really are, to realize what really matters, and to consecrate our whole souls toward the realization of God's great work and glory, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

It is true that praying "Thy will be done" may entail submitting to difficult or challenging circumstances ahead. C. S. Lewis provides a slightly different approach to this scripture: "'Thy will be done.' But a great deal of it is to be done by God's creatures; including me. The petition, then, is not merely that I may patiently suffer God's will but also that I may vigorously do it. I must be an agent as well as a patient. I am asking that I may be enabled to do it. . . .

"Taken this way, I find the words have a more regular daily application. For there isn't always—or we don't always have reason to suspect that there is—some great affliction looming in the near future, but there are always duties to be done; usually, for me, neglected duties to be caught up with. 'Thy will be done—by me—now' brings one back to brass tacks." Further, Lewis explained, "Thy will be done" may also imply a readiness on our part to receive and experience new and unanticipated blessings. "I know it sounds fantastic," he added, "but think it over. It seems to me that we often, almost sulkily, reject the good that God offers us because, at that moment, we expected some other good." [^12] "Thy will be done" thus represents our petition that the Almighty work his wonders through us, that he soften our hearts to new ideas, new avenues of understanding, and open us to new paths and new doors of opportunity when it is best for us to move in another direction.

Conclusion

We kneel before God to show our reverence toward him. Where possible, we speak our prayers aloud. But many times in the day we are not in a position to kneel or to give voice to our yearnings or our feelings. And so it is that we have the commission to "pray always," to keep a prayer in our hearts, to speak to the Almighty in our mind. We pray for his direction and his strength in school, in our work, in our studies, in counseling with troubled friends or confused loved ones, and in our athletic endeavors. Amulek delivered this invitation: "Yea, cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save. Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him. Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks. Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening. Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies. Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness. Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them. Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase. But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness. Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you" (Alma 34:18-27).

Alma also implored: "Cry unto God for all thy support; yea, let all thy doings be unto the Lord, and whithersoever thou goest let it be in the Lord; yea, let all thy thoughts be directed unto the Lord; yea, let the affections of thy heart be placed upon the Lord forever. Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good; yea, when thou liest down at night lie down unto the Lord, that he may watch over you in your sleep; and when thou risest in the morning let thy heart be full of thanks unto God; and if ye do these things, ye shall be lifted up at the last day" (Alma 37:36-37).

Brothers and sisters, as President Boyd K. Packer pointed out some years ago, the moral pollution index in our society is rising. [^13] Evil is on the loose. Satan is abroad in the land (see D&C 52:14); it is truly the day of his power. I do not consider myself any stronger than any other Latter-day Saint. I cannot resist the incessant pull of immorality nor escape the desensitization that follows naturally from larger doses of harshness, crudeness, and violence without the infusion of spiritual power that comes through communion with the Infinite. I would suggest that the same thing is true for each one of you. No one of us is invulnerable to satanic influences. No one of us is strong enough to confront the enemy alone.

I bear witness that prayer makes available that "balm of Gilead" that comes to us from God in heaven through his Holy Spirit. Peace and perspective come to us as we come unto him. I bear witness of the great irony that submission and surrender to the Almighty, in prayer and in practice, lead to dynamic individualism. I know that God our Father lives, that he knows us and hears our prayers. When we pray we are not speaking to a force in the universe but instead to the Father of our spirits. I know that each of us can refine and purify our lives through a greater attention to the regularity, intensity, and overall quality of our prayers. That we will more consistently pour out our souls in prayer as individuals and as families, that the Lord may pour out upon us a blessing hitherto unknown, is the earnest desire of my heart.

Notes

From an address delivered in the Sunset Heights Eighth Ward, Orem, Utah, 15 March 1998.

---
Notas:
[^1] His children take his name in vain through profanity and vulgarity. The most commonly understood violation is speaking the name of Deity in the context of cursing or profaning. It is interesting to note that the word profane (from the Latin pro- and fanum) means literally "outside the temple." What an insightful way to describe the profanation of the name of God: to take that which is most holy, remove it from its hallowed setting, and thrust it into an environment that is unholy and unclean. Thus, alternate translations of this passage read as follows: "You must not make wrong use of the name of the Lord your God" (Revised English Bible); "You shall not make wrongful use of the name of the Lord your God" (New Revised Standard Version); "You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God" (New International Version). President Gordon B. Hinckley has taught: "So serious was violation of this law considered in ancient Israel that blasphemy of the name of the Lord was regarded as a capital crime. . . . Lawrence O. Richards, Expository Dictionary of Bible Words (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1985), 608.
[^4] J. R. Dummelow, A Commentary on the Holy Bible (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1936), 67.
[^5] Adam Clarke, Commentary on the Holy Bible, abridged by Ralph Earle (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1967), 126.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 137.
[^7] Spencer W. Kimball, "'Hold Fast to the Iron Rod,'"Ensign, November 1978, 6.
[^8] Anonymous LDS youth, as quoted in Brent L. Top and Bruce A. Chadwick, Rearing Righteous Youth of Zion (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1998), 89.
[^9] Ezra Taft Benson, "A Message to the Rising Generation,"Ensign, November 1977, 32.
[^10] Hymns, no. 17.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, "Why the Lord Ordained Prayer," in Prayer (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978), 8.
[^12] Romans 8:26; see also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 278. Compare 3 Nephi 19:24; D&C 46:30; 50:29-30; 63:65.
[^13] Neal A. Maxwell, "What Should We Pray For?" in Prayer, 45.
