Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 36

Remember the Sabbath Day

The observance of the Sabbath predates Sinai, for we learn from Moses that after the Gods had completed the paradisiacal creation of all things, the Lord "rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he rested from all his work which God created and made" (Genesis 2:2-3; see also Moses 3:2-3). Interestingly, there is no mention in the Old Testament about the Sabbath or Sabbath observance during the times of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but we would suppose, knowing the import of this statute, that the former-day Saints during patriarchal times did in fact honor the seventh day as a holy memorial. From the time of the exodus of the children of Israel from Egypt, the Sabbath commemorated the deliverance of the covenant people from bondage. "Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee. . . . And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day" (Deuteronomy 5:12, 15). This would mean, therefore, that the Sabbath was kept on a different day each year.

During the wilderness wanderings the Israelites were instructed to gather enough manna on the day prior to the Sabbath so that they would have sufficient. "And Moses said, Eat that to day: for to day is a sabbath unto the Lord: to day ye shall not find it in the field. Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the sabbath, in it there shall be none" (Exodus 16:25-26). Indeed, the seriousness of the law of the Sabbath is illustrated in an instance in Numbers 15, in which "a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day" is stoned to death by the congregation of Israel (vv. 32-36).

Inasmuch as a proper observance of the Sabbath signals and symbolizes a worshipful attitude, it would seem to follow that during periods of waywardness the people of God would naturally cease to comply with this law. Thus Nehemiah's reform included a reinstitution of a strict Sabbath observance. "In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses. . . . Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day? Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath. And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day" (Nehemiah 13:15-19).

During the centuries preceding the coming of the Messiah, efforts to interpret the Law resulted in massive commentary, rules, and "traditions of the elders." No aspect of the Law became more burdensome and cumbersome than the law of the Sabbath. Endless lists and formulae pertaining to servile work, distances to be traveled, and in general what was and was not appropriate for the Sabbath—these things constituted an integral part of daily life among Jews in the first century. "We do not overstate our case," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written, "when we say that the Jewish system of Sabbath observance that prevailed in the day of Jesus was ritualistic, degenerate, and almost unbelievably absurd, a system filled with fanatical restrictions." [^1] In an effort to establish a sane perspective on the Sabbath day—to point up the spiritual inconsistency associated with so many innane restrictions—Jesus took occasion to lift and teach and heal and work miracles, to do good on the Sabbath, for all of which he was attacked by his enemies among the Jewish leaders. "Wherefore the Sabbath was given unto man for a day of rest," he taught, "and also that man should glorify God, and not that man should not eat; for the Son of Man made the Sabbath day, therefore the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath" (JST, Mark 2:26-27). Following Jesus' mortal ministry, the members of the Church of Jesus Christ observed the first day of the week as the Sabbath day, the Lord's day, in remembrance of the Resurrection of the Master (see Acts 20:7; 1 Corinthians 16:2; Revelation 1:10).

Purposes of the Sabbath

Why would God stress so forcefully the proper observance of the Sabbath? Why would this be one of the Ten Commandments? Consider the following principles:

"It is a day of worship," President Joseph F. Smith declared, "a day in which the spiritual life of man may be enriched. A day of indolence, a day of physical recuperation is too often a very different thing from the God-ordained day of rest. . . . A proper observance of the duties and devotions of the Sabbath day will, by its change and its spiritual life, give the best rest that men can enjoy on the Sabbath day." [^3]

It is essential for us to go to Church to participate in those sacraments or ordinances that provide a clear channel for divine power. "And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world," Jehovah said in a modern revelation, "thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day; for verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High" (D&C 59:9-10). Partaking of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper enables us to renew sacred covenants—our promise to take the Lord's name, to keep his commandments, to bear one another's burdens—and to renew the Lord's promise to us—that we can be forgiven and renewed in spirit, that we may always have his Spirit to be with us (see Moroni 4-5).

There is a grander sense in which proper Sabbath observance rests our souls. Too many of us depend on Church attendance and weekly association with the Saints to make all the difference in our spiritual lives; we suppose that one-day-a-week holiness is sufficient to make it through the mists of darkness. I am persuaded that the Sabbath serves us most powerfully when we have earnestly sought through the week to come unto Christ—through at least brief daily efforts at personal and family devotion. One of the reasons we often have such difficulty pondering on the Savior and his atoning sacrifice during the sacramental service is because we have not thought too much about such things Monday through Saturday. On the other hand, when members of the Church are striving to think and ponder and pray and search the scriptures during the week, then the Sabbath becomes a capstone to a well spent week. It is of such seven-day-a-week holiness that the Master speaks when he says: "Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times" (D&C 59:11; emphasis added).

The scriptures often speak of rest in other ways as well. The Sabbath is a day of rest in the sense that it is a day wherein we seek to enter the "rest of the Lord," that is, "rest from doubt, from fear, from apprehension of danger, rest from religious turmoil of the world." [^4] To rest on the Sabbath is also to move closer to that supernal day when we are permitted to enter God's presence (JST, Exodus 34:1-2) and receive the fulness of his glory (D&C 84:24). We thus rest here, in this life, in preparation for the ultimate rest hereafter. Mormon thus declared: "Wherefore, I would speak unto you that are of the church, that are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord, from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in heaven" (Moroni 7:3).

Because the Lord established the Sabbath as a day of rest at the consummation of the Creation, it would be wise for us to reflect, on the Sabbath, on the goodness and omnipotence of our Creator, to ponder on the beauties and wonders about us. Because the Sabbath at one time in history commemorated the deliverance of ancient Israel from the hold of the Egyptians, it would be wise for us to reflect, on the Sabbath, on the power of the Almighty's arm to deliver us from ignorance and sin and death and eternal unhappiness. And because since the ministry of the Messiah the Sabbath has pointed us to his rise from death, it would be wise for us to reflect, on the Sabbath, on the infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice of Jesus the Christ. President David O. McKay observed: "Our Sabbath, the first day of the week, commemorates the greatest event in all history—Christ's resurrection, and his visit as a resurrected being to his assembled Apostles." [^7] Elder Mark E. Petersen added that "our observance or nonobservance of the Sabbath is an unerring measure of our attitude toward the Lord personally and toward his suffering in Gethsemane, his death on the cross, and his resurrection from the dead. It is a sign of whether we are Christians in very deed, or whether our conversion is so shallow that commemoration of his atoning sacrifice means little or nothing to us." [^8]

Prophetic Counsel

The leaders of the Church have made it abundantly clear that God expects a covenant people to be true to their covenants, including our ongoing promise to properly observe the Sabbath. We cannot expect to avoid the perils that await the ungodly if we are contributors to society's ungodliness and irreverence. Elder George Albert Smith declared the following in a much quieter and more reverent day than our own: "The Sabbath has become the play-day of this great nation, the day set apart by thousands to violate the commandment that God gave long, long ago, and I am persuaded that much of the sorrow and distress that is afflicting and will continue to inflict mankind is traceable to the fact that they have ignored his admonition to keep the Sabbath day holy." [^9] President Spencer W. Kimball stated: "I again would urge upon all Saints everywhere a more strict observance of the Sabbath day. The Lord's holy day is fast losing its sacred significance throughout the world, at least our world. More and more, man destroys the Sabbath's sacred purposes in pursuit of wealth, pleasure, recreation, and the worship of false and material gods." [^10] Also: "Brethren and sisters, once again I call to our attention the fourth commandment given by the Lord to Moses on Mount Sinai. . . . Let us observe it strictly in our homes and in our families. Let us refrain from all unnecessary labors. Sunday is not a day for hunting and fishing, nor for swimming, picnicking, boating, or engaging in any other sports." [^11]

President Benson taught: "I don't believe that it is possible to keep our spirituality on a high plane by spending our Sabbaths on the beach, on the golf course, in the mountains, or in our own homes reading newspapers and looking at television. When the Lord said, 'And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer' (D&C 59:9), that is exactly what He meant. We must have spiritual food.

"Of course you can live a pretty good life out on the golf course on Sunday. But you don't build your spirituality. Probably you could worship the Lord out there, but the fact is you don't do it as you don't worship Him down on the beach. But if you go the house of the Lord you will worship Him. If you attend to your prayers in your home with your family you will worship Him. And your spirituality will be raised. The spiritual food which your body requires will be provided and you are much more apt to have this joy." [^12]

Note the following counsel regarding purchases on the Sabbath:

"We note," President Kimball observed, "that in our Christian world in many places we still have business establishments open for business on the sacred Sabbath. We are sure the cure of this lies in ourselves, the buying public. Certainly the stores and business houses would not remain open if we, the people, failed to purchase from them. Will you all please reconsider this matter. Take it to your home evenings and discuss it with your children. It would be wonderful if every family determined that henceforth no Sabbath purchase would be made." [^13]

"I wish I had the power," President Gordon B. Hinckley said, "to convert this whole Church to the observance of the Sabbath. I know our people would be more richly blessed of the Lord if they would walk in faithfulness in the observance of the Sabbath. . . . There isn't anybody in this Church who has to buy furniture on Sunday. There really isn't. There isn't anybody in this Church who has to buy a new automobile on Sunday, is there? No. There isn't anybody in this Church who, with a little care and planning, has to buy groceries on Sunday. . . . You don't need to make Sunday a day of merchandising. . . . I don't think we need to patronize the ordinary business merchants on the Sabbath day. Why do they stay open? To get customers. Who are those customers? Well, they are not all nonmembers of this Church. You know that and I know that." [^14]

Note the counsel from President James E. Faust: "Over a lifetime of observation, it is clear to me that the farmer who observes the Sabbath day seems to get more done on his farm than he would if he worked seven days. The mechanic will be able to turn out more and better products in six days than in seven. The doctor, the lawyer, the dentist, the scientist will accomplish more by trying to rest on the Sabbath than if he tries to utilize every day of the week for his professional work. I would counsel all students, if they can, to arrange their schedules so that they do not study on the Sabbath. If students and other seekers after truth will do this, their minds will be quickened and the infinite Spirit will lead them to the verities they wish to learn. This is because God has hallowed his day and blessed it as a perpetual covenant of faithfulness." [^15]

Conclusion

We live in a rapidly decaying world, in a society that is taking the most direct route to destruction. Because we cannot afford to partake of worldliness, we must seek to do all in our power to acquire and cultivate holiness. "Be ye holy," we have been told, "for I [the Lord] am holy" (1 Peter 1:16; see also Leviticus 11:44). More specifically, "Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the Lord" (Leviticus 19:30). "But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting"—that is, our hungering and thirsting after righteousness—"may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full. Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer" (D&C 59:12-14).

One sign and witness to God and to all men and women that we are eager to keep ourselves unspotted from the vices of the world is our willingness to keep the Sabbath day holy. It is a token of holiness, a visible symbol of our desire to honor Jehovah, even he who established the Sabbath, "the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth" (Alma 11:39). I have a conviction if we strive daily to draw near unto God—through brief but consistent scripture study, pondering, and prayer—that the Sabbath will indeed become the spiritual highlight and capstone of our week, the culmination of a diligent quest for holiness and peace. We thereby qualify for the cleansing and motivating power of the Holy Spirit in our lives and thus enter into the rest of the Lord. The Holy One becomes our God and we become his people, a people of covenant.

Notes

From The Ten Commandments for Today, ed. John G. Scott (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1997), 67-77.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dallin H. Oaks, The Lord's Way (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1991), 16-17; see also page 19.
[^3] Malcolm Muggeridge, Jesus: The Man Who Lives (New York: Harper & Row, 1975), 20.
[^4] Ibid., 19-20.
[^7] Wilford Woodruff, in George Q. Cannon, A String of Pearls (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1882), 85.
[^8] Lectures on Faith, 7:3.
[^9] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985), 191-92; emphasis added.
[^10] In Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), 184.
[^11] B. H. Roberts, as quoted by Harold B. Lee in Conference Report, April 1968, 129.
[^12] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 191.
[^13] Ibid., 324.
[^14] Marion G. Romney, Learning for the Eternities (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1977), 7; emphasis added.
[^15] Harold B. Lee, "Be Loyal to the Royal within You," 1973 BYU Speeches of the Year (Provo: BYU Publications, 1974), 91.
