Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 37

Faith and Scholarship

There has never been a time when there was a greater need for disciple-scholars, for persons of faith and intellect. Moral courage. Integrity. Priorities. These are principles of power, anchors that will enable us to make a difference in a world that has drifted from its moorings.

A Hierarchy of Truths

I believe in study. I find great joy in reading broadly and expanding my mind on many subjects. I think we are expected to do that as much as our time and circumstances allow. It is good for men and women to specialize, to focus their attention and efforts on certain disciplines or fields of study, to master the disciplines, to become expert on what the great minds have discovered or uncovered. In short, it is good to be learned (see 2 Nephi 9:29). I am sincerely grateful for noble teachers, both Latter-day Saint and of other faiths, who have motivated me—set me on fire—in regard to the social and behavioral sciences, as well as the ancient world of the Bible. At the same time, I thank God for those great minds whose faith in the true, eternal, but unseen verities has inspired me to prioritize. I have come to know that although ours is a thoughtful faith, one that requires reason as well as revelation, it is often necessary to place our unanswered questions on a shelf, to suspend intellectual judgment while our findings from study manage to catch up with the feelings and impressions obtained from the Spirit of the Lord.

All truths are not of equal worth, nor are they acquired in the same way. "Seeking learning by study," Elder Dallin H. Oaks observed, "we use the method of reason. Seeking learning by faith, we must rely on revelation. . . . Reason is a thinking process using facts and logic that can be communicated to another person and tested by objective (that is, measurable) criteria. Revelation is communication from God to man. It cannot be defined and tested like reason. Reason involves thinking and demonstrating. Revelation involves hearing or seeing or understanding or feeling. Reason is potentially public. Revelation is invariably personal." [^1] Surely we are put here on the earth to learn as much as we can in the sciences, in the arts, in languages, in history and foreign culture, and so on. And, to the degree that we can master some of these fields, we are better able to present the truth understandably and appropriately to more and more people (see D&C 88:78-80).

I have a conviction, however, that some truths matter more than others. It is valuable to know of gravity or the laws of motion, but it is vital to know of the reality of a Redeemer. It is helpful to know the laws of thermodynamics, but it is essential to know how to repent and call upon God, in the name of his Son, for forgiveness. The idea that spiritual truths are of greater worth to our eternal welfare than the field to which we have dedicated our professional lives should not be threatening to anyone, nor should it cause us to be defensive about our own discipline. The perpetuation of eternal truth and the conversion of individual souls must be more important to us than the discovery or dissemination of this or that idea. We are children of God, Christians, Latter-day Saints, and devotees to disciplines, in that order. When we get things out of order we open ourselves to trouble; we begin the gradual dilution of our discipleship.

On the one hand, I am convinced that the restored gospel is robust enough to open itself to rigorous study and analysis. It is commendable when a member of the Church, when confronted by a challenging issue, responds with the simple statement of testimony. Every one of us will be in that position at one time or another. And yet there is a particular power associated with the bearing of testimony informed by adequate study, testimony that represents, in the words of the Apostle Peter, a reason for the hope within us (see 1 Peter 3:15). On the other hand, I refuse to allow my commitment to the faith to be held hostage to the latest fads and trends in the academic world. I cannot, for example, afford to postpone believing in Christ until New Testament scholars of many faiths come to a consensus on what Jesus really did and what he really said. I cannot allow my witness of the Book of Mormon to rest on archaeological evidences in North, Central, or South America, any more than I can prop my faith in the Book of Abraham on what a handful of Egyptologists make of the Joseph Smith papyri. More than forty years ago Hugh Nibley reminded us that "the words of the prophets cannot be held to the tentative and defective tests that men have devised for them. Science, philosophy, and common sense all have a right to their day in court. But the last word does not lie with them. Every time men in their wisdom have come forth with the last word, other words have promptly followed. The last word is a testimony of the gospel that comes only by direct revelation. Our Father in heaven speaks it, and if it were in perfect agreement with the science of today, it would surely be out of line with the science of tomorrow. Let us not, therefore, seek to hold God to the learned opinions of the moment when he speaks the language of eternity." [^2]

Faith in a Day of Unbelief

There are few things more desperately needed in our day than faith—faith in the unseen, or as one astute observer of Christianity has noted, "faith that bridges the chasm between what our minds can know and what our souls aspire after." [^3] Faith is not whimpering acquiescence, not timid and spineless hope for happiness or for pie in the sky in the great by and by. Faith is active. Faith is powerful. Faith is based on evidence, internal evidence, the kind of evidence that men and women acquire who search and pray and open themselves to the Infinite, who refuse to yield to cynicism or arrogance.

Though one need not be simpleminded to have faith, one may need to be simple in his or her approach to life and its challenges in order to enjoy the fruits of faith. How open are we today to simple belief? Just how believing are we? How would we respond to the miracles of days gone by? Malcolm Muggeridge has written: "In humanistic times like ours, a contemporary virgin—assuming there are any such—would regard a message from the Angel Gabriel that she might expect to give birth to a son to be called the Son of the Highest as ill-tidings of great sorrow and a slur on the local family-planning center. It is, in point of fact, extremely improbable, under existing conditions, that Jesus would have been permitted to be born at all. Mary's pregnancy, in poor circumstances, and with the father unknown, would have been an obvious case for abortion; and her talk of having conceived as a result of the intervention of the Holy Ghost would have pointed to the need for psychiatric treatment, and made the case for terminating her pregnancy even stronger. Thus our generation, needing a Saviour more, perhaps, than any that has ever existed, would be too humane to allow one to be born; too enlightened to permit the Light of the World to shine in a darkness that grows ever more oppressive." [^4]

There is a sense in which faith requires us to act in the face of (what the world would consider to be) the absurd. Abraham was asked to put to death his beloved and long-awaited son Isaac, the one hope Abraham had of fulfilling the promise that his posterity would be as numberless as the sands upon the seashore or the stars in the heavens. Jehovah had spoken. Abraham had entered the realm of divine experience, knew the voice of the Lord, and knew that what he had encountered was real. Therefore, when the awful assignment came to offer up Isaac in sacrifice, he obeyed, even though, rationally speaking, there was no way the promises could thereafter be realized. But Abraham, the father of the faithful, had implicit trust in his God, "accounting that God was able to raise [Isaac] up, even from the dead" (Hebrews 11:19). Abraham knew God and he knew his purposes; the finite mind yielded to the Infinite, knowing fully that "whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire." [^5] His leap of faith was prerequisite to his ascent to glory.

Faith and the Will of God

I am surprised by the ways some of us often use the word faith. I hear a missionary in Vienna say: "Come on, Elder, where's your faith? Why, if we had the faith we could baptize this whole city!" I watch with some sorrow as well-meaning but insensitive souls explain to a grieving mother and father that if the family had sufficient faith, their fifteen-year-old daughter, who has struggled with multiple sclerosis for five years, would not be forced to suffer longer. Let us be clear on this matter: Faith is not the power of positive thinking. Faith is not the personal resolve that enables us to will some difficult situation into existence. Faith is not always the capacity to turn tragedy into celebration. Faith is a principle of power, of God's power. We do not generate faith on our own, for it is the gift of God (see Ephesians 2:8). We do not act ourselves into faith, for faith is a gift of the Spirit, given by God to suit his purposes and bless the body of Christ, the Church.

C. S. Lewis wisely remarked: "We must not encourage in ourselves or others any tendency to work up a subjective state which, if we succeeded, we should describe as 'faith,' with the idea that this will somehow insure the granting of our prayer. We have probably all done this as children. But the state of mind which desperate desire working on a strong imagination can manufacture is not faith in the Christian sense. It is a feat of psychological gymnastics." [^6]

People act in faith when they act according to the will of God. To say that another way, I have sufficient faith to move Mount Timpanogos to the middle of Utah Lake only when I know that the Lord wants it moved! I have faith or power to touch the hearts of men and women with my testimony of the truth only when they are prepared and readied for the word. Even the Master could not perform miracles in the midst of a people steeped in spiritual indifference. "A prophet is not without honour," Jesus said in speaking of his own reception in Nazareth, "save in his own country, and in his own house. And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief" (Matthew 13:57-58; emphasis added). Similarly, the prophet-leader Mormon loved his people and poured out his soul in prayer in their behalf; "nevertheless, it was without faith, because of the hardness of their hearts" (Mormon 3:12). Someone watching from the sidelines, unaware of what faith really is, might have cried out: "Come on, Mormon, where's your faith?"

Again, acting by faith is acting according to the will of the Lord. I remember very well one warm June evening in Louisiana, only a few months after I had returned from my mission, sitting with my mom and dad, watching television. The phone rang, and my father and I were quickly summoned to the hospital to give a priesthood blessing to someone. A sixteen-year-old boy, a friend of my younger sister, had suddenly collapsed on the softball field and had been rushed to the hospital. He had been diagnosed as having a rare degenerative nerve disease, and my father was told that if something didn't happen soon he would die. We rushed to the hospital, took the elevator to the fifth floor, and hurried through the doors that opened to the waiting room. We were greeted by the weeping and sorrow of family members; the young man had died. We did our best to console them and then made our way home. As we walked in the back door my sister asked, "How is he?" I answered that her friend had passed away. She came right back with: "Well, why didn't you raise him from the dead?" Being the seasoned and experienced returned missionary that I was, having most all of the answers to life's questions, I stuttered for a second and then turned to my father: "Yeah, why didn't we raise him from the dead?" Dad's answer was kindly but firm. It was also extremely instructive: "Because the Spirit of the Lord didn't prompt us to do so," he said. In the years that followed, I came to know something about my dad's faith: he had been with his father when in fact the Spirit had prompted and the dead had been raised to life again. He knew when to move and when not to move. He had faith.

Let me share another story. Wilford Woodruff was traveling to Zion to assume his new assignment to the Quorum of the Twelve. On the journey his wife Phoebe was overcome with a high fever and lay upon the point of death. "I alighted at a house," Brother Woodruff wrote, "and carried my wife and her bed into it, with a determination to tarry there until she either recovered her health, or passed away. This was on Sunday morning, December 2nd.

"After getting my wife and things into the house and wood provided to keep up a fire, I employed my time in taking care of her. It looked as though she had but a short time to live.

"She called me to her bedside in the evening and said she felt as though a few moments more would end her existence in this life. She manifested great confidence in the cause she had embraced, and exhorted me to have confidence in God and keep his commandments.

"To all appearances, she was dying. I laid hands upon her and prayed for her, and she soon revived and slept some during the night.

"December 3rd found my wife very low. I spent the day taking care of her. . . . She seemed to be gradually sinking, and in the evening her spirit apparently left her body, and she was dead.

"The sisters gathered around her body, weeping, while I stood looking at her in sorrow. The spirit and power of God began to rest upon me until, for the first time during her sickness, faith filled my soul, although she lay before me as one dead.

"I had some oil that was consecrated for my anointing while in Kirtland. . . . I then bowed down before the Lord and prayed for the life of my companion, and I anointed her body with the oil in the name of the Lord. I laid my hands upon her, and in the name of Jesus Christ, I rebuked the power of death and the destroyer, and commanded the same to depart from her, and the spirit of life to enter her body.

"Her spirit returned to her body, and from that hour she was made whole; and we all felt to praise the name of God, and to trust in Him and to keep His commandments.

"While this operation was going on with me (as my wife related afterwards) her spirit left her body, and she saw her body lying upon the bed, and the sisters weeping. She looked at them and at me, and upon her babe, and while gazing upon this scene, two personages came into the room . . . , and told her they had come for her. . . . One of these messengers informed her that she could have her choice: she might go to rest in the spirit world, or, on one condition she could have the privilege of returning to her tabernacle and continuing her labors upon the earth. The condition was, if she felt that she could stand by her husband, and with him pass through all the cares, trials, tribulations and afflictions of life which he would be called to pass through for the gospel's sake unto the end. When she looked at the situation of her husband and child she said: 'Yes, I will do it!'

"At the moment that decision was made the power of faith rested upon me, and when I administered unto her, her spirit entered her tabernacle, and she saw the messengers [go out] the door." [^7]

Joseph Smith taught that working by faith is working by the power of mental exertion rather than physical force. [^8] I am persuaded that the mental exertion of which he spoke is not merely a cognitive exercise but rather a strenuous effort, a spiritual search to know the will of God and then the determination to accept and abide by that will. "Working by faith is not the mere speaking of a few well-chosen words," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written; "anyone with the power of speech could have commanded the rotting corpse of Lazarus to come forth, but only one whose power was greater than death could bring life again to the brother of Mary and Martha. Nor is working by faith merely a mental desire, however strong, that some eventuality should occur. There may be those whose mental powers and thought processes are greater than any of the saints, but only persons who are in tune with the Infinite can exercise the spiritual forces and powers that come from him." In short, "faith cannot be exercised contrary to the order of heaven or contrary to the will and purposes of him whose power it is. Men work by faith when they are in tune with the Spirit and when what they seek to do by mental exertion and by the spoken word is the mind and will of the Lord." [^9]

The Lord asks us to move forward on the path of life on the basis of what has been made known through prophets. We cannot always see the end from the beginning. We cannot always act in the face of the observable or the demonstrable. In many cases, believing must precede seeing. Indeed, the revelations affirm that as we search diligently, pray always, and be believing, all things will work together for our good (see D&C 90:24). We are further counseled to doubt not because we see not, for we receive no witness until after the trial of our faith (see Ether 12:6). This is the nature of the leap of faith, a leap from the safe and the secure to the anticipated and the hoped for (see Alma 32:21). The disciples of Christ are not called upon to proceed wholly in the dark, to leap from the precipice without evidence of deliverance. Rather, we are asked to look through the eyes of faith (see Alma 5:15; 32:40; Ether 12:19), to rely upon the unseen, to trust in the quiet but persistent whisperings of the Spirit, to lean upon the prophetic promises. In the words of President Harold B. Lee, we must "learn to walk to the edge of the light, and perhaps a few steps into the darkness, and [we] will find that the light will appear and move ahead of [us]." [^10]

The Discipline of Faith

This kind of faith may be particularly difficult for one devoted to research and study, one dependent solely on external evidence; it requires that we put first things first, that we not judge the restored gospel—its history or doctrines—by the canons of our own discipline, but the other way around. That is, faithful scholarship does not, as some have naively supposed, entail hiding from the truth or hiding the truth, but rather viewing all things through the lenses of the Restoration. It is only then that we are able to see things as they really are and as they really will be (see Jacob 4:13; D&C 93:24). One of the challenges a serious student faces is to learn the strengths—and thus the limitations—of his or her own field of study, what it can teach us and what it cannot teach us. It just may be that faithful scholarship requires more, not less, mental discipline than scholarship involving the intellect alone. Faithful scholarship requires that we not live a divided or disjointed life, that we not be a psychologist or a historian or a chemist during the week and a Latter-day Saint on Sunday, but that we take the restored gospel seriously and incorporate it into all areas of worthwhile investigation. The Apostasy was long and broad and deep; it made its influence felt in the pure sciences, the social sciences, the arts, literature, and, of course, theology. The Restoration is destined to have an impact not alone in the explication of doctrine and the delivery of divine authority (as vital as those things are) but also in all areas of study. When disciplined minds and creative artists open themselves to the enlightening powers of the Holy Ghost and are imbued with the spirit and power of the restored gospel, learning and discovery and creativity reach beyond the paltry bounds of what has been done heretofore and open us to new vistas of understanding and expression.

Indeed, faith has its own type of discipline. Some things that are obvious to the faithful sound like the gibberish of alien tongues to the faithless. The discipline of faith, the concentrated and consecrated effort to become single to God, has its own reward, a reward that includes the expansion of the mind. Such persons come to be filled with light and are able in time to comprehend all things (see D&C 88:67). It is worth considering the words of a revelation given in Kirtland, Ohio. Having encouraged the Saints to call a solemn assembly, the Lord continued: "And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; . . . seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). We note that the counsel to seek learning out of the best books is prefaced by the negative clause "and as all have not faith . . ." One wonders whether the Master did not intend something like the following: Since all do not have sufficient faith—or, in the words of Elder B. H. Roberts, since they have not "matured in their religious convictions" to learn by any other means [^11] —then they must seek learning by study, the use of the rational processes alone. In other words, if all did have the requisite faith, then what? Perhaps learning by studying from the best books would then be greatly enhanced by revelation. Honest truth seekers would learn things in this way that they could not know otherwise.

Could this be what Joseph Smith meant when he taught that "the best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching"? [^12] It is surely in this same context that another of the Prophet's famous yet little-understood statements finds meaning: "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes," he declared, "you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject" of life after death. [^13] "I believe in study," President Marion G. Romney stated. "I believe that men learn much through study. As a matter of fact, it has been my observation that they learn little concerning things as they are, as they were, or as they are to come without study. I also believe, however, and know, that learning by study is greatly accelerated by faith." [^14]

President Harold B. Lee expressed the following to BYU students just weeks before his death: "The acquiring of knowledge by faith is no easy road to learning. It will demand strenuous effort and continual striving by faith. In short, learning by faith is no task for a lazy man. Someone has said, in effect, that 'such a process requires the bending of the whole soul, the calling up from the depths of the human mind and linking the person with God. The right connection must be formed; then only comes knowledge by faith, a kind of knowledge that goes beyond secular learning, that reaches into the realms of the unknown and makes those who follow that course great in the sight of the Lord.'" [^15] On another occasion, President Lee taught that "learning by faith requires the bending of the whole soul through worthy living to become attuned to the Holy Spirit of the Lord, the calling up from the depths of one's own mental searching, and the linking of our own efforts to receive the true witness of the Spirit." [^16]

Learning by faith requires that we be as rigorous in our pursuit of sacred things through the established channels—scriptures, living prophets, personal revelation—as we are in our research and study of secular things. Sometimes members of the Church dismiss outright or at least underestimate the power of the gospel message because they have not paid a sufficient price to plumb the depths of those things God has made known. Elder John A. Widtsoe thus stated that "it is a paradox that men will gladly devote time every day for many years to learn a science or an art; yet will expect to win a knowledge of the gospel, which comprehends all sciences and arts, through perfunctory glances at books or occasional listening to sermons. The gospel should be studied more intensively than any school or college subject. They who pass opinion on the gospel without having given it intimate and careful study are not lovers of truth, and their opinions are worthless." [^17]

Learning by faith seems to entail something else as well. An episode in the Book of Mormon highlights a very important principle. "Now it came to pass," Mormon writes, "that there were many of the rising generation that could not understand the words of king Benjamin, being little children at the time he spake unto his people; and they did not believe the tradition of their fathers. They did not believe what had been said concerning the resurrection of the dead, neither did they believe concerning the coming of Christ." And now note this powerful statement: "And now because of their unbelief they could not understand the word of God; and their hearts were hardened" (Mosiah 26:1-3; emphasis added). Because of their unbelief—their refusal to believe, to accept the true but unseen, to surrender and yield to God—they denied themselves the right to understanding. One who approaches the reading of the Book of Mormon, for example, with a cynical eye is not likely to mine its doctrinal pearls or to gain a witness of its truthfulness; there must be a willful suspension of disbelief, an inclination to accept the truth when confronted with it, an openness to the possibility that something just might be true.

God doesn't ask us to be gullible or to obey blindly. "Of those who speak in his name," President Joseph F. Smith declared, "the Lord requires humility, not ignorance." [^18] Neither ignorance nor blind obedience add strength to the kingdom. Instead, the Omniscient One simply asks of his Saints that they believe, that they be willing to trust in him, in his plan, and in those who direct the destiny of his church. Some knowledge may come by study, but intelligence or the glory of God requires diligence and obedience (see D&C 130:19). In a revelation to President Brigham Young, the Savior explained: "Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear" (D&C 136:32).

Conclusion

I have learned a few things as I have learned a few things over the years. I thank God for the formal education I have received, for the privilege it is (and I count it such) to have received university training and to have earned bachelor's, masters, and doctoral degrees. Education has expanded my mind and opened conversations and doors for me. It has taught me what books to read, how to research a topic, and how to make my case or present my point of view more effectively. But the more I learn, the more I value the truths of salvation, those simple but profound verities that soothe and settle and sanctify human hearts. I appreciate knowing that the order of the cosmos points toward a Providential Hand; I am deeply grateful to know, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that there is a God and that he is our Father in Heaven. I appreciate knowing something about the social, political, and religious world into which Jesus of Nazareth was born; I am deeply grateful for the witness of the Spirit that he is indeed God's Almighty Son.

I appreciate knowing something about the social and intellectual climate of nineteenth-century America; I am grateful to have, burning within my soul, a testimony that the Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820, and that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is truly the kingdom of God on earth. In short, the more I encounter men's approximations to what is, the more I treasure those absolute truths that make known "things as they really are, and . . . things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13; compare D&C 93:24). In fact, the more we learn, the more we begin to realize what we do not know, the more we feel the need to consider ourselves "fools before God" (2 Nephi 9:42).

Those who choose to follow the Brethren, believe in and teach the scriptures, and be loyal to the Church—no matter the extent of their academic training or intellectual capacity—open themselves to ridicule from the cynic and the critic. Ultimately, doctrinal truth comes not through the explorations of scholars but through the revelations of God to apostles and prophets. And if such a position be labeled as narrow, parochial, or anti-intellectual, then so be it. I cast my lot with the prophets. I am one who sincerely believes that education need not be antithetical to conversion and commitment; it all depends on where one places his or her trust. "True religion," Elder Bruce R. McConkie testified, "deals with spiritual things. We do not come to a knowledge of God and his laws through intellectuality, or by research, or by reason. . . . In their sphere, education and intellectuality are devoutly to be desired. But when contrasted with spiritual endowments, they are of but slight and passing worth. From an eternal perspective what each of us needs is a Ph.D. in faith and righteousness. The things that will profit us everlastingly are not the power to reason, but the ability to receive revelation; not the truths learned by study, but the knowledge gained by faith; not what we know about the things of the world, but our knowledge of God and his laws." [^19]

Notes

From an address to Kappa Omicron Nu, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 2 April 1998.

---
Notas:
[^1] Terry Glaspey, Not a Tame Lion (Nashville: Cumberland House, 1996), 160.
[^2] C. S. Lewis, Christian Reunion and Other Essays, ed. Walter Hooper (London: Collins Fount Paperbacks, 1990), 20; see also C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 6.
[^3] Jerry Johnston, "Ideally Speaking," Deseret News, 28 March 1998, E1.
[^4] Glaspey, Not a Tame Lion, introduction.
[^5] See Stephen E. Robinson, Are Mormons Christians? (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991); Craig L. Blomberg and Stephen E. Robinson, How Wide the Divide? (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1997).
[^6] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 10-11.
[^7] C. S. Lewis, Miracles: A Preliminary Study (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 153; see also 148-57; 176, note 1; and C. S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 22.
[^8] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 54.
[^9] Lewis, Miracles, 151.
[^10] See Robert L. Millet, "The Eternal Gospel," Ensign, July 1996, 48-56.
[^11] Gospel Doctrine, 31, 395, 398-400.
[^12] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 92.
[^13] Ibid., 132.
[^14] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 121.
[^15] William W. Wordsworth, Ode on Intimations of Immortality, as quoted in Jack M. Lyon et al., Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996), 62.
[^16] Gospel Doctrine, 12-13.
[^17] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 51.
[^18] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 88; see also Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 60.
[^19] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 62, 75-76.
