Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 38

The Theology of C. S. Lewis:A Latter-day Saint Perspective

C. S. Lewis is widely read among the Latter-day Saints and has had a profound influence on the understanding of Christian doctrine among the members of the Church. I have personally been fascinated by his life and stimulated by his writings and teachings. In no way could I be identified as an expert on Lewis, but if passion for his theology and fond appreciation for his practical religion qualify one to write about him, then I am qualified. Terry Glaspey observed that "one of the surest reasons for Lewis's vast popular appeal was his belief that the ultimate truths of life are not hidden only in the minds of the learned, but what is really most important in life is accessible to all." [^1] Lewis himself noted: "My only function as a Christian writer is to preach 'Mere Christianity' not ad clerum but ad populum. Any success that has been given me has, I believe, been due to my strict observance of those limits." [^2] For this, the LDS people have admired him and, for the most part, embraced his teachings.

A Lay Church and Theological Literacy

Although The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a lay church and sermons in the main worship service on the Sabbath are usually delivered by members of the congregation, a visitor would notice how frequently the talks revolve around scripture and scriptural commentary, with insights frequently drawn from thinkers who represent other faiths. One writer for Salt Lake City's Deseret News found that C. S. Lewis in particular "had been quoted from the [Salt Lake] Tabernacle podium [in the Church's semiannual general conference] almost twenty times in twenty years—more than Thomas Jefferson, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Winston Churchill, Pearl S. Buck—more than any other non-LDS author." He suggested that Lewis's common touch with uncommon ideas is what has endeared him to Mormons. As this writer put it, Lewis is "the one who leans over and speaks into our ear, the friend we can't help but take into our hearts." [^3]

Perhaps a lay church like ours is more prone than other, more traditionally structured Christian churches to adopt and appropriate writings that seek to take otherwise esoteric tenets and reduce them to reachable and memorable concepts. Lewis appears to me to be far more practical than sacramental, far more prone to speak of personal engagement with divinity than to focus on ecclesiastical or liturgical matters. In addition, his popularity in Latter-day Saint culture, as with a broader Christian readership, is no doubt related to the fact that he does not come across as denominational or wedded to any particular religious persuasion. In his adherence to "mere Christianity," he is everyman's preacher, every woman's exegete. He is the thinking Christian's supreme apologist. "He was not a theological liberal, but neither did his views square with fundamentalism." [^4]

One final reason why C. S. Lewis is so well received by Latter-day Saints is found in his broad and inclusive vision of Christianity. Mormons have taken their share of lumps in past decades, especially with the continuing growth of the Church, from those religious organizations who insist that Latter-day Saints are not Christian. That exclusion generally comes through an extremely narrow definition of Christianity, by misrepresentation of Mormonism, or over nonbiblical historical or doctrinal issues. [^5] We resonate to Lewis's words: "It is not for us to say who, in the deepest sense, is or is not close to the spirit of Christ. We do not see into men's hearts. We cannot judge, and are indeed forbidden to judge. It would be wicked arrogance for us to say that any man is, or is not, a Christian in this refined sense. . . . When a man who accepts the Christian doctrine lives unworthily of it, it is much clearer to say he is a bad Christian than to say he is not a Christian." [^6]

Of course, Clive Staples Lewis was not a Latter-day Saint, and I have no intention of contorting him into one. I cannot read his mind, nor can I always know assuredly what he meant by what he said. But then, neither can anyone else who reads him, unless they were intimately acquainted with him during his life. It is not even possible to say, "Well, Lewis must have meant this or that, inasmuch as he was an Anglican," or "Surely Jack intended to convey this or that idea, since he was a defender of the Christian faith." Why not? Because there are parts of Lewis's theology that defy rubric, that are not placed comfortably within any particular religious tradition.

This is, in fact, what makes him so very fascinating to me and other Latter-day Saints. For pages on end, Lewis's insights capture Christians of every denomination, and then—suddenly and without warning, in the next paragraph—he will make this person or that person extremely uncomfortable. This breadth, this inclusiveness, this freshness and distinctiveness—these are the things that endear Lewis to at least one Latter-day Saint. In the remainder of this chapter I will consider the following five doctrinal items from Lewis's teachings and comment on how they are viewed from an LDS perspective: (1) the true myth; (2) surprised by joy; (3) the nature of fallen man; (4) transformation in Christ; and (5) evil and suffering.

The True Myth

One area of study that has seemed especially challenging to the faith of many young Christians proved, ironically, to be foundational to Lewis's acceptance of Christianity. Central to his conversion was his recognition of similarities between mythical patterns in cultures and belief systems throughout the world. The symbols of descent and renascence, the suffering and dying god, rebirth and resurrection are, in his words, "derived (through human imagination) from the facts of Nature, and the facts of Nature from her Creator." Lewis added that "the Death and Re-birth pattern is in her because it was first in Him." [^7] Lewis called such phenomena "good dreams," archetypical occurrences all about us, those "queer stories scattered all through the heathen religions about a god who dies and comes to life again, and, by his death, has somehow given new life to men." [^8] Whereas some challenge the uniqueness of Christianity because of the ubiquity of such myths, Lewis came to acknowledge Christianity as the "true myth," the myth that became history. That is, "Christians are not claiming that simply 'God' was incarnate in Jesus. They are claiming that the one true God is He whom the Jews worshipped as Jahweh, and that it is He who has descended." [^9]

We as Latter-day Saints believe that a plan of salvation—a system of redemption in which God the Father would send his Beloved Son into the world as a Savior—was known to men and women from the beginning and that Christian prophets have taught what we call "Christ's eternal gospel" and have even administered Christian sacraments since the beginning of time. [^10] In overview, Jesus is truly the "Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, as the apostles John and Peter declared" (1 Peter 1:19-20; Revelation 13:8; Moses 7:47). The atoning sacrifice is not only timely (for those of us who regularly need its cleansing powers) but timeless. Though the act of atonement would not take place until Jesus suffered in Gethsemane and on Golgotha in the meridian of time, earth's earliest inhabitants were taught from the beginning to call upon God in the name of his Beloved Son. Mormons take literally the words of the Apostle Peter that "to [Christ] give all the prophets witness" (Acts 10:43).

It is but reasonable in the LDS view, therefore, that remnants of truth, pieces of a much larger mosaic, should be found scattered throughout the world in varying cultures and among diverse religious groups, albeit in some cases in altered or even convoluted forms. Joseph F. Smith, sixth president of the Church, said of those who seek to upstage Christianity that Jesus Christ "is no imitator. He taught the truth first; it was his before it was given to man. . . . If we find truth in broken fragments through the ages, it may be set down as an incontrovertible fact that it originated at the fountain, and was given to philosophers, inventors, patriots, reformers, and prophets by the inspiration of God. It came from him through his Son Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost, in the first place, and from no other source. It is eternal. . . . Men are mere repeaters of what he has taught them." [^11]

And so as a Latter-day Saint I find Lewis's discussion of the true myth to be especially compelling. The "doctrine of death" of a god found throughout the world is, in Lewis's words, "an 'eternal gospel' revealed to men wherever men have sought, or endured, the truth: it is the very nerve of redemption, which anatomizing wisdom at all times and in all places lays bare; the unescapable knowledge which the Light that lighteneth every man presses down upon the minds of all who seriously question what the universe is 'about.'" [^12]

Surprised by Joy

Lewis frequently commented on another divine manifestation in life—the inner longings that men and women so often feel, a sense of divine homesickness, mysterious moments when we feel ill at ease or out of place in this life, not put off by the throes of mortality as much as by mortality itself. He noted that men and women were often "surprised by joy," startled by moments that matter, brief brushes with eternity. "All your life," Lewis pointed out, "an inattained ecstasy has hovered just beyond the grasp of your consciousness." [^13] "If I find in myself a desire which no experience in this world can satisfy," he stated, "the most probable explanation is that I was made for another world. . . . I must keep alive in myself the desire for my true country, which I shall not find till after death; I must never let it get snowed under or turned aside; I must make it the main object of life to press on to that other country and to help others to do the same." [^14]

Lewis is speaking, of course, of our longing for heaven and for heavenly things. Latter-day Saints identify with the sentiment because we have, like others, felt the same longings or homesickness. We look at the situation, however, from a slightly different perspective. Because Latter-day Saints believe in a premortal existence—of a life as spirits before we were born, a time wherein we were acquainted with God—we would agree with Wordsworth that "our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting." [^15] These intimations of immortality also bespeak a memory of what once was, a longing for reunion, reacquaintance, renewal of association. For us, "homesickness" is not figurative but literal. Our souls pine for the home our bodies cannot remember. As early as 1883, one Church leader wrote: "Our knowledge of persons and things before we came here, combined with the divinity awakened within our souls through obedience to the gospel, powerfully affects, in my opinion, all our likes and dislikes, and guides our preferences in the course of this life, provided we give careful heed to the admonitions of the Spirit. All those salient truths which come home so forcibly to the head and heart seem but the awakening of the memories of the spirit." [^16]

The Nature of Fallen Man

As a Christian, C. S. Lewis believed in the reality and in the consequences of the Fall of Adam and Eve. Because of that Fall, death and sin and corruption and decay have entered into the world and encompass us here. Indeed, an acknowledgment of the Fall and of man's fallen nature is indispensable to an appreciation for the Atonement of Jesus Christ. "A recovery of the old sense of sin," Lewis observed, "is essential to Christianity. Christ takes it for granted that men are bad. Until we really feel this assumption of his to be true, though we are part of the world He came to save, we are not part of the audience to whom His words are addressed." [^17] In fact, as men and women come unto Christ and surrender their old selves, they begin to recognize more and more their need for redemption and renovation. "When a man is getting better," Lewis said, "he understands more and more clearly the evil that is still left in him." [^18]

So far as I can tell, however, Lewis did not believe that men and women are punished for what Adam and Eve did or that we individually "sinned in Adam," as the Christian church fathers declared. [^19] Further, he taught that "the doctrine of Total Depravity—when the consequence is drawn that, since we are totally depraved, our idea of good is worth simply nothing—may thus turn Christianity into a form of devil-worship." [^20] Having discussed the nature of the Fall and of fallen man, Lewis went on to say that he would have been misunderstood if anyone described his views "as a restatement of the doctrine of Total Depravity. I disbelieve that doctrine, partly on the logical ground that if our depravity were total we should not know ourselves to be depraved, and partly because experience shows us much goodness in human nature." [^21] Nor did Lewis believe that the human body was to be spurned or despised. "I know some muddle-headed Christians have talked as if Christianity thought that sex, or the body, or pleasure, were bad in themselves. But they were wrong. Christianity is almost the only one of the great religions which thoroughly approves of the body—which believes that matter is good, that God Himself once took on a human body, that some kind of body is going to be given to us even in Heaven and is going to be an essential part of our happiness, our beauty, and our energy." [^22]

Ezra Taft Benson, thirteenth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, stated that "just as a man does not really desire food until he is hungry, so he does not desire the salvation of Christ until he knows why he needs Christ. No one adequately and properly knows why he needs Christ until he understands and accepts the doctrine of the Fall and its effect upon all mankind." [^23] The Latter-day Saints thus view the Fall as a companion doctrine to the Atonement. If there had been no Fall, there would have been no Atonement, and thus the regeneration and glorification that come only through the cleansing power of Christ's blood could not have been extended to humankind.

Thus, for Latter-day Saints, partaking of the forbidden fruit in Eden brought about a "fortunate fall," one that opened the way to far more glorious blessings in eternity. As one early Church leader explained: "The fall had a twofold direction—downward, yet forward. It brought man into the world and set his feet upon progression's highway." [^24] The Latter-day Saints teach that even though we are not responsible or accountable for the Fall of Adam and Eve, we are certainly affected by it—physically, mentally, emotionally, and spiritually. We agree wholeheartedly with Lewis that fallen man is "not simply an imperfect creature who needs improvement: he is a rebel who must lay down his arms." [^25]

The Book of Mormon contains the clearest statements in LDS literature on the doctrine of the Fall and the plight of fallen man. Note the following passages:

"Wherefore, all mankind were in a lost and in a fallen state, and ever would be save they should rely on this Redeemer" (1 Nephi 10:6).

"Men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent.

"For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord" (Mosiah 3:18-19).

"And since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance, and so forth" (Alma 22:14).

In addition, Lewis once stated that "to ask that God's love should be content with us as we are is to ask that God should cease to be God: because He is what He is, His love must, in the nature of things, be impeded and repelled by certain stains in our present character, and because He already loves us He must labour to make us lovable." [^26] The Book of Mormon similarly teaches the self-contradiction of God's trying to save us in our sins rather than from our sins: "What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God" (Alma 42:25). As Brigham Young declared: "It requires all the atonement of Christ, the mercy of the Father, the pity of angels and the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ to be with us always, and then to do the very best we possibly can, to get rid of this sin within us." [^27]

Transformation in Christ

There is so much that could be said in discussing Lewis's thoughts regarding the preeminent place of Jesus Christ. I have been stimulated over the years by Lewis's discussions of Christ's suffering and forsakenness in Gethsemane; [^28] the nature of repentance and how it is that Christ's "advantage" allows him to "pay the debt"; [^29] and his provocative and memorable illustrations of how spiritual rebirth entails more than cosmetic or outward changes in behavior. [^30] The following expression, which Lewis wrote in a letter in 1942, is deeply comforting to the Latter-day Saint while at the same time supportive of our emphasis on the need to "endure to the end": "No amount of falls will really undo us if we keep on picking ourselves up each time. We shall of course be very muddy and tattered children by the time we reach home. But the bathrooms are all ready, the towels put out, and the clean clothes in the airing cupboard. The only fatal thing is to lose one's temper and give it up. It is when we notice the dirt that God is most present in us: it is the very sign of His presence." [^31]

C. S. Lewis boldly refused to accept the impotent position of Jesus as merely a great moral teacher. He is absolutely right: Jesus of Nazareth was either a God or a liar or madman. [^32] "Only two views of this man are possible," he noted. "Either He was a raving lunatic of an unusually abominable type, or else He was, and is, precisely what He said. There is no middle way. If the records make the first hypothesis unacceptable, you must submit to the second. And if you do that, all else that is claimed by Christians becomes credible—that this Man, having been killed, was yet alive, and that His death, in some manner incomprehensible to human thought, has effected a real change in our relations to the 'awful' and 'righteous' Lord, and a change in our favour." [^33]

Let me focus briefly on two aspects of Lewis's treatment of Christ's redemptive work that particularly appeal to Latter-day Saints: first, the balance between divine grace and human action; and second, the ultimate glorification of man in Christ. From my reading of Lewis, I conclude that although there was no question in his mind that salvation was in Christ and that the renovation of men and women's souls was the work of a God, that persons who chose to come unto Christ were expected to be more than grateful and passive observers of the changes taking place within them. "We profanely assume that divine and human action exclude one another like the actions of two fellow-creatures so that 'God did this' and 'I did this' cannot both be true of the same act except in the sense that each contributed a share." He continued: "In the end we must admit a two-way traffic at the junction. . . . We have nothing that we have not received; but part of what we have received is the power of being something more than receptacles." [^34] As Lewis stated elsewhere, "Christians have often disputed as to whether what leads the Christian home is good actions, or faith in Christ. I have no right really to speak on such a difficult question, but it does seem to me like asking which blade in a pair of scissors is most necessary. . . . You see, we are now trying to understand, and to separate into water-tight compartments, what exactly God does and what man does when God and man are working together." [^35]

Latter-day Saints have often been critical of those who emphasize salvation by grace alone, while we have often been criticized for a type of works-righteousness because we give work any significance at all. The Mormons believe that the gospel is, in fact, a gospel covenant. The Lord agrees to do for us what we could never do for ourselves—to forgive our sins, to lift our burdens, to renew our souls and re-create our nature, to raise us from the dead and qualify us for glory hereafter. Whereupon, we strive to do what we can do: have faith in Christ, repent of our sins, be baptized, love and serve one another, and do all in our power to put off the natural man and deny ourselves of ungodliness. In short, Latter-day Saints believe that more is required of men and women than a verbal expression of faith in the Lord, more than a confession with the lips that we have received Christ into our hearts. Without question, the power to save us, to change us, to renew our souls, is in Christ. True faith, however, always manifests itself in faithfulness. Thus, the real questions are not whether one is saved by grace or by works but rather, In whom do we trust? On whom do we rely? (see 1 Nephi 10:6; 2 Nephi 2:8; 31:19; Moroni 6:4).

As Latter-day Saints, we feel that few things would be more sinister than encouraging lip service to God while discouraging obedience and faithful discipleship. On the other hand, surely nothing could be more offensive to God than a smug self-assurance that comes from trusting in one's own works or relying upon one's own strength. What is perhaps the most well-known passage in LDS literature on this delicate matter is found in the Book of Mormon: "For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Nephi 25:23; see also 10:24; Alma 24:10-11). That is, above and beyond all we can do, we are saved by the grace of Christ; salvation is still the greatest of all the gifts of God (see D&C 6:13; 14:7). Further, the more we learn to trust the Lord and rely upon his merits and mercy, the less anxious we become about life here and hereafter. "Thus, if you have really handed yourself over to Him," Lewis wisely remarked, "it must follow that you are trying to obey Him. But trying in a new way, a less worried way." [^36]

The second aspect of Christ's redeeming work found in Lewis's writing, which I want to treat briefly, concerns what God eventually intends to do with us. More specifically, let me turn to Lewis's teachings regarding our becoming like Christ. He wrote in The Problem of Pain that "we are, not metaphorically but in very truth, a Divine work of art, something that God is making, and therefore something with which He will not be satisfied until it has a certain character. Here again we come up against what I have called the 'intolerable compliment.'" [^37]

From Miracles: "Christ, reascending from his great dive, is bringing up Human Nature with Him. Where He goes, it goes too. It will be made 'like him' (Philippians 3:21; 1 John 3:1-2)." Lewis went on to say that eventually those who are redeemed in Christ will have the power to perform miracles, just as Christ did. "Christ's isolation," he continued, "is not that of a prodigy but of a pioneer. He is the first of His kind; He will not be the last." [^38]

From A Grief Observed: "Sometimes, Lord, one is tempted to say that if you wanted us to behave like the lilies of the field you might have given us an organization more like theirs. But that, I suppose, is just your grand experiment. Or no; not an experiment, for you have no need to find things out. Rather your grand enterprise. To make an organism which is also a spirit; to make that terrible oxymoron, a 'spiritual animal.' To take a poor primate, a beast with nerve-endings all over it, a creature with a stomach that wants to be filled, a breeding animal that wants its mate, and say, 'Now get on with it. Become a god.'" [^39]

From The Weight of Glory: "It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you can talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship. . . . There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilization—these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit. . . . Next to the Blessed Sacrament itself, your neighbour is the holiest object presented to your senses." [^40]

And from Mere Christianity: "Century by century God has guided nature up to the point of producing creatures which can (if they will) be taken right out of nature, turned into 'gods.'" [^41]

Being changed in Christ "is not a change from being brainy men to brainier men: it is a change that goes off in a totally different direction—a change from being creatures of God to being sons of God." [^42]

"Now the point in Christianity which gives us the greatest shock is the statement that by attaching ourselves to Christ, we can 'become Sons of God.' Aren't we Sons of God already? Surely the fatherhood of God is one of the main Christian ideas? Well, in a certain sense, no doubt we are sons of God already. I mean, God has brought us into existence and loves us and looks after us, and in that way is like a father. But when the Bible talks of our 'becoming' Sons of God, obviously it must mean something different. And that brings us up against the very centre of Theology. . . .

"We don't use the words begetting or begotten much in modern English, but everyone still knows what they mean. To beget is to become the father of: to create is to make. And the difference is this. When you beget, you beget something of the same kind as yourself. A man begets human babies, a beaver begets little beavers and a bird begets eggs which turn into little birds. But when you make, you make something of a different kind from yourself. A bird makes a nest, a beaver builds a dam, a man makes a wireless set. . . .

"Now that is the first thing to get clear. What God begets is God; just as what man begets is man. What God creates is not God; just as what man makes is not man. That is why men are not Sons of God in the sense that Christ is. They may be like God in certain ways, but they are not things of the same kind. They are more like statues or pictures of God. . . .

"And that is precisely what Christianity is about. The world is a great sculptor's shop. We are the statues and there is a rumour going round the shop that some of us are some day going to come to life." [^43]

"We are not begotten by God, we are only made by Him: in our natural state we are not sons of God, only (so to speak) statues. . . . Now the whole offer which Christianity makes is this: that we can, if we let God have His way, come to share in the life of Christ. If we do, we shall then be sharing a life which was begotten, not made, which always has existed and always will exist. Christ is the Son of God. We shall love the Father as He does and the Holy Ghost will arise in us. He came to this world and became a man in order to spread to other men the kind of life He has." [^44]

"The command Be ye perfect is not idealistic gas. Nor is it a command to do the impossible. He is going to make us into creatures that can obey that command. He said (in the Bible) that we were 'gods' and He is going to make good His words. If we let Him—for we can prevent Him if we choose—He will make the feeblest and filthiest of us into a god or goddess, a dazzling, radiant, immortal creature, pulsating all through with such energy and joy and wisdom and love as we cannot now imagine, a bright stainless mirror which reflects back to God perfectly (though, of course, on a smaller scale) His own boundless power and delight and goodness. The process will be long and in parts very painful; but that is what we are in for. Nothing less. He meant what He said." [^45]

As Latter-day Saints, we perk up and listen carefully to this kind of discussion. One of the tenets of our faith is that human spirits were born sons and daughters of God before this life, and if they will be born again now, they can be empowered and transformed by Jesus Christ, becoming eventually as he is. Elder B. H. Roberts wrote: "The term 'father' carries with it the notion of generation, begetting from one's own person, springing from one's own nature, and partaking of one's own physical and mental qualities and perhaps likeness, but the term 'creator' does not necessarily convey that notion, since a created thing may be external to the nature of the being who created it; as, for example, when God created the heaven and the earth. In this case the heaven and the earth did not bear the image of God; nor was it made in his likeness, as the result was when God said, 'Let us make man in our image, and after our likeness.' So in relation to man; he begets a son or a daughter by act of generation; he is a father; and also, in a sense, a creator." [^46]

We teach and believe that all men and women, like Christ, are made in the spiritual image and likeness of God (Genesis 1:27; Moses 2:27). Through Christ, our physical selves can also become begotten sons and daughters, and so Latter-day Saints feel it is neither robbery nor heresy for the children of God to aspire to be like their Heavenly Father (Matthew 5:48; Philippians 2:6). Transformation comes through the merits of Christ and his Atonement (1 John 5:4-5; Revelation 2:7, 11). Through faith we become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ, the natural Heir (Romans 8:17; Galatians 4:7), thus inheriting all things, just as Jesus inherits all things (1 Corinthians 3:21-23; Hebrews 1:2; Revelation 21:7). In that glorified state we will conform to the image of the Lord Jesus (Romans 8:29; 1 Corinthians 15:49; 2 Corinthians 3:18; 1 John 3:2), be made partakers of his divine nature (2 Peter 1:3-4), and become one with him and with the Father (John 17:21-23; Philippians 3:21).

Although Mormons teach that godhood comes through receiving eternal life in Christ, they do not believe anyone will ever, worlds without end, unseat or oust God the Eternal Father or his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ; those holy beings are and forever will be the Gods we worship. [^47] Even though we believe in the ultimate deification of man, I am unaware of any authoritative statement in LDS literature, despite frequent claims of other faiths to the contrary, that suggests that we will ever worship any being other than God. We believe in "one God" in the sense that we love and serve one Godhead, one divine presidency, each of whom possesses all of the attributes of godhood.

Evil and Suffering

C. S. Lewis was an articulate voice in the centuries-old conversation regarding human suffering and the question of evil. If in fact people choose so poorly, and those choices make such tragic impact on others' lives as they do, why should God allow human agency or choice? Lewis answers that for one thing, "free will, though it makes evil possible, is also the only thing that makes possible any love or goodness or joy worth having. . . . Of course God knew what would happen if they used their freedom the wrong way: apparently He thought it worth the risk." [^48] The inevitable pain and tragedy associated with allowing men and women—even debauched and vicious men and women—to exercise their moral agency was less than the evil of denying such agency and thereby reducing us to something less than human beings. [^49]

For Lewis, suffering "is not good in itself. What is good in any painful experience is, for the sufferer, his submission to the will of God, and, for the spectators, the compassion aroused and the acts of mercy to which it leads." [^50] Suffering is also God's way of getting our attention, Lewis taught, of focusing us on the things of greatest worth, and forcing us to assess the depth and substance of our faith; only then can we learn something about what we are made of and, like Abraham, discover what God already knows about our integrity. [^51] "God whispers to us in our pleasures," Lewis pointed out, "speaks in our conscience, but shouts in our pains: it is His megaphone to rouse a deaf world." [^52] Thus, God's love and goodness to us are eternal in nature and work for the ultimate perfection of our character. That love and goodness may not be readily perceived as kind, for often it is through suffering that the dross is burned out and the soul is refined and purified.

God is not just a "senile benevolence" who delights in everyone moving through life in serene, uninterrupted, fashion, void of challenges and absent of irony. Indeed, the Almighty has "paid us the intolerable compliment of loving us, in the deepest, most tragic, most inexorable sense." [^53] The scriptures attest that Jesus learned obedience by the things which he suffered (see Hebrews 5:8) and that our Lord's personal engagement with temptation and suffering enabled him to be "touched with the feeling of our infirmities" (see Hebrews 4:15). Therefore "if tribulation is a necessary element in redemption, we must anticipate that it will never cease till God sees that world to be either redeemed or no further redeemable."54

Latter-day Saints believe that one of the major purposes of mortality is to learn to overcome, to put things into perspective, to keep our passions and desires within the bounds the Lord has set. Some of the greatest challenges to faith come in the form of pain, abuse, seemingly meaningless suffering, ironic tragedy, and man's inhumanity to man. It is a tenet of the gospel that pain and suffering are an essential part of God's plan, not something we seek out, to be sure, but a vital dimension of mortality. In the midst of enormous suffering in a miserable jail in Missouri, Joseph Smith wrote by way of inquiry: "O God, where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries? Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion toward them?" Within moments he received the divine reply: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment. And then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes." And then, "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he? Therefore, hold on thy way, and . . . fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 121:1-3, 7-8; 122:7-9).

Like Lewis, Latter-day Saints believe that God is all-powerful, that he could prevent all suffering, stop all abuse, remove even the possibility of inhumanity, and erase all pain—but that he will not. In what may be one of the most important addresses on the place of human suffering in the development of an eternal character, President Spencer W. Kimball said:

"If all the sick for whom we pray were healed, if all the righteous were protected and the wicked destroyed, the whole program of the Father would be annulled and the basic principle of the gospel, free agency, would be ended. No man would have to live by faith. . . .

"Being human, we would expel from our lives physical pain and mental anguish and assure ourselves of continual ease and comfort, but if we were to close the doors upon sorrow and distress, we might be excluding our greatest friends and benefactors. Suffering can make saints of people as they learn patience, long-suffering, and self-mastery. The sufferings of our Savior were part of his education." [^54]

I hasten to add that the believing Latter-day Saint is not ascetic. We do not seek out persecution nor glory in pain. "Life is an obstacle course," one LDS philosopher observed. "And sometimes it is a spook alley. . . . And some of our prayers [here in this life] are like the gambler's [request], 'Give me the money I made you promise not to give me if I asked for it.' What does a true friend do in such a case? God will honor our first request, to let us go through it; and He will provide you with . . . the way to make it bearable. More, to make it productive." [^55]

There is one other dimension of the problem of evil and suffering in Lewis that deserves at least brief mention. It is what some Evangelical scholars have begun to call the "soteriological problem of evil." It may be stated simply as follows: If God is good, caring, and omniloving, how can he allow so many of his children to go to their graves without ever having heard of Jesus Christ, the only name under heaven whereby man can be saved (see Acts 4:12)? Some have chosen to take a rather restrictive view of the matter and have concluded that because God is all-wise and all-good and because no one really deserves to be saved anyway, we ought to be forever grateful that a few, relatively speaking, are saved. Others in a similar camp would simply reply that those who have never heard of Jesus were not elected to do so in the grand economy of God anyway. Still others would swing the pendulum toward a more inclusive position and thus open the door to a broader definition of "faith in God" or being in Christ. [^56]

Lewis explained that "those who put themselves in [God's] hands will become perfect, as He is perfect—perfect in love, wisdom, joy, beauty, and immortality. The change will not be completed in this life, for death is an important part of the treatment." [^57] On another occasion he remarked: "Here is another thing that used to puzzle me. Is it not frightfully unfair that this new life [in Christ] should be confined to people who have heard of Christ and been able to believe in Him? But the truth is God has not told us what His arrangements about the other people are. We do know that no man can be saved except through Christ; we do not know that only those who know Him can be saved through Him." [^58]

Further, Lewis said: "There are people (a great many of them) who are slowly ceasing to be Christians but who still call themselves by that name: some of them are clergymen. There are other people who are slowly becoming Christians though they do not yet call themselves so. There are people who do not accept the full Christian doctrine about Christ but who are so strongly attracted by Him that they are His in a much deeper sense than they themselves understand. There are people in other religions who are being led by God's secret influence to concentrate on those parts of their religion which are in agreement with Christianity, and who thus belong to Christ without knowing it. . . . Many of the good Pagans long before Christ's birth may have been in this position." [^59]

In the closing pages of The Great Divorce, there is a fascinating conversation between Lewis and George MacDonald. There Lewis is taught concerning Christ's descent into hell and is told, "There is no spirit in prison to Whom He did not preach." Lewis then asks: "And some hear him?" MacDonald answers: "Aye." Lewis follows up: "In your own books, . . . you were a Universalist. You talked as if all men would be saved. And St. Paul too." MacDonald then delivers a rather complex and difficult response, but one in which he seems to be saying, in essence, that everyone who desires to be saved will be saved. Although we speak rather categorically here of heaven and hell and formulate straightforward criteria for attaining each, from an eternal perspective, far more will be saved than we realize. Lewis did not attempt to correct MacDonald's doctrine for the reader. [^60]

Latter-day Saints take very seriously the obligation to do missionary work throughout the world, in order that every person might be invited to come unto Christ in this manner. And what of those who have died without this opportunity? What of those who never heard Jesus preach? What of those in the first century who never had occasion to hear the testimony of Peter or Nathaniel or Paul? And what of those before or since that day, men and women throughout the earth who have died ignorant of the gospel of Jesus Christ? Are they damned forever by bad timing or poor transportation facilities?

Like Lewis, Latter-day Saints are inclusivists and hold out hope for the unevangelized without giving up the belief that Christ is the only way to salvation. As Latter-day Saints we feel that every person will have the opportunity, either in this life or the next, to receive the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ and enter into the everlasting covenant. We have been taught that between the time of Christ's death on the cross and his rise from the tomb, he went into the postmortal spirit world, preached his message and organized the faithful, in order that the message of truth might be made available to all who are willing to receive it (see 1 Peter 3:18-20; 4:6; D&C 138). But the sacraments or ordinances of the Church are earthly ordinances and must be performed on this side of the veil of death. Thus members of the Church go into holy temples, receive these ordinances, and then return frequently to perform them in behalf of those who have died without them. In short, Latter-day Saints are involved in what some Evangelicals have called "postmortem evangelism." [^61]

Conclusion

My purpose in this chapter has been to explain why we as Latter-day Saints have such a fascination with C. S. Lewis. To put it simply, we admire and quote him frequently for one reason: he touches upon doctrinal matters that are at the heart of much of what we believe. We could certainly explore ideas about which members of the Church would take issue with Lewis—the nature of God, exnihilo creation, the Nicene Trinity, and a few others. And there may also be things about Mormonism that would grind on Lewis, both in terms of doctrine and lifestyle. He once remarked in a letter, for example, that he strongly objected "to the tyrannic and unscriptural insolence of anything that calls itself a Church and makes teetotalism a condition of membership." [^62] But again, that is not the purpose of this chapter. My whole point is that C. S. Lewis is an important religious figure throughout the Christian world, including that of the Latter-day Saints, and that his influence may be broader than many had even supposed. C. S. Lewis is a thinking man's theologian, a writer whose views are crisp and sharp and challenging; his presentation is neither syrupy nor sentimental on the one hand, nor tedious on the other. His discussions are both spiritually satisfying and intellectually enlarging. He himself once described his task and his achievement: "When I began, Christianity came before the great mass of my unbelieving fellow-countrymen either in the highly emotional form offered by revivalists or in the unintelligible language of highly cultured clergymen. Most men were reached by neither. My task was therefore simply that of a translator—one turning Christian doctrine, or what he believed to be such, into the vernacular, into language that the unscholarly people would attend to and could understand." [^63]

In short, as one Latter-day Saint has written, in tribute to this great Christian, "Lewis was able to deal with fundamentals without being fundamentalistic. He sought to revive Christian belief in the minds of men without being revivalistic. In this disposable age of paper plates and paper philosophies which are good for one use only, Lewis insisted that all things had to be tested spiritually, rationally, and experientially before an honest man could give allegiance to them. He believed that Christianity met every test." [^64]

Notes

From an address at the Seventh Annual Wheaton Theology Conference, Wheaton College, Norton, Massachusetts, 16 April 1998.

---
Notas:
[^1] Jeffrey R. Holland, Christ and the New Covenant (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997), 336-37; emphasis added.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 216-17.
[^3] C. S. Lewis, Letters of C. S. Lewis, rev. ed., ed. Walter Hooper (New York: Harcourt Brace & Co., 1993), 365.
[^4] Joseph Fielding Smith, as quoted by Boyd K. Packer, "The Fountain of Life," fireside address at Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 29 March 1992.
[^5] See Stephen E. Robinson, Are Mormons Christians? (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991); Craig L. Blomberg and Stephen E. Robinson, How Wide the Divide? (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1997).
[^6] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 10-11.
[^7] C. S. Lewis, Miracles: A Preliminary Study (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 153; see also 148-57; 176, note 1; and C. S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 22.
[^8] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 54.
[^9] Lewis, Miracles, 151.
[^10] See Robert L. Millet, "The Eternal Gospel," Ensign, July 1996, 48-56.
[^11] Gospel Doctrine, 31, 395, 398-400.
[^12] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 92.
[^13] Ibid., 132.
[^14] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 121.
[^15] William W. Wordsworth, Ode on Intimations of Immortality, as quoted in Jack M. Lyon et al., Best-Loved Poems of the LDS People (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1996), 62.
[^16] Gospel Doctrine, 12-13.
[^17] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 51.
[^18] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 88; see also Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 60.
[^19] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 62, 75-76.
[^20] Ibid., 33.
[^21] Ibid., 59.
[^22] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 92.
[^23] Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), 33.
[^24] Orson F. Whitney and Matthias Cowley,Cowley and Whitney on Doctrine, comp. Forace Green (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), 287.
[^25] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 59.
[^26] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 43.
[^27] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 11:301.
[^28] See C. S. Lewis, Letters to Malcolm: Chiefly on Prayer (New York: Harcourt Brace & Co., 1992), 42, 44.
[^29] See Lewis, Mere Christianity, 59-61.
[^30] Ibid., 165-66, 169-70.
[^31] C. S. Lewis, Letters of C. S. Lewis, ed. W. H. Lewis; rev. and enlarged edition, edited by Walter Hooper (New York: Harcourt Brace & Co., 1993), 365.
[^32] See Lewis, Mere Christianity, 55-56; C. S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory and Other Essays, ed. Walter Hooper (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 105.
[^33] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 21.
[^34] Lewis, Letters to Malcolm, 49-50.
[^35] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 131-32; see also Lewis, Christian Reunion, 18.
[^36] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 131.
[^37] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 38.
[^38] Lewis, Miracles, 178.
[^39] Lewis, A Grief Observed (San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1989), 84-85.
[^40] Lewis, The Weight of Glory, 39-40; emphasis in original.
[^41] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 188.
[^42] Ibid., 186.
[^43] Ibid., 137-40.
[^44] Ibid., 153-54.
[^45] Ibid., 176.
[^46] B. H. Roberts, The Seventy's Course in Theology, Fifth Year (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1912), 47.
[^47] See Parley P. Pratt, Key to Science of Theology, 1978 ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), 22-23.
[^48] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 53.
[^49] See Lewis, Miracles, 234.
[^50] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 98.
[^51] See Lewis, A Grief Observed, 34-35, 49-50; see also Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 90-91.
[^52] Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 83.
[^53] Ibid., 35-37.
[^54] Ibid., 102.
[^55] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972), 97-98.
[^56] Truman G. Madsen, "Human Anguish and Divine Love," Four Essays on Love (Provo: Communications Workshop, 1971), 59.
[^57] For a detailed treatment of this challenging issue, see John Sanders, No Other Name: An Investigation into the Destiny of the Unevangelized (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1992); John Sanders, ed., What About Those Who Have Never Heard? (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1995); Dennis L. Okholm and Timothy R. Philips, eds., Four Views on Salvation in a Pluralistic World (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1996); Clark Pinnock et al., The Openness of God (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1994).
[^58] Lewis, Mere Christianity, 177.
[^59] Ibid., 65.
[^60] Ibid., 178.
[^61] C. S. Lewis, The Great Divorce (New York: Touchstone, 1996),121-22.
[^62] See Gabriel Fackre, "Divine Perseverance," in Sanders, What About Those Who Have Never Heard? 71-95; Leonhard Goppelt, A Commentary on 1 Peter, ed. Ferdinand Hahn (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1993), 253-65.
[^63] Lewis, Letters of C. S. Lewis, 447.
[^64] C. S. Lewis, God in the Dock: Essays on Theology and Ethics, ed. Walter Hooper (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1970), 183; emphasis in original.
