Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 41

Are You a "Saved" Mormon?

Let me reconstruct a rather familiar scene to most of us. We attempt to explain the message of the Restoration to a member of a Protestant church, only to have them remark, "Thank you, but I'm a saved Christian." We recoil or turn off or, I suppose in some cases, are tempted to argue with them about what they mean. Or we may respond as my father did so many times: "Yes, of course, you are saved from the grave." But that's obviously not what they meant. In like fashion, when a Protestant asks us: "Are you a saved Christian?" we are uncertain about how to respond. Generally, even if we do not voice our feelings, we feel the need to emphasize that one is not saved until he or she endures to the end of mortal life.

It is unfortunate that a topic like being saved carries with it so much emotional baggage (and thus so many barriers between us and others of our Father's children) that we are not in a position to communicate even our differences appropriately. Over the years as I have spoken openly with friends or colleagues from other faiths, I have come to appreciate a little better what they are saying. Some mean that they have received in their heart a witness that Jesus is the Christ; that the Savior has forgiven their sins and they are now willing to turn their lives over to him; and that they are now in a saved condition in regard to happiness here and eternal reward hereafter. I know there are people out there who feel that once they profess Jesus with their lips they are saved forevermore and that what they do thereafter with their lives in terms of goodness and morality is immaterial. Yes, there are such people, but I don't know many of them. Most of those Protestants who I grew up with and most of the ministers and theologians I have encountered since then really do see a very close tie between their saved condition and a righteous, God-fearing life. Those who are serious students of the New Testament understand the central message of the second chapter of James—that good works flow from the regenerate heart, that righteousness evidences true faith.

I want to begin this chapter with a clear statement of witness—that there was an Apostasy, a loss of plain and precious truths, a loss of priesthood authority. I know that God began the Restoration of truths and powers through Joseph Smith and will continue to do so into and through the Millennium. There's no question in my mind about any of that. But I want to suggest that because the Baptists or the Methodists or the Pentecostals do not possess the authority to act in the name of God does not mean that they have no truth or that any scriptural interpretation from them is automatically incorrect or corrupt. Though the fulness of the gospel is to be found in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, remnants of truth, elements of enlightenment, and aspects of the original faith of the former-day Saints may be found in modern Christianity. More specifically, I would like to propose a sense in which Latter-day Saint theology encompasses the notion of being saved, here and now, in this life. Before doing so, I want to discuss several related concepts.

Redemption

It is often the case that the scriptures may be understood on many levels. Words and phrases and doctrinal concepts may mean a number of things, depending upon the context, the audience, and the need at the time. For this reason, it is seldom wise to be overly zealous about exclusive definitions, singular interpretations, and formulas when it comes to comprehending holy writ. We have this principle illustrated in Moroni's recitation to Joseph Smith of the prophecy of Malachi concerning the coming of Elijah. In the midst of quoting numerous passages from the Old and New Testaments, Moroni quoted Malachi 4:5-6 quite differently from how it appears in the King James Version. Did this new rendition invalidate the old one? Are the renditions in our present Bibles inaccurate, or does Moroni's account simply represent another dimension of the prophecy? Knowing full well what Moroni had said in 1823, Joseph the Prophet, in an epistle to the Church in 1842, quoted the Malachi passage directly from the King James Version. "I might have rendered a plainer translation to this," he said, "but it is sufficiently plain to suit my purpose as it stands" (D&C 128:18).

In addition, many words have both present and ultimate meaning. For example, let us consider the word redeem. We all know that the ultimate form of redemption is salvation or exaltation in the highest degree of the celestial kingdom. Abinadi taught that Christ has redeemed us in that he has "granted salvation unto his people" (Mosiah 15:18). He spoke of the conditional aspect of redemption when he stated that "the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sins . . . that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them. . . . For salvation cometh to none such; for the Lord hath redeemed none such; yea, neither can the Lord redeem such" (Mosiah 15:26-27). In another vein, all men and women are redeemed in the sense that the spirit and the body of every mortal shall be inseparably joined. We know that "through the redemption which is made for [us] is brought to pass the redemption from the dead. And the spirit and the body are the soul of man. . . . And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth all things" (D&C 88:14-15, 17).

Moroni testified that God had "created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man. And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord." Now note Moroni's broad definition of redemption, one in which all men and women have part: "Yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; . . . and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is temporal death" (Mormon 9:12-13; emphasis added; compare Helaman 14:17). Further, the sons of perdition are "the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath" (D&C 76:38), meaning the only ones who shall be resurrected but not redeemed unto a kingdom of glory.

But what of our being redeemed in this life? Simply stated, forgiveness of sin entails redemption from sin. Christ came to redeem us from sin by virtue of his atoning blood, through the receipt of sacred ordinances, and by the medium of the Holy Spirit (see Alma 5:21; 9:27). Just prior to his death, father Lehi exulted: "The Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell; I have beheld his glory, and I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love" (2 Nephi 1:15). That is, Lehi had been forgiven of his sins, had through the Atonement put off the natural man and put on Christ, and had come to know the supernal and sanctifying power of divine love. Christ came into the world, as Lehi explained to Jacob, to "redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil" (2 Nephi 2:26). Because of the knowledge and faith of the brother of Jared, he was redeemed from the Fall and brought back into the presence of Jehovah (see Ether 3:13). After three days of darkness and anguish of soul, Alma the younger declared: "I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit" (Mosiah 27:24). When men and women are born again; when they are changed from their carnal and fallen state to a state of righteousness; when they come alive and are quickened in regard to the spiritual realm—they are redeemed of the Lord, here, in this life. That redemption reaches also to those who die without law (see Moroni 8:22).

On the other hand, Amulek observed: "And [Christ] shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else. Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death" (Alma 11:40-41). In a like manner, Mormon taught that where faith is insufficient among the people to call down the signs and wonders of heaven, "they are as though there had been no redemption made" (Moroni 7:38). Truly, "only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption" (Alma 34:16; see also 42:13). The Savior cannot redeem his people in their sins, only from them (see Alma 11:34-37; Helaman 5:9-10).

Justification, Sanctification, and Sealing

The scriptures are consistent in their declaration that "no unclean thing can enter into [God's] kingdom" (3 Nephi 27:19). In theory there are two ways by which men and women may inherit eternal life. The first is simply to live the law of God perfectly, to make no mistakes. To do so is to be justified—pronounced innocent, declared blameless—by works or by law. If we keep the commandments completely (including receiving the ordinances of salvation), never deviating from the strait and narrow path throughout our mortal lives, then we qualify for the blessings of the obedient. And yet we are very much aware of the terrible truth that all are unclean as a result of sin (see Romans 3:23). All of us have broken at least one of the laws of God, and we therefore disqualify ourselves for justification by law. Moral perfection may be a possibility, but it is certainly not a probability. Jesus alone trod that path. "Therefore," Paul observed, "by the deeds of the law"—meaning the law of Moses, as well as any law of God—"there shall no flesh be justified in his sight" (Romans 3:20; see also 2 Nephi 2:5).

The second way to be justified is by faith; it is for the sinner to be pronounced clean or innocent through trusting in and relying upon the merits of him who answered the ends of the law (see Romans 10:4; 2 Nephi 2:6-7). Jesus owed no personal debt to justice; the Holy One thus claims of the Father "his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men" (Moroni 7:27). Because we are guilty of transgression, if there had been no Atonement of Christ, no amount of good deeds on our part, no nobility independent of divine intercession, could make up for the loss. Truly, "since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself" (Alma 22:14). Thus He who loved us first (see 1 John 4:10, 19) reaches out to the lost and fallen, to the disinherited, and proposes a marriage. The Infinite One joins with the finite, the Finished with the unfinished, the Whole with the partial, in short, the Perfect with the imperfect. Through covenant with Christ and thus union with the Bridegroom, we place ourselves in a condition to become fully formed, whole, finished.

Now back to our story. In one sense—in the present, in the here and now—we are justified as our sins are forgiven. Whenever we repent or turn away from our evil ways (the Hebrew connotation); whenever we repent or change our thoughts, attitudes and desires (the Greek connotation), we are justified—pronounced clean and free from sin and the demands of divine justice. To be justified by God is to be made clean in spite of one's inability to repay the Master, to be made innocent in spite of one's lack of moral perfection. It is to be acquitted from sin through one's faith in Christ, faith which manifests itself in the works of righteousness (see Romans 2:6-7, 13; Galatians 5:6; Titus 3:8, 14). The Lord Jesus compensates for the chasm between man's simple strivings and God's immutable standards of perfection, between where a man really is and where he must eventually be. Justification is both a journey and a destination, a process as well as a condition. Sidney Sperry thus spoke of being justified as not only a matter of "acquittal" from guilt and sin but also of "being regarded as righteous in a future divine judgment." Brother Sperry noted that "a comparison may be made by reference to a man on an escalator. We anticipate that he will reach a given floor if he stays on the escalator. So a person will eventually be justified"—meaning, fully entitled to enter the Lord's presence—"but may be regarded as being so now, if he retains a remission of sins (Mosiah 4:26) and continually shows his faith in God." [^1]

Another way of saying this is that when we come unto Christ by covenant, the Lord Jesus justifies or exonerates us in the here and now; he treats us now as if we were fully qualified to inherit eternal life. In process of time and as we remain "in Christ," meaning in covenant, his Spirit, the sanctifier, works and labors with our soul, ridding us of filth and dross, transforming our actions and our desires. In short, for now God justifies or ratifies our actions, and the way we know we are approved of God is that He sends forth his Spirit upon us. We enjoy the peaceful assurance that he is pleased with our offering (see D&C 59:23). In time and after we have been proven and tried, we are justified in the sense that our lives, covenants, and ordinances receive the ratifying and certifying approval of heaven.

The same principle holds for being sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. In one sense—in the present, in the here and now—a young couple can go into the temple to be married for eternity, and if they approach that sacred covenant and ordinance reverently and worthily, it could appropriately be said of them that their marriage has been sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. That is, the Holy Spirit of Promise, meaning the Holy Spirit promised to the Saints, the Holy Ghost, was present to manifest his approval and to place a type of ratifying seal upon what took place. That seal is maintained and made sure as the couple remain faithful to their covenants and endure to the end through dedicated service, through trust in and reliance upon Jesus Christ. [^2] Our revelations thus speak of the candidates for exaltation as those who are "overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true" (D&C 76:53).

We are sanctified when the Holy Ghost cleanses and renews our souls. Whereas justification is a decreed change of standing, sanctification is a change of state. "Sanctification is the work of God," one theologian has written, "whereby he sets the believer apart from sin. Sanctification is a practical reality, not simply a legal declaration. Sanctification involves a change in the sinner's character, not just a new standing before God." [^3] Also: "Justification frees us from the guilt of sin, sanctification from the pollution of sin. . . . God not only frees us from sin's penalty (justification), but He frees us from sin's tyranny as well (sanctification)." [^4] Elder Orson Pratt wrote of this purifying process as follows: "Without the aid of the Holy Ghost, a person . . . would have but very little power to change his mind, at once, from its habituated course, and to walk in newness of life. Though his sins may have been cleansed away, yet so great is the force of habit, that he would, without being renewed by the Holy Ghost, be easily overcome, and contaminated by sin. Hence, it is infinitely important that the affections and desires should be, in a measure, changed and renewed, so as to cause him to hate that which he before loved, and to love that which he before hated: to thus renew the mind of man is the work of the Holy Ghost." [^5]

What is true in regard to being justified is equally true in regard to being sanctified. We may in this life be sanctified in regard to certain sinful enticements. We may come to abhor sin (see Alma 13:12; compare 2 Nephi 9:49; Jacob 2:5), shake at its appearance (see 2 Nephi 4:31), and even have no more disposition to do evil (see Mosiah 5:2). But sanctification is a process, one that goes on minute by minute, day by day, and year by year. Of a chain smoker who had after baptism lost all desire for tobacco, it could appropriately be said that he had been sanctified in regard to that particular temptation. Of the divorced woman who had been abused by her former husband but who had through the intercession of divine powers had bitterness and vengeance burned out of her soul, it could rightly be said that she had been sanctified in regard to her feelings. Of the promiscuous man who had come unto Christ and forsaken his past life and who after conversion was no longer driven by lust, it could be said that he had been sanctified.

Sanctification comes in time to those who yield their hearts to God (see Helaman 3:35), to those whose minds are single to the glory of God (see D&C 88:67-68), to those who trust in and seek after the redeeming grace of him who calls his people to holiness. In one sense, we will never be completely freed from the pulls and tug of sin in this life. "Will sin be perfectly destroyed?" President Brigham Young asked. "No, it will not, for it is not so designed in the economy of heaven. . . . Do not suppose that we shall ever in the flesh be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates. . . . I think we should more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death." [^6] Sanctification may be a condition, but it is also a process. "Those who go to the celestial kingdom of heaven," Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained to BYU students in 1976, "have to be sanctified, meaning that they become clean and pure and spotless. They've had evil and sin and iniquity burned out of their souls as though by fire. . . . It is a process. Nobody is sanctified in an instant, suddenly. But if we keep the commandments and press forward with steadfastness after baptism, then degree by degree and step by step we sanctify our souls until that glorious day when we're qualified to go where God and angels are." [^7]

The Rest of the Lord

In reading Alma 13 in context—as a part of a larger sermon—we begin to see that the idea of entering the rest of the Lord is a central theme. The word rest is mentioned in each of the final four verses of the preceding chapter. It is mentioned five times in chapter 13. It would appear that Alma is trying to point out that it is through the atoning blood of Christ and by the power of the holy priesthood that individuals and congregations are prepared and made ready to enter the rest of God. In one sense, a person enters the rest of God in the present, in the here and now, when he or she gains a testimony of the gospel and is brought out of worldly confusion into the peace and security that comes only from God. In this sense, the rest of God is "the spiritual rest and peace which are born from a settled conviction of the truth in the minds of [individuals]." [^8] It is to know the peace of the Spirit, to enjoy the blessing of the Comforter. It is what Jesus promised to disciples when he said: "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest" (Matthew 11:28).

Second, spirits enter the rest of God when they enter paradise, the abode of the righteous in the postmortal spirit world at the time of death (see Alma 40:11-12; 60:13). A third dimension of the rest of the Lord is that which follows the Resurrection and Judgment, as we enter the celestial kingdom and receive exaltation. It is interesting that Mormon, speaking to the members of the Church in his day, uses rest in at least two ways. "Wherefore," he said, "I would speak unto you that are of the church, that are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord"—meaning here in mortality—"from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in heaven" (Moroni 7:3).

There is yet another sense in which the word rest is used in scripture, particularly in the Book of Mormon. This is also the sense in which a modern revelation uses the word:

"And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.

"Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

"And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

"For without this [the power of godliness] no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

"Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

"But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

"Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also" (D&C 84:19-25; emphasis added).

This is a significant scriptural statement. Alma's invitation for the people of Ammonihah to enter into the rest of the Lord is built upon the notion that ancient Israel provoked God and proved unworthy of this blessing (see Alma 12:36-37). Moses desired to make available the highest privilege of the priesthood to Israel—the privilege of seeing the face of God, of coming directly into the divine presence. Of the Israelites, Jehovah said: "I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage" (JST, Exodus 34:2; emphasis added). Here the rest of the Lord is equated with being received into the personal presence of the Lord while the recipients are still mortal.

Perfection

Jesus' call to a higher righteousness, embodied in the Sermon on the Mount, contained the penetrating and poignant statute: "Ye are therefore commanded to be perfect, even as your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (JST, Matthew 5:50). Many months later that same Lord, now resurrected and glorified, commanded his Saints in the Western Hemisphere: "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Nephi 12:48). The directive has been given, the standard set. Nothing short of the ideal can possibly suffice: a being of absolute perfection could ask nothing less of his people.

"Finite perfection," Elder McConkie has written, "may be gained by the righteous saints in this life. It consists in living a God-fearing life of devotion to the truth, of walking in complete submission to the will of the Lord, and of putting first in one's life the things of the kingdom of God." [^9] In one sense, to be perfect is to be complete, whole, mature, fully focused. Only Jesus of Nazareth maintained a perfect walk in this life in the sense that he navigated the strait and narrow without moral detour or transgression; he alone achieved moral perfection and completed mortality without flaw or error. But others have achieved perfection in the sense that they did all that was commanded them, in the sense that they gave themselves wholly to the accomplishment of the will of the Lord. The scriptural record attests that "Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God, as did also his three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth" (Moses 8:27; compare Genesis 6:9). The same is said of Seth, the son of Adam (see D&C 107:43). Further, "there was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil" (Job 1:1).

What do the scriptures mean when they speak of a person being "perfect in his generation"? President Brigham Young declared that "we all occupy diversified stations in the world and in the kingdom of God. Those who do right, and seek the glory of the Father in heaven, whether they can do little or much, if they do the very best they know how, they are perfect. . . . 'Be ye as perfect as ye can,' for that is all we can do tho it is written, 'Be ye perfect as your Father who is in heaven is perfect.' To be as perfect as we possibly can according to our knowledge is to be just as perfect as our Father in heaven is. He cannot be any more perfect than he knows how, any more than we. When we are doing as well as we know in the sphere and station which we occupy here we are justified. . . . We are as justified as the angels who are before the throne of God." [^10]

"Infinite perfection is reserved for those who overcome all things and inherit the fulness of the Father in the mansions hereafter. It consists in gaining eternal life, the kind of life which God has in the highest heaven within the celestial world." [^11] Though you and I cannot enjoy infinite perfection in the present, in the here and now, we can be perfect in the sense that we do the best we can and then rely wholly upon the merits and mercy of our Redeemer (see 2 Nephi 31:19; Moroni 6:4). That is, we can be "perfect in Christ" (Moroni 10:32). It is not that we must become sin-free in this life in order to be saved, though we ever press toward that glorious eventuality. Rather, it is expected that after we sin we return quickly to the light through godly sorrow and repentance. We become perfect in Christ in the sense that we yield to the will of Christ, become one with him through the Holy Spirit, and become whole, fully formed, and complete. In Stephen Robinson's words, "in the new covenant of faith, perfect innocence is still required, but it is required of the team or partnership of Christ-and-me, rather than of me alone. Because Christ and I are one in the gospel covenant, God accepts our combined total worthiness, and together Christ and I are perfectly worthy." [^12]

Salvation

Having dealt with several related concepts, let us finally turn our attention to the matter of being saved. We know, in the words of Joseph Smith, that to be saved is to be placed beyond the power of our enemies. [^13] "Salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him." To be saved is to be conformed into the image of Christ, to become like unto the Prototype of all saved beings. [^14] There is obviously what might be called a limited dimension to salvation—meaning, salvation from the grave, salvation from physical death. All mortals will be resurrected and thus enjoy this aspect of salvation. With but few exceptions, however (for example, see D&C 76:43-44, 88; 132:17), [^15] when the prophets speak of salvation they are referring to the highest of eternal rewards hereafter. Salvation is redemption, exaltation, eternal life, and eternal lives; each of these words means the same thing, but each lays stress on a particular aspect of the saved condition. And so in the ultimate meaning, to be saved is to qualify for exaltation in the celestial kingdom—to be endowed with a fulness of the glory of the Father and to enjoy a continuation of the family unit into eternity (see D&C 132:19).

But now to the question with which we began. Do Latter-day Saints believe that men and women may enjoy the benefits of salvation only in the world to come? Is there no sense in which we may be saved in the present, in the here and now? Though I quickly acknowledge that most scriptural references to salvation seem to point toward that which comes in the next life, we do have within our theology principles and doctrines that suggest a form of salvation in this life. Perhaps the most obvious illustration is when a member of the Church makes his or her calling and election sure to eternal life. As Joseph Smith taught, when we exercise saving faith and demonstrate our willingness to serve God at all hazards, we eventually, in this life or the next (see D&C 14:7; 50:5; 58:2), receive the assurance of eternal life.16

If the more sure word of prophecy comes to us in this life, our salvation is secure or, we might say, fairly secure. In fact, there is never a time in this life when faithful endurance to the end is not required. The scriptures teach that a man or woman may fall from grace and depart from the living God; that even the sanctified must take heed lest they fall (see D&C 20:30-34;124:124); that those who were once enlightened and have tasted the heavenly gift may fall away (see Hebrews 6:4-6); and that "if we sin willfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth"—meaning, the knowledge that we are sealed to eternal life [^16] —"there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins" (Hebrews 10:26). [^17] The Prophet Joseph thus taught in regard to the debate in his own day between the Presbyterians and the Methodists—"once in grace, always in grace" versus "having grace today, falling from it, and being renewed to grace again": "They are both wrong. Truth takes a road between them both, for . . . according to the Scripture, if men have received the good word of God, and tasted of the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, it is impossible to renew them again, seeing they have crucified the Son of God afresh, and put Him to an open shame; so there is a possibility of falling away; you could not be renewed again, and the power of Elijah cannot seal against this sin, for this is a reserve made in the seals and power of the Priesthood." [^18]

Those who have been sealed to eternal life are no doubt fully aware of the fact that they must stay faithful to the end, but even so they know assuredly that if they were to die suddenly, their salvation is secure. Thus they are saved, or, to put it another way, they are living in a saved condition. That may not be exactly what our Protestant brothers and sisters have in mind when they speak of being saved, but it's not far removed. Thus there is a condition or state you and I may attain unto in this mortal life in which salvation hereafter is promised here; the day of judgment has essentially been advanced.

But is there any way to know we are saved other than receiving the more sure word of prophecy? I think there is. That same Holy Spirit of Promise that searches the hearts of men and women, that ratifies and approves and seals ordinances and lives, that same Holy Spirit serves, as Paul indicates, as the "earnest of our inheritance" (Ephesians 1:14). The Lord's "earnest money" on us, his down payment, his indication to us that he will save us is the Holy Spirit. We know that we are on course when the Spirit is with us. We know that our lives are approved of God when the Spirit is with us. We know that we are in Christ, in covenant, when the Spirit is with us. And we know, I suggest, that we are saved when the Spirit is with us. If we live in such a way that we can take the sacrament worthily, hold and use a current temple recommend, and maintain the gift and gifts of the Spirit, then we are in the line of our duty; we are approved of the heavens; and if we were to die suddenly, we would go into paradise and eventually into the celestial kingdom.

The King James Version of 1 John 3:9 states: "Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin." There is a problem here: you know and I know that those who have been born again are not free from sin. But they repent quickly (see D&C 109:21). They move rapidly from the darkness back into the light. As we have stated earlier, the God-fearing live always in a spirit of repentance. President Brigham Young made this important explanation regarding living in a constant state of worthiness: "I do not recollect that I have seen five minutes since I was baptized that I have not been ready to preach a funeral sermon, lay hands on the sick, or to pray in private or in public. I will tell you the secret of this. In all your business transactions, words, and communications, if you commit an overt act, repent of that immediately, and call upon God to deliver you from evil and give you the light of His Spirit. . . . If I commit an overt act, the Lord knows the integrity of my heart, and, through sincere repentance, He forgives me." [^19] Further: "When men truly and heartily repent, and make manifest to the heavens that their repentance is genuine by obedience to the requirements made known to them through the laws of the gospel, then are they entitled to the administration of salvation, and no power can withhold the good spirit from them." [^20] The Joseph Smith Translation of the passage from 1 John reads as follows: "Whosoever is born of God doth not continue in sin; for the Spirit of God remaineth in him; and he cannot continue in sin, because he is born of God, having received that Holy Spirit of promise" (emphasis added).

A modern revelation attests: "But learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come" (D&C 59:23). Indeed, we might ask ourselves the same question the Lord asked Oliver Cowdery: "What greater witness can you have than from God?" (D&C 6:23). Another way of saying this is to state that we are living in a saved condition to the extent that we are living in the light, living according to our spiritual privileges, living in harmony with the knowledge and the blessings we have received to that point. On 15 July 1860 President Brigham Young said:

"If a person with an honest heart, a broken, contrite, and pure spirit, in all fervency and honesty of soul, presents himself and says that he wishes to be baptized for the remission of his sins, and the ordinance is administered by one having authority, is that man saved? Yes, to that period of time. Should the Lord see proper to take him then from the earth, the man has believed and been baptized, and is a fit subject for heaven—a candidate for the kingdom of God in the celestial world, because he has repented and done all that was required of him at that hour. . . .

"It is present salvation and the present influence of the Holy Ghost that we need every day to keep us on saving ground. When an individual refuses to comply with the further requirements of heaven, then the sins he had formerly committed return upon his head; his former righteousness departs from him, and is not accounted to him for righteousness: but if he had continued in righteousness and obedience to the requirements of heaven, he is saved all the time, through baptism, the laying on of hands, and obeying the commandments of the Lord and all that is required of him by the heavens—the living oracles. He is saved now, next week, next year, and continually, and is prepared for the celestial kingdom of God whenever the time comes for him to inherit it.

"I want present salvation. I preach, comparatively, but little about the eternities and Gods, and their wonderful works in eternity; and do not tell who first made them, nor how they were made; for I know nothing about that. Life is for us, and it isfor us to receive it today, and not wait for the Millennium. Let us take a course to be saved today, and, when evening comes, review the acts of the day, repent of our sins, if we have any to repent of, and say our prayers; then we can lie down and sleep in peace until the morning, arise with gratitude to God, commence the labors of another day, and strive to live the whole day to God and nobody else." [^21]

Conclusion

I don't expect that many of us will adopt the terminology of many modern Christians or of those who believe they have been saved at the time they received Jesus into their heart. Nor do I think we should. But it certainly wouldn't hurt us to better understand them. In addition, I am concerned that far too many Latter-day Saints wrestle with feelings of inadequacy, struggle with hopelessness, and in general are much too anxious about their standing before God. Too many worry about qualifying for the celestial kingdom. It is important to keep the ultimate goal in our minds, but it seems so much more profitable to focus on fundamentals and on the here and now—staying in covenant, being true to our promises, cultivating the gift of the Holy Ghost. "I am in the hands of the Lord," President Brigham Young pointed out, "and never trouble myself about my salvation, or what the Lord will do with me hereafter." [^22] As he said on another occasion, our work "is a work of the present. The salvation we are seeking is for the present, and sought correctly, it can be obtained, and be continually enjoyed. If it continues today, it is upon the same principle that it will continue tomorrow, the next day, the next week, or the next year, and, we might say, the next eternity." [^23]

Though we must guard against all forms of pride or self-assurance, we must also avoid the kind of false modesty or doubt that is antithetical to faith; as Joseph Smith taught, doubt—certainly including a constant worry as to our standing before God or our capacity to go where Christ is—cannot co-exist with saving faith. Fear and doubt "preclude the possibility of the exercise of faith in [God] for life and salvation." [^24] If indeed "happiness is the object and design of our existence," [^25] then happiness is something to be enjoyed in the present, in the here and now, not something reserved for the distant there and then. "If we are saved," President Young declared, "we are happy, we are filled with light, glory, intelligence, and we pursue a course to enjoy the blessings that the Lord has in store for us. If we continue to pursue that course, it produces just the thing we want, that is, to be saved at this present moment.And that will lay the foundation to be saved forever and forever, which will amount to an eternal salvation." [^26]

Living in a state of salvation does not entail an inordinate self-confidence but rather a hope in Christ. To hope in our modern world is to wish, to worry, to fret about some particular outcome. In the scriptures, however, hope is expectation, anticipation, and assurance. Faith in Christ, true faith, always gives rise to hope in Christ. "And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal" (Moroni 7:41). To have faith in Christ is to have the assurance that as we rely wholly upon his merits and mercy and trust in his redeeming grace, we will make it (see 2 Nephi 31:19; Moroni 6:4). He will not only bridge the chasm between the ideal and the real and thus provide that final spiritual boost into eternal life, but he will also extend to us that marvelous enabling power so essential to daily living, a power that enables us to conquer weakness and acquire the divine nature. In short, living in a state of salvation is living in the quiet assurance that God is in his heaven, Christ is the Lord, and that the plan of redemption is real and in active operation in our personal lives. It is not to be totally free of weakness, but to proceed confidently in the Savior's promise that in him we shall find strength to overcome, as well as rest and peace, here and hereafter.

Notes

From an address to BYU Religious Education Faculty, 9 September 1994.

1 Sidney Sperry, Paul's Life and Letters (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1955), 176.

---
Notas:
[^1] Will the power of the covenant coerce straying individuals into obedience? We all know that even a merciful God will not violate an individual's moral agency, that he will force no man to heaven. Exaltation in the celestial kingdom is reserved for those who chose to go there, not those who were coerced or manipulated into appropriate behavior. We know that the laws of the everlasting covenant cannot violate the principles of justice or the canons of right and wrong. And yet there seems to be, in the sermons and writings of the prophets, the quiet but soul-satisfying message that the alms of the prayers of the righteous do come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth; that righteous parents' loyalty to their covenants will not be overlooked; that no amount of suffering of the faithful in behalf of their posterity will be for naught; and that there is power, remarkable power in the covenant to save those who will be saved. President Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "Those born under the covenant, throughout all eternity, are the children of their parents. Nothing except the unpardonable sin, or sin unto death, can break this tie. If children do not sin as John says [1 John 5:16-17], 'unto death,' the parents may still feel after them and eventually bring them back to them again." [^12] As Elder Packer suggested, it may be that the oppressive power of evil in these last days is such that it chokes or restrains the proper exercise of agency. One day that will change. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 320-21.
[^2] Isn't the power or spirit of Elijah that which turns our hearts to our deceased loved ones? The spirit of Elijah does indeed point our minds to those who went before, those who laid the foundation for so much of what we now enjoy. Because Elijah came, we feel prompted and impelled to make available the sweet privileges of the gospel covenant to those who were not so blessed. At the same time, Elijah's power and blessings pertain to the living. President Harold B. Lee explained that Elijah's mission "applies just as much on this side of the veil as it does to the other side of the veil. . . . So, the hearts of you fathers and mothers must be turned to your children right now, if you have the true spirit of Elijah, and not think that it applies merely to those who are beyond the veil." [^13] Ibid., 257.
[^3] Isn't is possible that one can stray so far as to forfeit blessings hereafter? Yes, there are limits, not necessarily to God's mercy but the extent to which mercy can temper justice. In speaking of very serious sins, President Joseph F. Smith explained that a person can and will be forgiven if he repents; "the blood of Christ will make him free, and will wash him clean, though his sins be as scarlet; but all this will not return to him any loss sustained, nor place him on an equal footing with his neighbor who has kept the commandments of the better law. Nor will it place him in a position where he would have been, had he not committed wrong." [^14] President Joseph Fielding Smith declared that "children born under the covenant, who drift away, are still the children of their parents; and the parents have a claim upon them; and if the children have not sinned away all their rights, the parents may be able to bring them through repentance, into the celestial kingdom, but not to receive the exaltation." [^15] This is why we teach that prevention is far, far better than redemption. Though we rejoice in the cleansing powers of the blood of our Redeemer, we must, as President Harold B. Lee observed, impress the members of the Church "with the awfulness of sin rather than to content ourselves with merely teaching the way of repentance." [^16] Ibid., 258; emphasis added.
[^4] Doesn't the Prophet Joseph Smith's statement regarding the sealing of righteous parents seem to indicate that the parents' calling and election must be made sure? Reference is in fact made to calling and election in the statement quoted earlier in this chapter. We must, however, keep some things in mind. Latter-day Saints who have received the ordinances of salvation—including the blessings of the temple endowment and eternal marriage—may thus press forward in the work of the Lord and with quiet dignity and patient maturity seek to be worthy of gaining the certain assurance of salvation before the end of their mortal lives. But should we not formally receive the more sure word of prophecy in this life, we have the scriptural promise that faithfully enduring to the end—keeping the covenants and commandments from baptism to the end of our mortal life (see Mosiah 18:8-9)—eventuates in the promise of eternal life, whether that promise be received here or hereafter (see D&C 14:7; 53:7; 2 Nephi 31:20; Mosiah 5:15). "But blessed are they who are faithful and endure, whether in life or in death, for they shall inherit eternal life" (D&C 50:5). Ibid., 320-21; emphasis added.
[^5] Don't we believe that if a person rejects the gospel in this life they will reject it in the world to come? Isn't it true that if one wanders from the fold here they are not likely to return hereafter? Many years ago while working as a counselor, I encountered a single mother who was struggling to rear three teenagers. We had met for several sessions and she seemed to be making some progress in communicating more love and concern to her children. She came in one afternoon particularly pensive. I sensed that something of substance was weighing on her mind and asked if she wanted to talk about it. She said: "I have a big decision to make." She then reminded me that her husband had been killed in an automobile accident exactly one year ago. "What's the dilemma?" I asked. "I need to decide whether to do his temple work," she responded. "Why is that even a problem for you? Didn't you love him?" "Yes," she said. "I adored him. He was a remarkable human being—a terrific father, a loving husband, a Scouter in the community, a little league baseball coach, an all-around great guy." She paused a moment and then added: "But he was not a member of the Church. He was very supportive of me and the children, was a moral and upright man, and didn't smoke or drink, but he never took the restored gospel very seriously." Words of Joseph Smith, 240; spelling corrected and emphasis added.
[^6] Isn't this risky? Won't these kinds of teachings motivate some young people to neglect their duty and "sow their wild oats?" I suppose there will always be those who choose to take license in gospel liberty or who show contempt for the saving grace of our Lord by knowingly violating the laws of God. There is always a risk on that end of the spectrum. There is, however, what I perceive to be a greater risk—that well-meaning, hardworking, and diligent mothers and fathers with straying children may draw false conclusions about themselves and maybe even "throw in the towel" in despair. To such persons, the prophetic word concerning the consummate power of the covenant is like manna to the soul, like living water to parched lips. It may also be the case that such doctrine is often more effectively delivered and applied in more intimate settings. Bruce Hafen has written: "I was surprised on one occasion to hear a senior General Authority tell me something in a private conversation that allowed for greater flexibility on a particular issue than I had expected to hear. I told him how valuable I thought it would be if more members of the Church could hear his counsel, because what is said across the desk can so nicely clarify what is said over the pulpit. He replied that private counsel can be adapted to the attitudes and understanding of the person being counseled. If that same counsel were given publicly to an audience that included individuals of insufficient background or commitment, it might appear to give license to those whose needs require not more flexibility, but less." [^19] Ibid., 241; punctuation corrected and emphasis added.
[^7] Is all of this really fair to those parents who have been successful in rearing their family or to those children who have kept themselves from serious sin? This may be the most difficult question of all. In this case I think it appropriate to be direct and to the point. Stated bluntly, all of us are guilty of sin. All of us are in need of pardoning mercy. All of us fall short of the divine standard. During a long day of debate with his opponents, Jesus delivered the following parable: "A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in the vineyard. He [the son] answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went. And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he [the second son] answered and said, I go sir: and went not. Whether of them twain did the will of his father?" (Matthew 21:28-31). One "may wonder why this story does not include a third son who said, 'I will,' and kept his word. Perhaps it is because this story characterizes humanity, and we all fall short (Romans 3:23). Thus Jesus could describe only two kinds of religious people: those who pretend to be obedient but are actually rebels, and those who begin as rebels but repent." [^20] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 11:215; emphasis added.
[^8] Words of Joseph Smith, 241-42; punctuation corrected.
[^9] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-50.
[^10] Orson F. Whitney, in Conference Report, April 1929, 110; emphasis added.
[^11] See Harold B. Lee, in Conference Report, April 1973, 130.
[^12] See David O. McKay, in Conference Report, April 1935, 116.
[^13] Boyd K. Packer, in Conference Report, April 1992, 94-95; emphasis added.
[^14] Doctrines of Salvation, 2:90; emphasis added.
[^15] Harold B. Lee, Ninth Annual Priesthood Genealogy Seminar-Syllabus 1974, Devotional Addresses 1973 (Provo,Utah: Brigham Young University Press,1974), 530.
[^16] Gospel Doctrine, 374; see also Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), 310-11.
[^17] Doctrines of Salvation, 2:91; emphasis in original.
[^18] Harold B. Lee, Decisions for Successful Living (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973), 88.
[^19] Bruce R. McConkie, address given at funeral service for S. Dilworth Young, Salt Lake City, Utah,13 July 1981, typescript, 5; emphasis added.
[^20] Wilford Woodruff, as quoted in Boyd K. Packer, The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), 206; emphasis added.
[^21] Bruce C. Hafen, The Broken Heart (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1989), 4-5.
[^22] John F. MacArthur, The Gospel According to Jesus (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1988), 167.
[^23] J. Reuben Clark Jr., "As Ye Sow . . . ," address delivered at Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 3 May 1955, 7.
[^24] Joseph F. Smith, "In the Presence of the Divine," as quoted in Messages of the First Presidency, 5:6-7; emphasis added.
[^25] Russell M. Nelson, "Children of the Covenant,"Ensign, May 1995, 33-34; citing Joseph Fielding Smith, in Conference Report, October 1950, 13-14.
[^26] Lorenzo Snow, General Conference address given 6 October 1893, as quoted in Collected Discourses, 4 vols., comp. Brian H. Stuy (Sandy, Ut.: BHS Publishing, 1987), 3:364-65; emphasis added.
