Robert L. Millet, Selected Writings of Robert L. Millet: Gospel Scholars Series ( 2000)

Chapter 42

Securing the Children through the Covenant

There is power, consummate power, in the new and everlasting covenant. That power transcends our finite capacity to fully understand the infinite willingness of God—and his eternal plan—to save all of those who will be saved. We know so little. In a world that presses for fairness, we too often close our eyes to the tender mercies of a loving Savior. The Master demonstrates his infinite mercy, for example, by refusing to condemn those who were ignorant of the gospel message and its requirements (see 2 Nephi 9:25-26; Mosiah 3:11; Moroni 8:22; D&C 137:7-9), including little children who died before the age of accountability (see Mosiah 3:16; 15:25; Moroni 8:8-12, 22; D&C 29:46-47; 74:7; 137:10). He offers the sublime gift—eternal life—to those laborers who join the work in the vineyard in the eleventh hour, the same gift he offers to those who have labored the entire day (see Matthew 20:1-16).

Expanding Our Vision and Our Hope

The Prophet Joseph Smith called upon us to repent of littleness of soul and broaden our horizons. "It is the constitutional disposition of mankind to set up stakes and set bounds to the works and ways of the Almighty." And further, by way of warning, "I say to all those who are disposed to set up stakes for the Almighty, You will come short of the glory of God." [^1] Earlier he had said: "Our heavenly Father is more liberal in His views, and boundless in His mercies and blessings, than we are ready to believe or receive." [^2] He added that "inasmuch as the Lord Almighty has preserved me until today, He will continue to preserve me, by the united faith and prayers of the Saints, until I have fully accomplished my mission in this life, and so firmly established the dispensation of the fulness of the priesthood in the last days, that all the powers of earth and hell can never prevail against it." [^3]

In speaking at a funeral for Judge Elias Higbee on 13 August 1843, the Prophet stated: "Had I inspiration, revelation, and lungs to communicate what my soul has contemplated in times past, there is not a soul in this congregation but would go to their homes and shut their mouths in everlasting silence on religion till they had learned something. Why be so certain that you comprehend the things of God, when all things with you are so uncertain. You are welcome to all the knowledge and intelligence I can impart to you." After thus preparing us for what was to come, he continued: "That which hath been hid from before the foundation of the world is revealed to babes and sucklings in the last days. The world is reserved unto burning in the last days. He shall send Elijah the prophet, and he shall reveal the covenants of the fathers in relation to the children, and the covenants of the children in relation to the fathers." He then referred to the four angels mentioned in Revelation 7, described in modern revelation as "four angels sent forth from God, to whom is given power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; having power to shut up the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness" (D&C 77:8; emphasis added). The Prophet then mentioned "four destroying angels holding power over the four quarters of the earth until the servants of God are sealed in their foreheads, which signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure. When a seal is put upon the father and mother, it secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and mother." [^4]

Howard and Martha Coray recorded that same sermon as follows: "God shall send unto them Elijah the prophet and he shall reveal unto them the covenants of the fathers with relation to the children and the covenants of the children in relation to the Fathers, that they may have the privilege of entering into the same in order to effect their mutual salvation." [^5] Franklin D. Richards recorded the Prophet's words in the following manner: "Judge Higbee would say that covenants either there or here must be made in view of eternity.The covenant sealed on the foreheads of the parents secured the children from falling [and] that they shall all sit upon thrones as one with the godhead, joint heirs of God with Jesus Christ." [^6]

What does this mean? To what degree can righteous parents, fathers and mothers who have entered into and kept sacred covenants, affect and effect the salvation of their posterity? President Brigham Young taught: "Let the father and mother, who are members of this Church and kingdom, take a righteous course, and strive with all their might never to do a wrong, but to do good all their lives; if they have one child or one hundred children, if they conduct themselves towards them as they should, binding them to the Lord by their faith and prayers, I care not where those children go, they are bound up to their parents by an everlasting tie, and no power on earth or hell can separate them from their parents in eternity; they will return again to the fountain from whence they sprang." [^7] We think of the sufferings and pleadings of Alma the elder and his wife and remember the words of the angel to the wandering son: "Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people, and also the prayers of his servant, Alma, who is thy father; for he has prayed with much faith concerning thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth; therefore, for this purpose have I come to convince thee of the power and authority of God, that the prayers of his servants might be answered according to their faith" (Mosiah 27:14).

William Clayton's account of a funeral address by the Prophet Joseph contains the following: "When speaking of the passage 'I will send Elijah the prophet etc.,' he said it should read: 'And he shall turn the hearts of the children to the covenant made with their fathers.'" [^8] We believe that those who are faithful in their first estate come to the earth with certain predispositions to receive and embrace the truth. The Prophet himself declared that those of the house of Israel who come into the Church do so with quiet receptivity to the Spirit of the Lord and an openness to pure intelligence. [^9] Similarly, we have no difficulty speaking of the "spirit of Elijah" that reaches out, touches, directs, and impels individuals to search out their dead and perform the saving ordinances. Why should we have difficulty, then, in accepting the fact that the power of the covenant will reach out, touch, redirect, and impel the wandering sheep? Could it be that that power is indeed the same spirit of Elijah, the spirit that turns the hearts of the children to the covenant made with their fathers?

Elder Orson F. Whitney offered the following powerful commentary on Joseph Smith's words: "The Prophet Joseph Smith declared—and he never taught more comforting doctrine—that the eternal sealings of faithful parents and the divine promises made to them for valiant service in the cause of truth, would save not only themselves but likewise their posterity. Though some of the sheep may wander, the eye of the shepherd is upon them, and sooner or later they will feel the tentacles of divine providence reaching out after them and drawing them back to the fold. Either in this life or in the life to come, they will return. They will have to pay their debt to justice; they will suffer for their sins; and may tread a thorny path; but if it leads them at last, like the penitent prodigal, to a loving and forgiving father's heart and home, the painful experience will not have been in vain. Pray for your careless and disobedient children; hold on to them with your faith. Hope on, trust on, till you see the salvation of God. . . .

"You parents of the wilful and the wayward: Don't give them up. Don't cast them off. They are not utterly lost. The shepherd will find his sheep. They were his before they were yours—long before he entrusted them to your care; and you cannot begin to love them as he loves them. They have but strayed in ignorance from the Path of Right, and God is merciful to ignorance. Only the fulness of knowledge brings the fulness of accountability. Our Heavenly Father is far more merciful, infinitely more charitable, than even the best of his servants, and the Everlasting Gospel is mightier in power to save than our narrow finite minds can comprehend." [^10]

In our own day, Elder Boyd K. Packer has provided a comforting context and reaffirmation for the promise to faithful parents. In discussing the "moral pollution" of the last days, he said: "It is a great challenge to raise a family in the darkening mists of our moral environment. We emphasize that the greatest work you will do will be within the walls of your home,11 and that 'no other success can compensate for failure in the home.'12The measure of our success as parents, however, will not rest solely on how our children turn out. That judgment would be just only if we could raise our families in a perfectly moral environment, and that now is not possible.

"It is not uncommon for responsible parents to lose one of their children, for a time, to influences over which they have no control. They agonize over rebellious sons and daughters. They are puzzled over why they are so helpless when they have tried so hard to do what they should. It is my conviction that those wicked influences one day will be overruled. . . .

"We cannot overemphasize the value of temple marriage, the binding ties of the sealing ordinance, and the standards of worthiness required of them. When parents keep the covenants they have made at the altar of the temple, their children will be forever bound to them." [^11]

Some Questions and Answers

This marvelous doctrine can and should provide hope—a measure of peace and rest and assurance—to all who mourn over their wandering sheep. It is a revealed answer to some of the soul's longings for understanding. And yet there are additional questions that beckon for response. Let's consider some of these questions:

Bruce R. McConkie expressed the following sentiments at the funeral of Elder S. Dilworth Young: "If we die in the faith, that is the same thing as saying that our calling and election has been made sure and that we will go on to eternal reward hereafter. As far as faithful members of the Church are concerned, they have charted a course leading to eternal life. This life is the time that is appointed as a probationary estate for men to prepare to meet God, and as far as faithful people are concerned, if they are in the line of their duty, if they are doing what they ought to do, although they may not have been perfect in this sphere, their probation is ended. Now there will be some probation for some other people hereafter. But for the faithful saints of God, now is the time and the day, and their probation is ended with their death." [^17]

I asked again: "Well, what's the problem? Why don't you do his work?" She then told me that one of her institute teachers had discouraged her from doing so. As I recall, his words went something like this: "Look, he didn't accept the gospel here, and so he won't accept it hereafter. To go to the temple in his behalf would be a total waste of time." I was stunned but attempted to hold my composure, especially because the teacher she quoted was well known in the community, and his word was highly regarded. She then asked what I thought. I said: "Oh, I'd probably take a slightly different approach." "What's that?" she asked. "I would go to the temple and see that his work is done for him this afternoon if I could," I said. I explained that we are simply not in a position to judge, to know what's in a person's heart—what they feel, what they believe, what they know. We do not really understand what constitutes a valid opportunity to hear the gospel, when the witness of the Spirit has been felt, or whether the message of the Restoration was even presented in a manner that was intelligible or truly inspirational. As I recall, she saw to it that her husband's temple work was done for him a short time later.

Amulek did teach that the same spirit or disposition we have in this life will be with us in the world to come (see Alma 34:31-35), and the principle is true enough. Continuing in an evil habituated course makes it awfully difficult to change. But is such impossible? We must never deny another person the opportunity to change. People change here. Why can they not change hereafter? President Joseph F. Smith beheld in his vision of the postmortal spirit world how "the chosen messengers went forth to declare the acceptable day of the Lord and proclaim liberty to the captives who were bound, even unto all who would repent of their sins and receive the gospel." Now note this interesting verse: "Thus was the gospel preached to those who had died in their sins, without a knowledge of the truth, or in transgression, having rejected the prophets" (D&C 138:31-32; emphasis added). This same principle is echoed in the words of President Wilford Woodruff: "I tell you when the prophets and apostles go to preach to those who are shut up in prison, thousands of them will there embrace the Gospel. They know more in that world than they do here." [^18]

So many things can weigh upon the mind and heart of an individual, pressures and challenges and crosses that only God can see and comprehend. Why does a person reject the gospel? Why does a child wander? Can we see the whole picture? Are we in a position to pass appropriate judgment and close the doors to future recovery and reconciliation? I have a conviction that when a person passes through the veil of death all of those impediments and challenges and crosses to bear that were beyond his or her power to control—abuse, neglect, immoral environment, weighty traditions, etc.—will be torn away like a film. Then perhaps they shall, as President Woodruff suggested, see and feel things that they could not see and feel before.

Obviously there are all types and varieties of sin, and some are certainly more serious than others. At the same time, there should be no doubt in any of our hearts that each one of us receives far more of the goodness and grace of heaven than is just. On one occasion I was in conversation with a colleague. We were chatting about life here and the kinds of rewards that can come to us hereafter. I made some offhand and rather flippant comment to this effect: "I just want to get what I deserve." I was startled but instructed by my friend's response: "You had better pray to God that you don't get what you deserve!" Every one of us is and will forevermore be eternal debtors. Indeed, as King Benjamin taught, if we "should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to another—I say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants" (Mosiah 2:21).

Inasmuch as each of us is a recipient of unending and unmerited grace, how can we, in the spirit of Christian charity—or in the attitude of sane discourse—speak of the Lord's pardoning mercy toward wayward children as unfair? Of course it's unfair! It's all unfair! That a pure and innocent man should suffer and agonize over others' transgressions is not fair. That he who had never taken a backward step should tread the winepress alone, "even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:107; 88:106) and thereby descend below all things (see D&C 88:6), is nor fair. That the lowly Nazarene should be subjected to the ignominy and unspeakable torture of crucifixion is definitely unfair. But the plan of the Father is not a plan of fairness, at least as we judge fairness from our limited perspective; it is a plan of mercy. The Father and the Son love us in ways that we cannot comprehend. They will do all that is within the bounds of propriety to save as many of the posterity of Adam and Eve as will be saved. President J. Reuben Clark Jr. spoke of the goodness of our God: "I feel that [the Lord] will give that punishment which is the very least that our transgression will justify. . . . I believe that when it comes to making the rewards for our good conduct, he will give the maximum that is possible to give." [^21]

Conclusion

There is power in righteousness, power that activates God's covenant with his people, power that binds and seals here and hereafter, power that links the children of Abraham, the children of the covenant, together in love and unity. Righteous parents thereby have great positive impact on generations to come. "Ye are the children of the prophets," the risen Lord declared to the Nephites; "and ye are of the house of Israel; and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. The Father having raised me up unto you first, and sent me to bless you in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; and this because ye are the children of the covenant" (3 Nephi 20:25-26; emphasis added).

The pull of the covenant toward righteousness may come from both sides of the veil. The counsel of Elisha the prophet is still timely: "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them" (2 Kings 6:16). My friend and colleague Joseph McConkie told me that his grandfather, Oscar McConkie Sr., said to the family just before his death: "I am going to die. When I die, I shall not cease to love you. I shall not cease to pray for you. I shall not cease to labor in your behalf." President Joseph F. Smith, in a general conference address in April 1916 entitled "In the Presence of the Divine," made the following impressive and instructive remarks:

"Sometimes the Lord expands our vision from this point of view and this side of the veil, so that we feel and seem to realize that we can look beyond the thin veil which separates us from that other sphere. If we can see, by the enlightening influence of the Spirit of God and through the words that have been spoken by the holy prophets of God, beyond the veil that separates us from the spirit world, surely those who have passed beyond, can see more clearly through the veil back here to us than it is possible for us to see to them from our sphere of action. I believe we move and have our being in the presence of heavenly messengers and of heavenly beings. We are not separate from them. We begin to realize, more and more fully, as we become acquainted with the principles of the gospel, as they have been revealed anew in this dispensation, that we are closely related to our kindred, to our ancestors, to our friends and associates and co-laborers who have preceded us into the spirit world. We can not forget them; we do not cease to love them; we always hold them in our hearts, in memory. . . . How much more certain it is and reasonable and consistent to believe that those who have been faithful, who have gone beyond and are still engaged in the work for the salvation of the souls of men, . . . can see us better than we can see them; that they know us better than we know them. They have advanced; we are advancing; we are growing as they have grown; we are reaching the goal that they have attained unto; and therefore, I claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever. For now they see the dangers that beset us; they can comprehend, better than ever before, the weaknesses that are liable to mislead us into dark and forbidden paths. They see the temptations and the evils that beset us in life and the proneness of mortal beings to yield to temptation and to wrong doing; hence their solicitude for us, and their love for us, and their desire for our well being, must be greater than that which we feel for ourselves." [^22]

"Rewards for obedience to the commandments," Elder Russell M. Nelson explained, "are almost beyond mortal comprehension. Here, children of the covenant become a strain of sin-resistant souls. And hereafter, . . . children of the covenant, and 'each generation [will] be linked to the one which went on before . . . [in] the divine family of God.' Great comfort comes from the knowledge that our loved ones are secured to us through the covenants." [^23]

In summary, the Holy One of Israel, who is the Mediator of the Covenant, has extended the promise that when a seal is placed upon a father and mother—a seal that comes through faithfulness to their eternal covenants—their children will be bound to them forever. Even if the children stray for a season, the tentacles of the everlasting covenant will feel after them and they shall, either here or hereafter, return to the fold. We do not fully understand all of the implications of this marvelous promise, but we feel to trust in the ransoming and redeeming power of our Lord who is also our Savior.

"God has fulfilled his promises to us," President Lorenzo Snow explained, "and our prospects are grand and glorious. Yes, in the next life we will have our wives, and our sons and daughters. If we do not get them all at once, we will have them some time, for every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess that Jesus is the Christ. You that are mourning about your children straying away will have your sons and your daughters. If you succeed in passing through these trials and afflictions and receive a resurrection, you will, by the power of the Priesthood, work and labor, as the Son of God has, until you get all your sons and daughters in the path of exaltation and glory. This is just as sure as that the sun rose this morning over yonder mountains. Therefore, mourn not because all your sons and daughters do not follow in the path that you have marked out to them, or give heed to your counsels. Inasmuch as we succeed in securing eternal glory, and stand as saviors, and as kings and priests to our God, we will save our posterity. . . . God will have His own way in His own time, and He will accomplish His purposes in the salvation of His sons and daughters. . . . God bless you, brethren and sisters. Do not be discouraged is the word I wish to pass to you; but remember that righteousness and joy in the Holy Ghost is what you and I have the privilege of possessing at all times." [^24]

As a personal aside, several years ago my wife and I were struggling with how best to build faith in all of our children and how to entice wandering souls back into Church activity. A caring colleague, sensing the weight of my burdens, happened into my office one day and simply asked this question: "Do you think our Heavenly Parents wander throughout the heavens in morose agony over their straying children?" Startled a bit by the question, I thought for a moment and said: "No, I don't think so. I know they feel pain, but I honestly can't picture them living in eternal misery." Then my friend responded: "Ask yourself why they do not do so and it will make a difference in your life." I didn't get much work done the rest of the day because I spent many hours pondering the question. When I arrived home that evening, I asked Shauna to sit down and reflect on the same question. She answered as I did, and then the two of us set about a prayerful quest for the next several days to understand how it is that our Eternal Father and Mother deal with their pain.

In time it began to dawn on us that the Lord knows the end from the beginning, and that, as Joseph the Prophet declared, all things—past, present, and future—are and were with Him "one eternal now." [^25] Perspective. Perspective. That was the answer. God deals with pain through and by virtue of his infinite and perfect perspective. He not only knows what we have done and what we are doing, but he also knows what we will do in the future. If in fact, as the prophets have taught, many who are heirs to the blessings of the covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob will either in time or eternity be reconciled to and reunited with the covenant family, then all we need to do for the time being is to seek, through fasting and prayer, to gain at least a portion of our God's perspective—his omniloving patience, his long-suffering, his ever-open arms—to gain, in other words, even a glimpse of the big picture as God sees it. Such a perspective will not only serve us well in the midst of our sufferings; it will also empower our souls and fashion us into the image of our Master, who is the personification and embodiment of charity or pure love (see Moroni 7:45-48).

And so, because we are mortal, because we are human, because we cannot see the end from the beginning, when a child wanders we fret and ache and sometimes despair. But there is hope smiling brightly before us, hope that springs forth from the elevated perspective provided by the power of the gospel covenant. President Gordon B. Hinckley, in addressing the Saints in Great Britain, said: "May you be blessed, each of you. May there be love and peace and gladness in your homes. I leave my blessing upon you. May there be food on your table, clothing on your backs, shelter over your heads and a sense of security and peace and love among your children, precious children every one of them, even those who may have strayed. I hope you don't lose patience with them; I hope you go on praying for them, and I don't hesitate to promise that if you do so, the Lord will touch their hearts and bring them back to you with love and respect and appreciation." [^26]

"There is never a time," the Prophet Joseph Smith observed, "when the spirit is too old to approach God. All are within the reach of pardoning mercy, who have not committed the unpardonable sin." [^27] And so we pray, we fast, we plead, and we implore. And perhaps most important, we love those who wander, and we never, never give up hope. I testify that there is a God in heaven who is our Eternal Father and that he lives in the family unit; that our Heavenly Father knows us one and all by name and knows, perfectly well, of our sorrows and our soul's deepest longings; that Jesus, as the Good Shepherd, will go in search of the lost sheep; that the gospel covenant is as broad and deep and penetrating as eternity; and that there are righteous forces at work that are beyond our capacity to perceive or comprehend. I know, with all my heart, that "the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man [or woman] availeth much" (James 5:16), and that both in time and in eternity our God shall wipe away all tears (see Isaiah 25:8; Revelation 7:17; 21:4).

We trust in the power of Christ, the Mediator of the covenant, to forgive, to repair, to renew, and to rekindle the gospel light within the hearts of those who stray for a season. And we take comfort in the Master's promise: "Be faithful and diligent in keeping the commandments of God, and I will encircle thee in the arms of my love" (D&C 6:20).

Notes

From an address to Brigham Young University Religious Education faculty, Provo, Utah, 1995.

---
Notas:
[^1] How can the Latter-day Saints justify having additional books of scripture and adding to the Christian canon? The Latter-day Saints show genuine love and concern by taking care of their people. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 56.
[^2] What do the Latter-day Saints really believe about God? Is it true that they believe man can become as God? They strive to build the family unit. Ibid., 61; see also Joseph Smith, The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984), 297-301.
[^3] Do the Latter-day Saints believe that salvation comes through their own works rather than by the grace of Christ? Are they "saved" Christians? They provide for their young people. See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 320-21.
[^4] Are the Latter-day Saints Christian? Or do they, as some have suggested, worship a different Jesus? Theirs is a layman's church. See Adolph Von Harnack, What Is Christianity? (New York: Harper, 1957); Edwin Hatch, The Influence of Greek Ideas on Christianity (Gloucester, Mass.: Peter Smith, 1970); Henry Chadwick, The Early Church, rev. ed. (New York: Penguin Books, 1993), 77, 89-90; Jaroslav Pelikan, Christianity and Classical Culture (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993), 28-29, 74, 84-85, 231-47; Dallin H. Oaks, in Conference Report, April 1995, 112-13.
[^5] They believe that divine revelation is the basis for their practices. Gordon B. Hinckley, Teachings of Gordon B. Hinckley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1997), 236.
[^6] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 370.
[^7] If the fourteen-year-old Joseph Smith did indeed learn of the Father's corporeality in the First Vision, he did not state it specifically in his various accounts of that vision. The Prophet explained in Ramus, Illinois, that "the Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's" (D&C 130:22); that statement was recorded in April 1843. However, the Saints were teaching of God's corporeal nature at least 1as early as 1836. See Milton V. Backman Jr., "Truman Coe's 1836 Description of Mormonism," Brigham Young University Studies 17 (Spring 1977): 347-55; see also Words of Joseph Smith, 60, 63-64.
[^8] See David L. Paulsen, "Early Christian Belief in a Corporeal Deity: Origen and Augustine as Reluctant Witnesses," Harvard Theological Review 83, no. 2 (1990): 105-16; "The Doctrine of Divine Embodiment: Restoration, Judeo-Christian, and Philosophical Perspectives," Brigham Young University Studies 35, no. 4 (1996): 7-94.
[^9] Doctrines of Salvation, 1:12; see also McConkie, Promised Messiah, 166.
[^10] See Stephen E. Robinson, Are Mormons Christian? (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1991), 60-61.
[^11] C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: Macmillan, 1952), 154; see also The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses (New York: Macmillan, 1980), 18.
[^17] Gordon B. Hinckley, in meeting with Religion Newswriters Association, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 14 September 1997; see Ensign, February 1998, 73.
[^18] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 13:56.
[^21] See also Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975), chapter 11; The Holy Temple (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), chapter 2.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 343.
[^23] <%5Ci>Peter, as quoted in Clementine Recognitions III, 34; as cited in Hugh Nibley, Since Cumorah, 2d ed. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co. and FARMS, 1988), 97.
[^24] Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988), 5.
[^25] <%5Ci>First Presidency (President Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund), in Conference Report, April 1907, appendix, 16; as quoted in Howard W. Hunter, That We Might Have Joy (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1994), 59.
[^26] Lorenzo Snow, General Conference address given 6 October 1893, as quoted in Collected Discourses, 4 vols., comp. Brian H. Stuy (Sandy, Ut.: BHS Publishing, 1987), 3:364-65; emphasis added.
[^27] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 220.
