The Epistles of Paul

resurreCTiOn OPTiOns

The resurrection of Jesus has been interpreted as:

The following theories have been proposed to explain the empty tomb and the post-Resurrection appearances of Christ:

Theory

explanation

Jesus’ spirit returned but not his body.

The disciples hallucinated.

probable, but not really necessary.

(Matt. 28:11-15), or (4) Joseph of Arimathea (John 19:38ff.).

that Jesus had risen.

Resurrection God (1 Cor. 15:3ff.).

Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc.

eThiCs fOr wiTnessinG

(1) We are Christians, called by God to honor Jesus Christ with our lives, abiding by biblically defined ethical

standards in every area of life, public and private. This includes our efforts to persuade coworkers and

others to believe the good news about Jesus Christ.

(2) Wherever we live and work, we seek to follow the mandate, motives, message, and model of Jesus, who still

pursues and reclaims those lost in sin and rebelling against Him.

(3) We believe all people are created in God’s image with the capacity to relate to their Creator and Redeemer.

We disdain any effort to influence people which depersonalizes them or deprives them of their inherent

value as persons.

(4) Since we respect the value of persons, we believe all are worthy of hearing about Jesus Christ. We also

affirm the right of every person to survey other religious options. People are free to choose a different belief

system than Christianity.

(5) We affirm the role and right of Christians to share the gospel of Christ in the marketplace of ideas. However,

this does not justify any means to fulfill that end. We reject coercive techniques or manipulative appeals,

especially those that play on emotions and discount or contradict reason or evidence. We will not bypass a

person’s critical faculties, prey upon psychological weaknesses, undermine a relationship with one’s family

or religious institution, or mask the true nature of Christian conversion. We will not intentionally mislead.

(6) We respect the individual integrity, intellectual honesty, and academic freedom of others, both believers

and skeptics, and so we proclaim Christ without hidden agendas. We reveal our own identity, purpose,

theological positions, and sources of information. We will use no false advertising and seek no material gain

from presenting the gospel.

(7) We invite people of other religious persuasions to join us in true dialogue. We acknowledge our

humanness--that we Christians are just as sinful, needy, and dependent on the grace of God as anyone else.

We seek to listen sensitively in order to understand, and thus rid our witness of any stereotypes or fixed

formulae which block honest communication.

(8) As our “brothers’ keepers,” we accept our responsibility to admonish any Christian brother or sister who 377

presents the message of Christ in a way that violates these ethical guidelines.

Maps and Charts.indd 377

1/18/10 4:24:17 AM
