Allen E. Bergin, professor of psychology at Brigham Young University and counselor in the presidency of the BYU Eleventh Stake.

Here in mortality, many people suffer innocently with emotional or mental problems that result from someone else’s bad behavior. A child’s mental and emotional problems caused by physical, emotional, or sexual abuse, particularly at the hands of a parent, can extend well into adulthood.

There are other sources of mental and emotional wounds, as well. Scientists are finding that many psychological disorders are caused by biochemical defects in the body. Drug and alcohol dependencies of infants born to addicted mothers are vivid illustrations. Severe mental handicaps and chronic schizophrenia (or split personality) are yet other examples of conditions caused by biochemical factors that have long-lasting effects on the mind and the body and that are largely outside an individual’s control.

We live in a fallen world, in which environment, biology, or both may work against mental health and normal conduct. Elder James E. Talmage addressed this matter: “To a degree, children are born heirs to the good or evil natures of their parents; the effects of heredity are admitted. Good and evil tendencies, blessings and curses, are transmitted from generation to generation. … The children of Adam are natural heirs to the ills of mortality; but through Christ’s atonement they are all redeemed from the curse of this fallen state.” (The Articles of Faith, 12th edition, Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1924, pages 87–88.)

Thus, we may assume that, because of the Atonement, those afflicted with emotional wounds not of their own making will be relieved of them following death. Being freed of such abnormalities—whether originally induced by biological deficiencies or environmental stresses—is necessary if those who merit entrance into paradise are to enjoy that state of peace and rest. (See Mosiah 3:11; Alma 40:11–14.)

Certainly the Lord is just; he will take into account the fact that some of his children are harmed by the misconduct of others, and he will not allow the sins of others to afflict his children beyond their mortal period of probation.

Of course, this does not mean that those who have the capacity to change are justified doing nothing about the problems passed on to them, rationalizing that they will not be held accountable for their actions. We know that the Lord “cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance.” (Alma 45:16.)

For example, though a person may suffer from homosexual inclinations that are caused by some combination of biology and environment, the gospel requires that he or she develop firm self-discipline and make an energetic effort to change. That many former homosexuals have done so and have become successful in marriage and family life shows that people can overcome such problems and live according to gospel principles—even though it may be difficult to do so.

The same principles apply to a broad array of other problems, including sexual abuse, drug or alcohol abuse, eating disorders, and aggression. Though one cannot expect permanent reform immediately, many people who suffer from emotional or mental problems can make significant progress through a combination of spiritual guidance, professional counseling, and self-effort. Only in extreme cases of mental handicap or insanity is a person incapable of making progress.

It is also important that we be careful not to confuse serious clinical disorders with ordinary human weaknesses. If we had no weaknesses, this life would not be a test for us and God’s plan of salvation would be defeated. The Lord has said, “I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; … for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them.” (Ether 12:27.)

It is by exercising our spirits against both external and internal distress that we become strong spiritually. The Lord does not cause evils such as child abuse, but in order to preserve his children’s agency and accountability, the Lord allows his children to suffer the consequences of the misuse of agency—whether those consequences stem from their own actions or the actions of others.

Still, there is much that a person can do to overcome the effects of such wounds in this life. If we come unto Christ and seek to forgive those who have hurt us, for example, we can achieve relief, at least in part. Indeed, the Lord expects us to learn to forgive those who hurt us. Relieved of the burden of hate, we can then, through the Atonement, gain the strength to live worthily to “at the last day, be restored unto that which is good.” (Alma 41:3.)
