Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Abraham

The history of Abraham, father of the faithful, is found in both the Old Testament and in the Pearl of Great Price (Gen. 11:26 to 25:9; Abr. 1-3). His given name of Abram was changed by the Lord to Abraham, signifying "father of a multitude" (Gen. 17:5). His father, Terah, was an idol worshipper whose attempt to have Abraham slain on the altar of sacrifice was prevented by an angel of the Lord (Abr. 1; TPJS, 260). It is therefore even more significant that Abraham was obedient to the command of the Lord to place his own covenant child, Isaac, on a similar altar (Gen. 22). Of this event the Prophet Joseph said: "The sacrifice required of Abraham in the offering of Isaac, shows that if a man would attain to the keys of the kingdom of an endless life; he must sacrifice all things" (TPJS, 322).

Elder Francis M. Lyman once declared, "Obedience is the first law of God" (CR, Oct. 1899, p. 35). It is because Abraham understood this principle that he prospered. For, declared the Lord, "when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:21). Of Abraham's obedience, Joseph Smith wrote: "Abraham was guided in all his family affairs by the Lord; was conversed with by angels, and by the Lord; was told where to go, and when to stop; and prospered exceedingly in all that he put his hand unto; it was because he and his family obeyed the counsel of the Lord" (TPJS, 251-52). One of Abraham's sterling qualities was his great faith, regardless of the issues involved: "And he believed in the Lord," wrote Moses, "and he counted it to him for righteousness" (Gen. 15:6).

Before he was born, Abraham was chosen to serve the Lord, because he was one of the "noble and great" spirits of pre-earth life (Abr. 3:22-24). He received the Melchizedek Priesthood from the man whose name that priesthood bears (D&C 84:14). He had possession of a Urim and Thummim, given him from the Lord, through which he gained a knowledge of the abode of God, God's galaxy, and our system of stars (Abr. 3). He undoubtedly taught the Egyptians their knowledge of astronomy (TPJS, 251).

The Prophet Joseph saw him in the celestial kingdom (D&C 137:5) and was later informed that Abraham had received his exaltation and now sits on a throne as a god (D&C 132:37). Among the promises given to Abraham were the following: (1) through his ministry the name of the Lord would be known in the earth forever (Abr. 1:19); (2) all members of the Church and kingdom would be of his seed, whether by lineage or adoption (Abr. 2:10; Gal. 3:29); (3) he would become a father of many nations (Gen. 17:2-4); (4) kings would come from his lineage -both earthly and heavenly (Gen. 17:6); (5) the earth would be blessed through his seed (Abr. 2:11); (6) his name would be great among all nations (Abr. 2:9).

See also: Seed of Abraham; Works of Abraham
