Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Offerings of Cain

In an 1841 revelation, the Lord made reference to "the offerings of Cain" (D&C 124:75). The meaning thereof was described by the Prophet Joseph: "By faith in [the] atonement or plan of redemption, Abel offered to God a sacrifice that was accepted, which was the firstlings of the flock. Cain offered of the fruit of the ground, and was not accepted, because he could not do it in faith, he could have no faith, or could not exercise faith contrary to the plan of heaven. It must be shedding the blood of the Only Begotten to atone for man; for this was the plan of redemption; and without the shedding of blood was no remission; and as the sacrifice was instituted for a type, by which man was to discern the great Sacrifice which God had prepared; to offer a sacrifice contrary to that, no faith could be exercised, because redemption was not purchased in that way, nor the power of atonement instituted after that order; consequently Cain could have no faith; and whatsoever is not of faith is sin." (TPJS, 58; italics added.)

"The mere shedding of the blood of beasts or offering anything else in sacrifice, could not procure a remission of sins, except it were performed in faith of something to come; if it could, Cain's offering must have been as good as Abel's." (TPJS, 59.)

Moses tells us that Cain loved Satan more than God and offered his sacrifice unto the Lord as a result of Satan's commanding him to do so. The devil knew it would not be respected by the Lord and thereby Cain would become angry. (Moses 5: 18, 21.) The tragedy of Cain's offering might be summed up in these words: "He rejected the greater counsel which was had from God; and this is a cursing" (Moses 5:25; see also WTP, 99-100).

Thus, an "offering of Cain" might well be any offering made to the Lord that is done without full purpose of heart-without faith (see Moro. 7:6-8). Any such offerings will be rejected by God. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "If faith is not present in religious rites, can we reach any other conclusion, with reference to them, than that whatsoever is not of faith is sin?" (DNTC 3:198.)
