Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Page, John E.

The call of John E. Page to fill a vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles is recorded in a revelation received July 8, 1838 (D&C 118:6). His position within that quorum is again mentioned in a later revelation (D&C 124:129). Page was baptized by Martin Harris's brother Emer on August 18, 1833.

"In May, 1836, he was called to go on a mission to Canada, to which he objected for the reason that he was destitute of clothing. The Prophet Joseph took off his coat and gave it to him, telling him to go, and the Lord would bless him." (Jenson 1:92.) During the two years in which he labored, he baptized over six hundred people. During the persecutions in Missouri, he lost his wife and two children, "who died as martyrs for their religion, through extreme suffering, for the want of the common comforts of life."

He had a tendency to disobey counsel and occasionally found himself at odds with the Prophet and other members of the Twelve. For example, though called to accompany Orson Hyde on a mission to Jerusalem, Page failed to leave American soil. On another occasion he reversed the actions of three members of the Twelve, following their departure from the branch at Cincinnati. His spiritual demise is written in the following words by Andrew Jenson: "Soon after Pres. [Joseph] Smith's death, an advertisement appeared in the Beaver (Penn.) 'Argus,' that Elder John E. Page was out of employment and would preach for anybody that would sustain his family."

Elder Page was disfellow-shipped from the Quorum of the Twelve on Feb. 9, 1846, after which he became very bitter against his former associates and advised the Saints to accept the apostate James J. Strang as their leader. Soon afterwards he left Nauvoo, and after traveling about 120 miles he met a company of Saints coming from Canada. These were advised by Page to accompany him to Voree, Wisconsin, the site designated by Strang as the gathering place. A few were deceived, but the majority continued on to Nauvoo. Page was excommunicated from the Church on June 26, 1846, and died in obscurity near Sycamore, Illinois, in the fall of 1867. (Jenson 1:93.)
