Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Paul

One of the great disciples of the Lord to walk this earth was the Apostle Paul. He is mentioned six times in the Doctrine and Covenants, and the authenticity of his apostolic calling is verified by the Savior (D&C 18:9). In spite of Paul's greatness, the Lord warned against those who claim celestial kinship on the basis of their devotion to specific disciples-including Paul-rather than to the Master (D&C 76:98-101).

The Prophet Joseph compared himself to Paul on several occasions in the scriptures, especially in relation to his commitment to his course in spite of persecution (D&C 127:2; JS-H 1:24). Paul's name even appears in the thirteenth article of faith, as we are reminded of those things to which we ought to cling or after which we ought to seek (Articles of Faith 1:13; Philip. 4:8).

This devoted disciple of the Master is honored for his zealous service to the truth and for his unflinching courage in the face of adversity. His consistent approach was to "straightway preach Christ," the name which he had been chosen to proclaim "before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel" (Acts 9:15, 20). His writings occupy thirteen of the twenty-seven books of the New Testament, and much of his ministry is found recorded in a fourteenth, the book of Acts. Paul sheds sublime light on divine concepts which are spoken of in the Doctrine and Covenants, such as the degrees of glory (1 Cor. 15:40-44; D&C 76; 88:28-32), salvation for the dead (1 Cor. 15:29; D&C 128), and the Fatherhood of God and man's ultimate destiny to become as God (Acts 17:28-29; 1 Cor. 8:5; Philip. 2:5, 6; D&C 132:20, 37).

The Prophet Joseph gave us a description of Paul, with whom he had evidently conversed, or at least seen and heard in vision: "He is about five feet high; very dark hair; dark complexion; dark skin; large Roman nose; short face; small black eyes, penetrating as eternity; round shoulders; a shining voice, except when elevated, and then it almost resembled the roaring of a lion. He was a good orator, active and diligent, always employing himself in doing good to his fellow man." (TPJS, 180.)

Paul's life is summarized in a statement he made near the end of his mortal sojourn: "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." (2 Tim. 4:7-8.) Tradition has Paul being beheaded at Rome, placing him among the martyrs who have given their lives for the sake of Christ.
