Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Phelps, W. W.

Among those who played a dominant role in the early history of the Church was William W. (W.W.) Phelps. In fact, the fruits of his labors are still being enjoyed on a worldwide basis; for each Sunday morning, as the Mormon Tabernacle Choir commences their theme song, "Gently Raise the Sacred Strain" (Hymns, no. 146), the words penned by Phelps decades ago are heard by countless listeners throughout the world. Other favorites such as "Praise to the Man" (Hymns, no 27) and "Now Let Us Rejoice" (Hymns, no 3) were also written by Phelps.

The name of W. W. Phelps initially appears in the Doctrine and Covenants in section 55, which is directed to him and in which he is called upon to assist Oliver Cowdery in "the work of printing, and of selecting and writing books for schools in this church" (D&C 55:4). In a later revelation he is specifically called to be a printer for the Church in the land of Zion-Jackson County, Missouri (D&C 57:11; 58:40).

Later yet he was appointed one of the "stewards" over the revelations which were to make up the Book of Commandments, the forerunner to the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 70:1). On July 20, 1833, his house was attacked by a mob and the printing office destroyed along with the initial copies of the Book of Commandments.

Phelps took an active part in the Church in Missouri, being present when the temple lot at Independence, Missouri, was dedicated by the Prophet. He also took part in the proceedings during the excavation of the Far West temple site. He offered his life as a ransom for the Saints on one occasion and served in a stake presidency along with David and John Whitmer.

This presidency was rejected by the Saints on February 6, 1838, after which Phelps became embroiled in bitterness against the Church. His actions led to his being excommunicated on March 17, 1839. On June 29, 1840, he wrote to the Prophet Joseph and asked for forgiveness and fellowship (HC 4:141-42). In Joseph's reply, he expressed his frank forgiveness in these poetic lines: "Come on, dear brother, since the war is past, for friends at first, are friends again at last" (HC 4:162-64).

Following his return, Phelps was ever loyal and active in the cause of truth. He served on the Nauvoo city council at the time of the martyrdom and was involved in the subsequent legal entanglements. He and his wife were among the first to receive their endowments in the Nauvoo temple, and he later served as an ordinance worker there as well as in the Salt Lake Valley. He labored in various civic and governmental positions in the territory and died a faithful member of the Church on March 7, 1872. (Jenson 3:692-97.)

See also: Shalemanasseh
