Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Pratt, Orson

The earliest mention of Orson Pratt in the Doctrine and Covenants came only six weeks after he was baptized a member of the Church by his brother, Parley. In this revelation the Lord said, "You are my son" and are "called of me to preach my gospel" (D&C 34:3, 5). He was called as one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and is later mentioned as a member of this body (D&C 124:129). His name also appears in a revelation to Brigham Young as one who is called upon to organize a pioneer company (D&C 136:13).

A full listing of his missionary journeys would occupy much space, for he was constantly responding to the charge given him by the Lord in 1830 to "preach my gospel." He crossed the Atlantic Ocean sixteen times in his missionary labors. He had a keen intellect, being much interested in mathematics and astronomy. While crossing the plains with the pioneers, Orson took astronomical and other scientific observations to determine the latitude and longitude of the most prominent places. He published several scientific books and pamphlets, including "Cubic and Biquadratic Equations," and at the time of his death was working on a manuscript titled "On the Differential Calculus, Containing Original Principles."

He was no less a writer in the realm of religion; his prolific pen produced numerous tracts, articles, and books which explained and defended the principles of the kingdom of God. He served as the Church Recorder and Historian from 1874 until his death on October 3, 1881. His service in the Quorum of the Twelve ran from his ordination in the spring of 1835 until his death on October 3, 1881. However, there was an almost six-month period in which he did not serve, which caused a reordering of his status in Apostolic seniority. (CA 1978:106.)

The Deseret News eulogized him as follows: "Orson Pratt was truly an Apostle of the Lord. Full of integrity, firm as a rock to his convictions, true to his brethren and to his God, earnest and zealous in defense and proclamation of the truth, ever ready to bear testimony to the latter-day work, he had a mind stored with scripture, ancient and modern, was an eloquent speaker, a powerful minister, a logical and convincing writer, an honest man and a great soul who reached out after eternal things, grasped them with the gift of inspiration, and brought them down to the level and comprehension of the common mind. Thousands have been brought into the Church through his preaching in many lands, thousands more by his writings. He set but little store on the wealth of this world, but he has laid up treasures in heaven which will make him eternally rich." (Jenson 1:87-91.)
