Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Prayer

One of the earliest admonitions in the Doctrine and Covenants was to "pray always, that you may come off conqueror" (D&C 10:5). Prayerful petitioning of the Lord is mentioned over ninety times in the Doctrine and Covenants and is one of the basic requirements for remaining in touch with spiritual matters. "Prayer is the passport to spiritual power," said President Spencer W. Kimball (CR, Apr. 1973, p. 153). It is a spiritually refreshing pause amidst the pressures of day-to-day living. The Lord taught that we "receive the Spirit through prayer" (D&C 63:64). Prayer is to be part of one's public and private experiences: an audible expression from the lips as well as a silent plea from the depths of one's soul (D&C 19:28; 23:6).

Elder Neal A. Maxwell made the following observations regarding prayer: "Petitioning in prayer has taught me that the vault of heaven, with all its blessings, is to be opened only by a combination lock: one tumbler falls when there is faith, a second when there is personal righteousness, and the third and final tumbler falls only when what is sought is (in God's judgment, not ours) 'right' for us. Sometimes we pound on the vault door for something we want very much in faith, in reasonable righteousness, and wonder why the door does not open. We would be very spoiled children if that vault door opened any more easily than it does now. I can tell, looking back, God truly loves me by the petitions that, in his perfect wisdom and love, he has refused to grant me. Our rejected petitions tell us not only much about ourselves, but also much about our flawless Father." (DSY, 1976, p. 200; see also 3 Ne. 18:20; D&C 109:44.)

Among the ingredients necessary for powerful, prayerful experiences should be the following: (1) Preparation: making sure that one has prepared both the physical setting and one's own mind and spirit for proper petitioning. (2) Personal relationship: endeavoring to visualize the Father with whom one is speaking; establishing a righteous rapport and friendly, yet respectful, relationship with Deity. (3) Pleading: Alma's spiritual success was due to his "wrestling with God in mighty prayer" (Alma 8:10). President Ezra Taft Benson cautioned that "each of us would become disturbed if a friend said the same few words to us each day, treated the conversation as a chore, and could hardly wait to finish it in order to turn on the TV and forget us" (En., May 1977, p. 33). No man should endeavor to either enter nor depart God's presence in haste. (4) Pause: "Part of our worthwhile, urgency prayers today can be a reverent, quiet, listening period," said Elder Marvin J. Ashton (En., May 1974, p. 37). In a celestial conversation, one must listen as well as talk. (5) Proceed: "After making a request through prayer, we have a responsibility to assist in its being granted," admonished President Benson (En., May 1977, p. 33).

If one is to spiritually survive in a world of wickedness, he must be fortified with celestial sustenance. Prayer is one of the basic sources of such eternal nourishment.

See also: House of Prayer; In the Season Thereof
