Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Precepts of Men

The Lord indicated that when the light of the gospel comes to dispel the darkness of sin and ignorance, many will not receive it "because of the precepts of men" (D&C 45:28-29). Their minds will have become too clouded by false philosophies to see the light of the gospel.

A precept, according to the dictionary, is "a principle intended as a general rule of conduct." "Precepts of men" are principles of conduct, or expressions of belief, which are "empty forms without spirituality" (CBM 1:407). That is, these precepts are not based upon the "living water" of gospel truths but rather leave men either thirsting or spiritually poisoned from their ill effects (John 4:10-14). These "precepts of men" are false doctrines which cause men to err and deny the power of God (2 Ne. 28:14-15, 26; JS-H 1:19).

Some of the "precepts of men" which were denounced in an address by Elder Ezra Taft Benson in 1969 included birth control, subversive educational theories, misuse of the arts and social sciences in promoting profane philosophies, and amoral or immoral teachings (CR, Apr. 1969, pp. 10-15).

President Harold B. Lee counseled: "If we find in school texts claims that contradict the word of the Lord as pertaining to the creation of the world, the origin of man, or the determination of what is right or wrong in the conduct of human souls, we may be certain that such teachings are but the theories of men; and as men improve their learning and experimentation, the nearer will their theories coincide with the truths that God has given to His church" (SHP, 73).

The Lord has commanded parents to fortify their children against the "precepts of men" by bringing them up "in light and truth" (D&C 93:40; see also 68:25). In summary, the Apostle Paul's words could well be reviewed: "Beware, lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ" (Col. 2:8).

See also: Commandments of Men
