Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Priesthood (#1)

The word priesthood appears well over one hundred times in the Doctrine and Covenants, and in each case one must look at the context in which it appears to identify its intended meaning. In most instances it refers to a specific priesthood-Aaronic (D&C 27:8), Levitical (D&C 107:1), or Melchizedek (D&C 84:6). Occasionally, one must be aware of historical circumstances to understand the meaning. For example, when the Lord speaks of those "ordained unto this priesthood, whose mission is appointed unto them to go forth," (D&C 68:2; italics added), he has reference to the priesthood possessed by Orson Hyde, who at that time held the Melchizedek Priesthood (D&C 68:1; SS, 409).

Brigham Young referred to the priesthood as "a perfect order and system of government" (DBY, 130). In an official explanation on the nature of priesthood, the following two aspects were defined: "As pertaining to eternity, priesthood is the eternal power and authority of Deity by which all things exist; by which they are created, governed, and controlled; by which the universe and worlds without number have come rolling into existence; by which the great plan of creation, redemption, and exaltation operates throughout immensity. It is the power of God.

"As pertaining to man's existence on this earth, priesthood is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of men." (IE 64:186.)

See also: Aaronic Priesthood; Authority of the Priesthood; Beautiful Garments; Dispensation of the Priesthood; Doctrine of the Priesthood; First Priesthood; First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood; Fulness of the Priesthood; Greater Priesthood; High Priesthood; Holy Priesthood; Holy Priesthood After the Order of the Son of God; Lesser Priesthood; Levitical Priesthood; Melchizedek Priesthood; Office of Priesthood and Patriarch; Order of the Only Begotten Son; Order of the Priesthood; Power of the Priesthood; Powers of Heaven; Presidency of the High Priesthood; President of the High Priesthood; Priesthood After the Holiest Order; Restoration of the Priesthood; Rights of the Priesthood; Second Priesthood
