Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Prophets

The standard for determining a prophet was set long ago by one who understood the principle he proclaimed: "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy," declared John the Revelator (Rev. 19:10). The Prophet Joseph Smith, in like fashion, declared that every man "who has the testimony of Jesus" is a prophet (TPJS, 119, 269). Elder Wilford Woodruff taught that "anybody is a prophet who has a testimony of Jesus Christ, for that is the spirit of prophecy" (JD 13:165).

In this respect, anyone is a prophet who has had the witness of the Spirit that Jesus is the Christ (1 Cor. 12:3; Moro. 10:6-7; D&C 46:13). Thus, if those who profess to be the Saints of God are worthy of such a witness, there should be one prophet for every member of record in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. What a strength there would be if the prayer of Moses were granted: "Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Num. 11:29.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe wrote that "a prophet is a teacher. That is the essential meaning of the word. He teaches the body of truth, the gospel, revealed by the Lord to man; and under inspiration explains it to the understanding of the people. He is an expounder of truth. Moreover, he shows that the way to human happiness is through obedience to God's law." (ER, 257; italics added.)

All who teach in the Church, which includes virtually everyone-home and visiting teachers, parents, officers, and classroom teachers-are ministers and should teach with the testimony of Jesus. Joseph Smith proclaimed that "salvation cannot come without revelation; it is vain for anyone to minister without it. No man is a minister of Jesus Christ without being a Prophet." (TPJS, 160.)

In terms of official ecclesiastical calling, however, there are only a few select men sustained to the office and calling of a prophet. These are the members of the First Presidency, Council of the Twelve Apostles, and, for periods of time, the Patriarch to the Church. Their principal business is not to foretell future events but to warn the world about the consequences of their wicked ways, to preach salvation through repentance and the saving ordinances of the gospel, and to "perfect the saints" (Eph. 4:11-14). Their major mission is to bear witness of the divinity of Jesus the Christ.

When a Latter-day Saint speaks of the prophet, he has reference to the one who holds the presiding position of senior Apostle and President of the Church (SHP, 153). He alone has the right to receive revelation for the Church, for in him is vested all authority and keys (D&C 132:7; DS 3:157). Though he is sustained by the voice of the people as the President of the Church, he holds "the keys of the Priesthood," his prophetic power, "independent of their voice" (JD 1:133; DBY, 138). In addition to the living prophet, Joseph Smith is respectfully referred to as "the Prophet" or the Prophet Joseph."

Most of the references to the term prophet in the Doctrine and Covenants refer to a specific prophet by name. For example, Hyrum Smith, the Assistant President of the Church, was given the title by the Lord (D&C 124:94), and President Spencer W. Kimball was recognized as the prophet in general conference (OD-2). Joseph Smith is referred to as "the Prophet" in most section headings of the Doctrine and Covenants as well as in specific references (e.g., D&C 21:1; 107:92; 124:125; 127:12; 135:1, 3).

See also: President of the High Priesthood; School of the Prophets; Translation of the Prophets; Two Prophets
