Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Bishop

The title bishop is applied to several categories of men in the Church: First, those "general bishops" who served in the early days of the Church when membership was small and scattered. These bishops had a jurisdiction which was "quite extensive or special, yet not over the whole Church" (PCG, 177). Edward Partridge, Newel Whitney, and George Miller were all early examples of this type of bishop (D&C 41:9-10; 72:5-8; 84:112-14; 124:20-21).

Second, the Presiding Bishop of the Church and his counselors, who serve as General Authorities, acting under the direction of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve.

Third, men who have previously served as bishops who continue to be referred to as "bishop" by many who associated with them in their previous ministry.

Fourth, men who are currently functioning as bishops. This last group of men have five main areas of responsibility in the wards in which they serve: (1) to preside over the Aaronic Priesthood and to serve as the president of the priests quorum (D&C 107:15, 87-88); (2) to serve as the presiding high priest of the ward, having all members of the ward "subject to his presidency" (GD, 185); (3) to "be a judge in Israel ... to sit in judgment upon transgressors" (D&C 107:73-74); (4) to be the director of welfare services-he has the responsibility for caring for the poor and "is personally responsible for determining needs and resources" (Bishop' s Guide, 1975, p. 11); (5) to serve as the administrator of finances, records, and properties, "for the office of a bishop is in administering all temporal things" (D&C 107:68).

In spite of the numerous responsibilities and concomitant demands on the time of one who faithfully serves as a bishop, the joy of his office knows no bounds. George Albert Smith, eighth President of the Church, stated: "There is no position in the Church that will bring a greater blessing to any man than the office of a bishop if he will honor that office and be a real father to the flock over whom he is called to preside" (CR, Oct. 1948, p. 186).

See also: Aaronic Priesthood; Bishopric; Common Judge; First-born; Literal Descendants of Aaron; Traveling Bishops
