Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Redemption

The words redemption (D&C 29:42), redeem (D&C 77:12), redeemed (D&C 29:44), and Redeemer (D&C 15:1) appear a number of times throughout the Doctrine and Covenants. To be redeemed is to nullify the effects of both the fall of Adam and one's own personal failings, through the intercession of Jesus Christ-the Redeemer-and one's own personal efforts. Elder Orson Pratt explained:

"Universal redemption from the effects of original sin, has nothing to do with redemption from our personal sins; for the original sin of Adam and the personal sins of his children, are two different things. The first was committed by man in his immortal state; the second was committed by man in a mortal state; the former was committed in a state of ignorance of good and evil; the latter was committed by man, having a knowledge of both good and evil.

"The children of Adam had no agency in the transgression of their first parents, and therefore, they are not required to exercise any agency in their redemption from its penalty. They are redeemed from it without faith, repentance, baptism, or any other act, either of the mind or body.

"Conditional redemption is also universal in its nature; it is offered to all but not received by all; it is a universal gift, though not universally accepted; its benefits can be obtained only through faith, repentance, baptism, the laying on of hands, and obedience to all other requirements of the gospel.

"Unconditional redemption is a gift forced upon mankind which they cannot reject though they were disposed. Not so with conditional redemption; it can be received or rejected according to the will of the creature.

"Redemption from the original sin is without faith or works; redemption from our own sins is given through faith and works. Both are the gifts of free grace; but while one is a gift forced upon us unconditionally, the other is a gift merely offered to us conditionally. The redemption of the one is compulsory; the reception of the other is voluntary." (MS 12:69; see also DS 2:9-10.)

Thus, the two phases of redemption are (1) the unconditional redemption from the dead, whereby all will be resurrected-a universal gift that cannot be rejected (D&C 88:14-17; Alma 12:25; 1 Cor. 15:19-23); and (2) the conditional redemption from one's personal sins which comes "through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son" (D&C 29:42-44) to those who manifest "a broken heart and a contrite spirit" (2 Ne. 2:6-7), are "baptized unto repentance" (Alma 9:27), and who "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ." (2 Ne. 31:19-20.) Even so, "it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23; italics added).

See also: Atonement; Day of Redemption; Redeemer; Redemption of Zion; Resurrection
