Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Richards, Willard

A name of celestial lustre in the Church is that of Willard Richards. Thrice mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants, twice as an Apostle and once as a witness to the martyrdom of God's prophets, he played an important role in early Church history (D&C 118:6; 124:129; 135:2). Dr. Richards, a medical man by profession, was also handy with a pen and served as the private secretary to Joseph Smith. He kept the Prophet's private journals and later served as Church Historian and Recorder. In the Salt Lake Valley he edited the Deseret News.

His first contact with the Church came through a Book of Mormon which his cousin Brigham Young had left with another cousin. Opening the book at random, he read half a page and declared: "God or the devil has had a hand in that book, for man never wrote it." In the next ten days he read it twice, convinced of its truthfulness.

Although stricken with palsy shortly after this initial contact with the gospel, Elder Richards was not deterred from pursuing the course he knew to be correct and eventually found his way to Kirtland, where he was baptized on December 31, 1836. He served a mission to England with members of the Twelve Apostles, and on July 8, 1838, was himself called to serve in that quorum of special witnesses. Due to his travels, he was not ordained until April 14, 1840.

He was one of the two survivors of the tragedy at Carthage, and the only one who was left physically unmarred from the attack. His bravery and love of the Prophet were exemplified when, minutes before the martyrdom took place, Joseph asked him if he would accompany the Prophet to the inner cell area of the jail, as suggested by the jailer. Dr. Richards promptly replied: "Brother Joseph you did not ask me to cross the river with you-you did not ask me to come to Carthage -you did not ask me to come to jail with you-and do you think I would forsake you now? But I will tell you what I will do; if you are condemned to be hung for treason, I will be hung in your stead, and you shall go free." (HC 6:616.)

It was the calm, steady approach of Willard Richards that took charge of the affairs of the Church in the hours that followed the martyrdom, for Brigham Young and all of the Twelve but John Taylor-who was seriously wounded-were away from Nauvoo at the time. On September 27, 1847, he was sustained as Second Counselor in the First Presidency, where he served faithfully until his death on March 11, 1854. (Jenson 1:53-56.)

See also: Carthage Jail; Martyrdom
