Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

S

Sabbath Day

From sacred Sinai the Lord declared, "Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy" (Ex. 20:8). Again, in our day, he has decreed: "And the inhabitants of Zion shall also observe the Sabbath day to keep it holy" (D&C 68:29). Although this latter command was specifically issued to the Saints in Missouri, the divine injunction applies to all men, especially those who claim membership in the society of Zion (see D&C 97:21).

The Sabbath day to Latter-day Saints is Sunday, the first day of the week, or the "Lord's day." "We admit without argument," said Elder James E. Talmage, "that under the Mosaic law the seventh day of the week, Saturday, was designated and observed as the holy day, and that the change from Saturday to Sunday was a feature of the apostolic administration following the personal ministry of Jesus Christ" (AF, 449).

By a revelation given on Sunday, August 7, 1831, the Lord designated Sunday as his Sabbath, or holy day. President Spencer W. Kimball made the following appeals regarding the Sabbath: "The failure to keep the Sabbath holy," he said, "is evidence of man's failure to meet the individual test set for each of us before the creation of the world, 'to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them' (Abr. 3:25)" (En., May 1975, p. 7).

"It would be wonderful if every family determined that henceforth no Sabbath purchase would be made. The Lord Jesus Christ said with, I think, some sadness, 'Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?' (Luke 6:46.)" (En., Nov. 1975, p. 6.)

"The Sabbath is not a day for indolent lounging about the house or puttering around in the garden, but is a day for consistent attendance at meetings for the worship of the Lord, drinking at the fountain of knowledge and instruction, enjoying the family, and finding uplift in music and song. It is a day for reading the scriptures, visiting the sick, visiting relatives and friends, doing home teaching, working on genealogy records, taking a nap, writing letters to missionaries and servicemen or relatives, preparation for the following week's church lessons, games with the small children, fasting for a purpose, writing devotional poetry, and other worthwhile activities of great variety." (FPM, 270-71.)

Finally, a warning seems in order: "Are we not inviting eventual destruction as we desecrate all things holy and sacred," said President Kimball, "and make his holy day, the Sabbath, a day of work, of commercialism, and of pleasure-seeking?" (En., Nov. 1977, p. 6.)

See also: Lord's Day; Singleness of Heart
