Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Sacrament

The sacred ordinance of the sacrament was instituted by the Lord on the occasion known as the Last Supper (Matt 26:26-29; 1 Cor. 11:23-26). The resurrected Redeemer repeated this ordinance among his disciples in the Americas (3 Ne. 18:1-14, 28-32). Its purpose is outlined in the sacramental prayers found in both the Book of Mormon and the D&C (Moro. 4, 5; D&C 20:75-79).

An excellent summary of the purposes of the sacrament has been provided by Elder Dallin H. Oaks: "It causes us to renew the covenant we made in the waters of baptism to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ and serve him to the end. We also take upon us his name as we publicly profess our belief in him, as we fulfill our obligations as members of his Church, and as we do the work of his kingdom.

"But there is something beyond these familiar meanings, because what we witness is not that we take upon us his name but that we are willing to do so. In this sense, our witness relates to some future event or status whose attainment is not self-assumed, but depends on the authority or initiative of the Savior himself.

"Scriptural references to the name of Jesus Christ often signify the authority of Jesus Christ. In that sense, our willingness to take upon us his name signifies our willingness to take upon us the authority of Jesus Christ in the sacred ordinances of the temple, and to receive the highest blessings available through his authority when he chooses to confer them upon us.

"Finally, our willingness to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ affirms our commitment to do all that we can to be counted among those whom he will choose to stand at his right hand and be called by his name at the last day. In this sacred sense, our witness that we are willing to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ constitutes our declaration of candidacy for exaltation in the celestial kingdom. Exaltation is eternal life, 'the greatest of all the gifts of God.' (D&C 14:7.)

"That is what we should ponder as we partake of the sacred emblems of the sacrament." (CR, Apr. 1985, p. 109.)

The emblems of the sacrament are normally bread and water, however, the Savior instructed that "it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory" (D&C 27:2).

See also: Sacrament Meetings
