Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Book of Commandments

In the summer of 1830, the Prophet Joseph began compiling and arranging some of the revelations he had received up to that time. At a conference of the Church held in Hiram, Ohio, November 1, 1831, the decision was reached to print a book to be known as the Book of Commandments. This "book of revelations" was to be "the foundation of the Church in these last days, and a benefit to the world, showing that the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom of our Savior are again entrusted to man; and the riches of eternity within the compass of those who are willing to live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God" (HC 1:235). During the conference the Lord revealed what is now section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which he called "mine authority, and the authority of my servants, and my preface unto the book of my commandments" (D&C 1:6).

In the process of compilation, some of the "wise" objected to the wording in the revelations, claiming it was of Joseph Smith. The Lord issued to them a challenge to see if "the most wise" among them could write a revelation comparable to "even the least" that was in Joseph's revelatory repertoire (D&C 67). The "wise" failed, and the unlearned Joseph maintained his prophetic mantle. Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were appointed to take the compilation of revelations to Jackson County, where they were to be printed. However, on July 20, 1833, a mob destroyed the W. W. Phelps and Co. printing press at Independence, and the Book of Commandments, containing 65 revelations, was destroyed.

On September 24, 1834, the Kirtland high council made arrangements for printing a new edition, which was accepted by a conference of the Church held on August 17, 1835. This edition contained 102 sections and was renamed the Doctrine and Covenants. The reason for the name change is unclear, although this name is mentioned in Joseph's journal entry of November 3, 1831 (HC 1:229).
