Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Smith, Emma

"When sorrows come, they come not single spies, but in battalions," wrote Shakespeare (Hamlet, act 4, sc. 5, lines 77-78). Such a statement might well describe the seventeen years of married life that Emma Hale Smith shared with her much maligned and persecuted prophet-husband. Even her betrothal to Joseph was anxiety laden, as her father, lacking a testimony of the Prophet's calling, opposed the union of his daughter to this visionary man. Yielding to her heart, Emma married Joseph Smith on January 18, 1827. This was the year in which Joseph completed his "apprenticeship" and received the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Emma acted as the first scribe in Joseph's early efforts of translation. She was with the Prophet on several occasions when mobocrats vainly tried to steal the sacred records.

Her soul was scarred with the loss of four little ones who preceded her and Joseph to the other side of the veil. Her husband was forcefully torn from her side on a number of occasions and she was constantly deprived of the sustaining succor of his loving presence. Plural marriage became a severe test to this woman of sorrows, and her state of mind following the martyrdom of her beloved husband might well be described in Solomon's words: "By sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken" (Prov. 15:13).

When the Saints came west, Emma remained behind in Nauvoo. Although "every effort" was made to extend to her help in making the journey, "no amount of pleading, no amount of persuasion or kindness" could dissuade her from her chosen course (LJFS, 130).

It is ironic that during the same week in which Brigham Young officially became the President of the Church and reorganized the First Presidency, Emma married outside the faith. She became the wife of Lewis C. Bidamon, a resident of Nauvoo, on December 23, 1847, and died at Nauvoo on April 30, 1879.

Although in her later years she chose to remain separate from the Church founded by her prophet-husband, Emma's impact in the Church endured. Her call to compile the first hymn-book for the Church (D&C 25) and her service as the first president of the Relief Society are footnotes of faithfulness that cannot be erased. We shall best leave to futurity, and the just and benevolent judgment of an all-wise Father, to determine Emma's place in the eternities.

See also: Elect Lady
