Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Smith, Joseph F.

Son of the patriarch-martyr, Hyrum Smith, and nephew of the prophet-martyr, Joseph Smith, Jr., Joseph F. Smith was but five years of age when a malicious mob took the lives of his father and uncle. He was born on November 13, 1838, during the days of mob rule in Missouri. He suffered the perils of persecution throughout his life. As an infant, his life was miraculously preserved when intruders ransacked his home, overturned his bedding, and left him to an almost sure suffocation beneath it.

When not quite eight years old, he drove an ox team from Montrose to Winter Quarters, Iowa, after a mob had driven his family from their home in Nauvoo, Illinois. Later he drove the wagon of his widowed mother, Mary Fielding Smith, across the plains from Iowa to the Salt Lake Valley. Along the way he was schooled in the faith of his mother.

On one occasion, her son observed how her faith and prayers led to the discovery of their lost oxen after others had given up the search. Of this experience, the boy would later say: "It was one of the first practical and positive demonstrations of the efficacy of prayer I had ever witnessed. It made an indelible impression upon my mind, and has been a source of comfort, assurance, and guidance to me throughout all of my life." (LJFS, 132-34.)

On another occasion, when her oxen suddenly fell and appeared to be in the throes of death, Joseph's faithful mother called upon the priesthood to rebuke the destroyer (LJFS, 150). This experience left its impact upon the boy regarding the power of the priesthood, which he himself would use so effectively throughout his life.

At the age of fifteen, he commenced a four-year mission to the Sandwich (Hawaiian) Islands and later served special missions both in those islands and in the British Isles. In 1866, at the age of twenty-seven, he was ordained an Apostle. He served as a counselor to presidents Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow. On October 17, 1901, he became the sixth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints-the Lord's prophet, seer, and revelator upon the earth.

Just a month before his death, he received a marvelous vision wherein he saw the ministry of the Savior to the spirits of the dead following His crucifixion (D&C 138). This vision, although previously accepted by the leading councils of the Church as revelation, was not presented to the membership of the Church to be accepted as scripture until April 3, 1976. The vision was a marvelous climax to the ministry of one who had spent his life declaring the doctrines of God to Saint and sinner, Jew and Gentile. His spirit left his mortal tabernacle on November 19, 1918, to take up his ministry in the world of the deceased which he had so recently viewed in vision.
