Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Smith, Samuel H.

Born March 13, 1808, Samuel H. Smith was the younger brother of the Prophet Joseph. He is mentioned in six sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. The first four of these refer to his missionary labors, in one of which the Lord expressed his pleasure with Samuel's efforts (D&C 52:30; 61:35; 66:8; 75:13).

Samuel's missionary efforts are legendary, for he is credited with taking the first missionary journey for the Church. As a result of this initial effort, one of the copies of the Book of Mormon he distributed came into the possession of Brigham Young's family and was instrumental in converting him and his friend Heber C. Kimball, also a future Apostle (ECH, 88-89).

Samuel was the third person to be baptized in this dispensation, following his brother Joseph and Oliver Cowdery. His zeal for the Book of Mormon also allowed him to be one of the eight witnesses to that sacred volume of scripture. (Their testimony of having seen the plates from which it was translated is now contained in the forepart of that book.)

Samuel became a member of the first high council of the church at Kirtland (D&C 102:3, 34), and later served in a bishopric in Nauvoo (D&C 124:141).

He participated in the Battle of Crooked River, where Apostle David W. Patten received his martyr's crown. Following the battle, Samuel was among those who were pursued by mob forces and who were saved by the intervention of a miraculous snowstorm which separated the two groups. During this period, they were deeply concerned about the safety of their families and the Prophet, and were suffering severely for want of food. Samuel, as the appointed leader of the group, received the following revelation: "Thus saith the Lord, my servant Joseph is not injured, nor any of his brethren that are with him, but they will all be delivered out of the hands of their enemies; your families are all well, but anxious about you. Let your hearts be comforted, for I the Lord will provide food for you on the morrow." The next day, Samuel was led directly to an Indian camp where bread and meat were provided to them.

On the day a malicious mob murdered his brothers, Joseph and Hyrum, Samuel was relentlessly pursued by a contingent of that mob. Because of the severe fatigue brought on by that chase, a fever was contracted which, according to John Taylor, "laid the foundation for his death, which took place on the 30th of July, [1844]," (HC 7:111). Of him it was written, "If ever there lived a good man upon the earth, Samuel H. Smith was that person." (Jenson 1:278-82.)
