Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Smith, William

The only mention of William Smith in the Doctrine and Covenants is as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (D&C 124:129). Unfortunately, the spirit of this holy calling did not seem to penetrate his pride nor subdue his temperament, for he frequently found himself at odds with his prophet-brother Joseph, whom he physically attacked on several occasions.

William was suspended from fellowship on May 4, 1839, at a general conference near Quincy, Illinois. However, through the intercession of Joseph and Hyrum he was restored to his former standing in the Church.

By right of lineage, William received the office of Patriarch to the Church on May 24, 1845. However, because of a printed line in the Times and Seasons which stated he was patriarch "over" the whole Church, William attempted to exercise authority which he did not possess and was rejected both as an Apostle and as a patriarch by the general conference of the Church in October 1845. (For an excellent discussion of this issue, see GK, 146-49.)

William's bitterness continued, and he was excommunicated on October 19, 1845. He later became a patriarch in the church of James J. Strang, but was also excommunicated from that organization. In 1848, he assumed the "right" of presidency and attempted to gather Saints to Palestine Grove, Illinois. Little became of this and in 1850 he organized a church at Covington, Kentucky, based on the doctrine of lineal descent, declaring himself as president pro tem, with Lyman Wight and Aaron Hook as counselors. He finally deserted this organization and became nominally connected with the "new organization," which became the foundation for the Reorganized Church in 1860.

William Smith died at Oster-dock, Clayton County, Iowa, on November 13, 1893. The tragedy of his life might well be expressed in the Old Testament proverb, "Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall" (Prov. 16:18).
