Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Snow, Erastus

Perhaps no more dedicated missionary of the Church has ever lived than Erastus Snow. The only mention of his name appears in connection with his call to help organize the pioneers in their western trek (D&C 136:12). However, as one reads his history, the zealous service which he gave to the Church in its formative years is very apparent.

Erastus joined the Church at age fourteen, being baptized February 3, 1833. By June 1834, he was in the mission field where he diligently labored for the next four years. In June 1838, he heeded the call to go to Missouri to help build the Church in Zion.

The following February, he was visiting with the Prophet and Hyrum during their incarceration at Liberty, Missouri, when an escape attempt was foiled. As a consequence, Erastus was confined along with the other brethren in the jail. A militant mob threatened all kinds of physical violence and torture to the prisoners. At the height of the disturbance, Joseph prophetically promised his fellow prisoners that "not a hair of their heads should be hurt, and that they should not lose any of their things, even to a bridle, saddle, or blanket; that everything should be restored to them; they had offered their lives for their friends and the gospel; that it was necessary the Church should offer a sacrifice and the Lord accepted the offering" (Jenson 1:106).

Acting upon Joseph's recommendation, Erastus served as his own lawyer and was readily acquited. Following this, the lawyers gathered around him and desired to know where he had received his training, for they claimed to have never heard a better plea. True to the promise of Joseph, everything that was taken from the men was restored: "nothing was lost, although no two articles were found in one place" (Jenson 1:106).

In 1847, Erastus Snow and Orson Pratt were the first two men to enter the Salt Lake Valley, three days ahead of the main pioneer company. On February 12, 1849, he was called to serve as an Apostle in the Quorum of the Twelve. In addition to the numerous missions he fulfilled in the United States, he labored several years in Denmark and was responsible for the translation of the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants into the Danish language. He died on May 27, 1888, in the seventieth year of his life, having spent close to sixty of those years in the service of the Master.
