Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Spirit (#1)

"For man is spirit," declared the Lord (D&C 93:33; italics added). Premortal man was a spirit child of our Father in Heaven (Heb. 12:9) and was created "spiritually" before he came "naturally upon the face of the earth" (Moses 3:5). This spirit was "in the likeness of his person" (D&C 77:2).

Concerning this likeness, Parley P. Pratt wrote: "The spirit of man consists of an organization of the elements of spiritual matter, in the likeness and after the pattern of the fleshly tabernacle. It possesses, in fact, all the organs and parts exactly corresponding to the outward tabernacles." (KT, 124.)

This likeness is also in the image of our Father in Heaven (Moses 2:26-27). Regarding this, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley said: "That man who knows that he is a child of God, created in the image of a divine Father and gifted with a potential for the exercise of great and godlike virtues, will discipline himself against the sordid, lascivious elements to which all are exposed" (CR, Oct. 1975, p. 57).

Joseph Smith proclaimed that "the spirit is a substance; that it is material, but that it is more pure, elastic and refined matter than the body; that it existed before the body, can exist in the body; and will exist separate from the body, when the body will be mouldering in the dust; and will in the resurrection, be again united with it" (TPJS, 207). This is in keeping with the instruction he gave in 1843 that spiritual matter "can only be discerned by purer eyes" (D&C 131:7-8).

The spirit of man comes to earth to receive and dwell in a temporal tabernacle, which he will leave upon death and reenter in a refined state at the time of the resurrection. Thus the Lord declared that "the spirit and the body are the soul of man" (D&C 88:15).

Those spirits who chose to rebel against God and follow Satan were cast out of heaven and will be forever denied the privilege of obtaining an earthly body (D&C 29:36-38; Abr. 3:27-28; Rev. 12:7-9; WTP, 34).
