Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Spirit World

President Joseph F. Smith saw the spirits of those who had lived and died prior to the Savior's death anxiously waiting in the spirit world for the Son of God to arrive following his death on Calvary (D&C 138:16). The spirit world is the abode of those who have passed through the portals of death and are awaiting resurrection. It can be a place of happiness or misery, depending upon how the individual has lived in mortality (Alma 40:11-14, 20-21).

When Christ arrived in the spirit world, he did not go among the wicked and ungodly but instead confined his ministry to the righteous, organizing them into missionary task forces to go among the unrepentant and uninformed (D&C 138:20, 29-37). This short organizational ministry of the Savior bridged the gulf which had previously separated the righteous from the wicked in the spirit world (see Luke 16:19-26).

According to President Joseph Fielding Smith, the phrase taken home to God (Alma 40:11) "simply means that their mortal existence has come to an end, and they have returned to the world of spirits, where they are assigned to a place according to their works with the just or the unjust, there to await the resurrection" (AGQ 2:85).

Elder Orson Pratt took a different view. He suggested that upon death all spirits return to their ancient home in the presence of the Lord, albeit for perhaps a short period of time, because the wicked and the righteous would be separated (JD 16:332-33).

Both President Brigham Young and Elder Parley P. Pratt taught that the spirit world is behind the veil right here on this earth (JD 3:368-69; KT, 132-33). Elder Pratt said: "As to its location, it is here on the very planet where we were born; or, in other words, the earth and other planets of a like sphere, have their inward or spiritual spheres, as well as their outward, or temporal. The one is peopled by temporal tabernacles, and the other by spirits. A veil is drawn between the one sphere and the other, whereby all the objects in the spiritual sphere are rendered invisible to those in the temporal."
