Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Taylor, John

John Taylor occupies the rare position of having authored a section in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 135). Called to the holy apostleship in 1838, Elder Taylor faithfully served as a member of that quorum of special witnesses and later ultimately served as the prophet and President of the Lord's Church here on earth (D&C 118:6; 124:129).

It was John Taylor's melodic voice which helped bring peace to the troubled minds of Joseph and Hyrum Smith only short minutes before their lives were brutally taken. Having accompanied the brethren to Carthage, John Taylor had offered to tear the jail down if only Joseph would give the word (LJT, 135). He was severely wounded in the attack which claimed his companions' lives, but he lived to bear powerful testimony of the truth for which the men had earned martyrs' crowns. Of his preservation, Elder Taylor wrote: "I felt that the Lord had preserved me by a special act of mercy; that my time had not yet come, and that I had still a work to perform upon the earth" (LJT, 150).

As a young man in England, John Taylor had exhibited an interest in things of the Spirit, including supernatural experiences that led him to America and the restored gospel. One such experience involved seeing a vision of an angel sounding a trumpet to the nations, and having the thought impressed upon his mind that he was to preach the gospel in America (LJT, 28; see Rev. 14:6-7). Upon immigrating to Canada, he became active as a lay preacher, but soon discovered that the doctrines of men did not coincide with the principles of truth taught within the Bible. His conversion was the result of the missionary efforts of Parley P. Pratt, who had received a revelatory blessing regarding the fruits of that mission and their future impact upon the Church (LJT, 35).

John Taylor joined the Church on May 9, 1836, with the following resolve: "When I first entered upon Mormonism, I did it with my eyes open. I counted the cost. I looked upon it as a lifelong labor, and I considered that I was not only enlisted for time, but for eternity." (LJT, 48.)

Elder Taylor quickly became known for his courage and forth-rightness in defending truth and liberty. Such an attitude earned for him the title, "Champion of Freedom and Liberty." In fact, one of the most prominent floral arrangements at his funeral was a large one with a banner reading, "Champion of Liberty."

He was also known for the zeal with which he pursued anything of either a temporal or spiritual nature. "If a thing is done well," he once said, "no one will ask how long it took to do it, but who did it." On another occasion he said, "I prefer a faded coat to a faded reputation."

His position was firm and well understood. Said one biographer, "Every Latter-day Saint always knew beforehand, on occasions when firmness and courage were needed, where President John Taylor would be found and what his tone would be" (LJT, 411).

His magnanimity is expressed in this plea to all who would call themselves Saints: "If you find people owing you who are distressed, if you will go to work and try to relieve them as much as you can, under the circumstances, God will relieve you when you get into difficulties" (ECH, 587). Though he arduously labored with pen and the spoken word to defend the Church, he was also quick to turn the other cheek when necessary. Of those who tried to provoke anger or hatred on the part of the Saints, Elder Taylor quipped: "They offer themselves to be kicked. Don't do it, have some respect for your boots." (LIT, 316.)

On July 25, 1887, John Taylor died a martyr's death, as the result of the severe persecution heaped upon him by the enemies of the Church, and he occupies what B. H. Roberts described as "the place of double martyr" (LJT, 414). True to the trust that had been placed in him, Elder Taylor died exemplifying the words he had often spoken: "I do not believe in a religion that cannot have all my affections, but I believe in a religion that I can live for, or die for" (LJT, 421).

See also: Carthage Jail; Martyrdom
