Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Telestial

The term telestial, as found in sections 76 and 88, is unique to Mormon theology. There is a glory of the hereafter known as the telestial world or kingdom (D&C 76:98; 88:21), which is inhabitated by those whose resurrected bodies are "quickened by a portion of the telestial glory" (D&C 88:31; 76:109). There are also telestial laws which govern telestial worlds and their inhabitants (D&C 88:24).

The Apostle Paul described the bodies to be possessed by the inhabitants of the three kingdoms of glory in the hereafter, but our present King James Bible only refers to two of them by name-the celestial, or glory of the sun, and the terrestrial, or glory of the moon (1 Cor. 15:39-42). Nevertheless, Paul spoke of the glory of the stars, which glory is that of a telestial order (D&C 76:81, 98). The Prophet Joseph Smith, in his inspired version of the Bible, used the term telestial to identify the glory of those resurrected bodies who inhabit such a kingdom (JST, 1 Cor. 15:40).

This glory is described by Elder James E. Talmage as follows: "This is for those who received not the testimony of Christ, but who, nevertheless, did not deny the Holy Spirit; who have led lives exempting them from the heaviest punishment, yet whose redemption will be delayed until the last resurrection. In the telestial world there are innumerable degrees comparable to the varying light of the stars. Yet all who receive of any one of these orders of glory are at last saved, and upon them Satan will finally have no claim. Even the telestial glory 'surpasses all understanding; And no man knows it except him to whom God has revealed it.'" (AF, 92-93; see D&C 76:81-112; 88:24, 31.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith informed us that the present status of our earth is that of a telestial order, which came about as a result of the fall of Adam (DS 1:82-85). The paradisiacal, or Garden of Eden, state of the earth was that of a terrestrial order, which order will return at the Second Coming and remain throughout the Millennium. At the end of this period, the earth will be celestialized.

See also: Some of Another; Third Trump; Vengeance of Eternal Fire']">Glory; Last Resurrection; Mansions of My Father; Salvation; Saved; Servants of the Most High; Some of One and Some of Another; Third Trump; Vengeance of Eternal Fire
