Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Terrestrial

The term terrestrial appears once in the Bible (1 Cor. 15:40) and a dozen times in sections 76 and 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants (76:71-98; 88:21-30). There is a terrestrial kingdom, or world (D&C 76:71), which is to be inhabited by resurrected beings whose bodies are of a terrestrial order or glory (D&C 76:78) and who live by terrestrial laws (D&C 88:23). The terrestrial kingdom is a secondary order of glory, falling below that of the celestial glory but being above that of the telestial glory. These degrees differ in brightness and luster, even as the sun, moon, and stars differ from one another.

The scriptures reveal that the celestial kingdom is divided into three heavens or degrees (D&C 131:1-4) and that the telestial kingdom likewise is subdivided into varying glories (D&C 76:98). Therefore, "we conclude that a similar condition prevails in the Terrestrial. Thus the innumerable degrees of merit amongst mankind are provided for in an infinity of graded glories." (AF, 409.) "God will give to every man a glory that will be suited to his condition" (GT 1:97).

The inhabitants of the terrestrial kingdom are described as follows: "1. Accountable persons who die without law (and who, of course, do not accept the gospel in the spirit world under those particular circumstances which would make them heirs of the celestial kingdom); 2. Those who reject the gospel in this life and who reverse their course and accept it in the spirit world; 3. Honorable men of the earth who are blinded by the craftiness of men and who therefore do not accept and live the gospel law; and 4. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who have testimonies of Christ and the divinity of the great latter-day work and who are not valiant, but who are instead lukewarm in their devotion to the Church and to righteousness" (MD, 784; D&C 76:71-80).

The term terrestrial is used in one other sense in Latter-day Saint discussion. According to the tenth article of faith, "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." This refers to the terrestrial condition that will prevail during the Millennium, when only those who abide at least the law of this order will be allowed to inhabit our earth (DS 1:84-86). The dictionary, as one might suspect, defines the term terrestrial as that which is "of or relating to the earth or its inhabitants; earthly or mortal."

See also: Glory; Honorable Men of the Earth; Mansions of My Father; Paradisiacal Glory; Presence of the Son; Salvation; Saved; Second Angel; Second Trump; They Who Are Not Valiant; They Who Died Without Law
