Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

United Order

According to Elder Marion G. Romney, "The United Order, the Lord's program for eliminating the inequalities among men, is based upon the underlying concept that the earth and all things therein belong to the Lord and that men hold earthly possessions as stewards accountable to God.

"On February 9, 1831, the Lord revealed to the Prophet what His way was. (D&C 42.) In his way there were two cardinal principles: (1) consecration and (2) stewardship.

"To enter the United Order, one consecrated all his possessions to the Church by a 'covenant and deed which' could 'not be broken.' That is, he completely divested himself of all of his property by conveying it to the Church.

"Having thus voluntarily divested himself of title to all his property, the consecrator received from the Church a stewardship by a like conveyance. This stewardship could be more or less than his original consecration, the object being to make 'every man equal according to his family, according to his circumstances and his wants and needs.' (D&C 51:3.)

"This procedure preserved in every man the right to private ownership and management of his property. At his own option he could alienate it or keep and operate it and pass it on to his heirs.

"The intent was, however, for him to so operate his property as to produce a living for himself and his dependents. So long as he remained in the order he consecrated to the Church the surplus he produced above the needs and wants of his family. This surplus went into a storehouse, from which stewardships were given to others and from which the needs of the poor were supplied." (LTG, 218-19.)

President J. Reuben Clark declared: "The United Order and communism are not synonymous. Communism is Satan's counterfeit of the United Order." As to the history of the original order, President Clark said: "The Lord tried us for three years to see if we could not set up the United Order; we could not. So then at Fishing River on June 22, 1834, following the dissolution of Zion's Camp, the Lord told us that we should give up the United Order and that he would not reestablish it until Zion was redeemed, and that time has not yet come." (MFP 6:199-200.)

See also: Order of Enoch; Steward; Stewardship; Storehouse, Lord's; United Order of the City of Zion; United Order of the Stake of Zion
