Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Whitmer, David

Among the most prominent participants of the early period in Church history was David Whitmer. He was one of the six original members of the Church, as well as one of the three privileged to see the angel Moroni, behold the gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated (among other ancient artifacts), and hear the voice of God bearing personal testimony to the truthfulness of the ancient record of holy writ.

Along with Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, he was charged with the responsibility of seeking out the twelve men who would occupy the first apostolic chairs of this dispensation (D&C 18:37). He was the recipient or corecipient of four revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants (14; 17; 18; 30) and received a mission call in yet another revelation (D&C 52:25).

It was David Whitmer who brought transportation to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to transport Joseph and Emma Smith, together with Oliver Cowdery, up to Fayette, New York, where Joseph and Oliver completed translating and transcribing the Book of Mormon at the home of David's father. He was called to serve as "a president" of the Church in Missouri, where he served about four years. During a brief period from July 1834 to December 1834, he was the designated successor to Joseph Smith, if the Prophet's life had been taken (HC 3:32, footnote).

Oliver Cowdery's ordination as Assistant President of the Church superseded David's previous appointment, but the latter seemed confused on this issue after that point. Following Whitmer's rejection as "a president" of the Church in Missouri, he refused to accept the jurisdiction of the high council and continued to identify himself as "President of the Church of Christ." For this and other "un-christianlike conduct," he was excommunicated on April 13, 1838. His efforts to attract a following failed.

In April 1887, he published a booklet entitled, "An Address to All Believers in Christ by a Witness to the Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon." The title, of course, bore continued witness of his firm belief in the divine manifestation which had been his, but the contents exhibited his differences with the divine Church of which he had been an original member.

Unfortunately, the warning of the Lord in 1830 had not taken root: "Behold, I say unto you, David, that you have feared man and have not relied on me for strength as you ought. But your mind has been on the things of the earth more than on the things of me, your Maker, and the ministry whereunto you have been called." (D&C 30:1-2; see Jenson 1:263-71.)

See also: Book of Mormon; Three Witnesses
