Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Whitney, Newel K.

Mentioned in ten sections of the Doctrine and Covenants, Newel K. Whitney was an important cog in the wheels which moved the Church forward in its early days (D&C 63:42; 64:26; 72:8; 78:9; 82:11; 84:112, 93:50; 96:2; 104:39-41; 117:1, 11). Born on February 5, 1795, Whitney was almost ten years senior to the Prophet, whom he faithfully served.

After joining the Church in November 1830, Newel and his wife had a remarkable vision in which they were told to "prepare to receive the word of the Lord, for it is coming." Shortly thereafter, a sleigh of strangers pulled up to Newel's store in Kirtland, Ohio. One of the occupants alighted from the vehicle and strode up the stairs of Whitney's establishment. "Newel K. Whitney, thou art the man!" exclaimed the stranger. To this friendly greeting, Newel replied, "You have the advantage of me. I could not call you by name as you have me." "I am Joseph, the Prophet," said the stranger. "You've prayed me here; now what do you want of me?" Thus began a long and cherished friendship.

The Prophet remained at Whitney's home, where he was hospitably treated, and under whose roof some of the revelations now contained in the Doctrine and Covenants were received. Joseph's trust in Newel extended beyond the financial finesse which the latter possessed, for the Prophet often entrusted his friend with some of his most secret thoughts and revelations. Among these was the principle of plural marriage. It was Newel K. Whitney who preserved the written revelation on plural marriage which eventually was given to Brigham Young to be had in the archives of the Church, and it was Elder Whitney who performed the ceremony in which his own daughter became the first plural wife by divine authority in this dispensation.

In December 1831, he was called as the second bishop of the Church (D&C 72). He functioned in this office in Ohio and Illinois before being called as the Presiding Bishop of the Church on April 6, 1847. He served faithfully until his death on September 23, 1850. Of him, the Deseret News said: "Thus in full strength and mature years, has one of the oldest, most exemplary, and most useful members of the Church fallen suddenly by the cruel agency of the King of Terrors. In him, the Church suffers the loss of a wise and able counselor and a thorough and straightforward business man. It was ever more gratifying to him to pay a debt than to contract one, and when all his debts were paid he was a happy man, though he had nothing left but his own moral and muscular energy. He has gone down to the grave, leaving a spotless name behind him" (Jenson 1:222-27).

See also: Ahashdah; One Wife
