Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Wight, Lyman

The name of Lyman Wight appears in three sections of the Doctrine and Covenants (52:7, 12: 103:30, 38; 124:18, 62, 70). He was baptized in 1830 and was one of the first to receive the office of high priest. At a conference in Kirtland in June 1831, he testified to seeing the Savior in vision. His faithfulness and courage in the early days of the Church seemingly knew no bounds. When others hesitated, he stepped forth to offer his all. During the persecution of the Saints in Missouri, he was described as "a dread to his enemies and a terror to evil doers."

Wight shared the confines of the Liberty Jail with Joseph and Hyrum Smith during their six months of incarceration and was ever ready to defend his leader with his life. Once, when asked to betray the Prophet in order to save his own life, Wight responded: "Shoot and be damned!"

Although not polished in speech and sometimes rough in appearance, Lyman Wight could bear a powerful testimony. During a mission to Cincinnati, he worked as a fisherman by day and preached by night. "One evening he went from the fish net to the court house, and stood on the top of a stove barefooted with his trousers rolled up to his knees, and his shirt sleeves up to his elbows, and preached two hours. Some of the people remarked, 'He preaches the truth, though he does not look much like a preacher.' "On April 8, 1841, he was called to join the select ranks of the Twelve Apostles, filling a vacancy created by the martyrdom of David W. Patten.

The "wild ram of the mountains" is how Joseph Smith referred to Lyman Wight (HC 7:435). He was one of those fearless men of great physical courage whose fidelity to the Prophet was unquestioned. Yet, as Joseph died on that fateful day in June 1844 and his physical body began the process of natural decay, in a similar fashion a spiritual decay began to take effect in Lyman Wight, for he found it impossible to transfer his loyalties from the man Joseph to the cause for which he stood.

Wight resisted the leadership of Brigham Young, stating he did not believe "the death of Joseph gave one of the twelve a supremacy over the others" (BYUS 17:109-10). "The day was when there was somebody to control me," declared this errant Apostle, "but that day is past." Unfortunately, this 1831 warning of the Lord was disregarded: "And let my servant Lyman Wight beware, for Satan desireth to sift him as chaff" (D&C 52:12). Contrary to counsel, Lyman led a colony to Texas and was excommunicated from the Church on December 3, 1848 (Jenson 1:93-96). He died on March 31, 1858.

See also: Wight's Ferry
