Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, The

Although The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was officially organized on April 6, 1830, the revealed name of the Church was not officially given until April 26, 1838. "For thus shall my church be called in the last days," declared the Lord, "even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (D&C 115:3-4.) Smith and Sjodahl have informed us of the various names by which the Church had been previously known: "The world, from the beginning, gave to the Saints the name 'Mormons,' or 'Mormonites.' The Saints called their organization, 'The Church of Christ,' or 'The Church of Jesus Christ.' At a conference held at Kirtland, in May, 1834, it was called, 'The Church of the Latter-day Saints.'" (SS, 740.) It is of interest to note that the minutes of the high council meeting in which David Whitmer was excommunicated, dated April 13, 1838, reflect the correct name of the Church some two weeks before the aforementioned revelation was received (HC 3:19).

That the name of Christ's church should bear his name was made clear to the ancient inhabitants of the Americas. "And how be it my church save it be called in my name?" queried the Savior, adding, "if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel" (3 Ne. 27:1-9; italics added). The qualifying "if" is an important inclusion, for to merely attach Christ's name to a church does not make it his.

Elder James E. Talmage discussed the meaning of the other components of the name of the Church: "We can understand, easily, what 'Latter-day' means-modern day, this day; but what does the word 'Saint' mean? ... It means directly, used as an adjective, 'holy,' and when used as a noun, 'a holy one,' and we, therefore, profess to be a body of holy men, holy women. We proclaim ourselves in the name of Jesus Christ to be the holy ones of the last days, a significant proclamation, blasphemous in the extreme if it be not justified. But that name was given us of God. We do not apologize for it, nor do we preach the doctrines of the gospel, committed to the Church to be preached, in any apologetic manner. We preach in simplicity, in humility, but not by way of apology.... We have no apology to offer for our name nor for our membership in the Church, nor for our scriptures that have been given by revelation through the prophets of the Lord unto the people." (CR, Apr. 1922, p. 72.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith counseled members of this great Church regarding the usage of its name: "It is a very easy matter for us to adopt some other title, apparently for convenience, as the correct name is rather lengthy." However, he added, "Since the Lord felt it important to remind the councils of the Church of its correct name and inform them that by that name it should be known in the last days, we should endeavor to carry out this commandment more nearly than it is the custom for many of us to do." (CHMR 2:86.)

This Church is, in the Lord's own words, "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30). Its objectives, according to President Stephen L Richards, are "to bear witness to the divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ; to teach all men the principles of his Gospel; and to convert and persuade them to follow in his ways and keep the commandments of God, that they may thus advance the Kingdom of God in the earth to bring brotherhood and peace to men and nations, and even exaltation for themselves" (CR, Oct. 1956, 40-41).

See also: Church of Christ; Kingdom of God (on Earth); Mormonism; Saints; Stone Cut Out of the Mountain; Wheat
