Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Cloven Tongues as of Fire

During the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet importuned the Lord that "cloven tongues as of fire" might be poured out upon the Saints (D&C 109:36). Some spiritual outpouring, which evidently is manifested in a physical, visible form, is what has been described as "cloven tongues as of fire." It occurred on the day of Pentecost, when the ancient disciples first received the personage of the Holy Ghost (Acts 2:3-4). Similar manifestations are mentioned in the Book of Mormon, although the term cloven tongues is not used (Hel. 5:22-24, 43-45; 3 Ne. 19:13-14). An official declaration of the First Presidency has stated that "the cloven tongues of fire were the sign of His [the Savior's] coming. This manifestation was repeated in this dispensation at the endowment in the Kirtland Temple." (MFP 5:4; italics added.)

That which is cloven is split, and the imagery of cloven tongues of fire brings to mind the flickering tongues of flames of fire. During great spiritual outpouring, flickering flames of celestial light may be visible.

A more recent manifestation of like nature took place on June 1, 1978; in an upper room in the Salt Lake Temple. As the First Presidency and members of the Twelve Apostles were prayerfully petitioning the Lord, a marvelous outpouring of the Spirit occurred. One of their number, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, said: "The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon us all; we felt something akin to what happened on the day of Pentecost and at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple.... On this occasion, because of the importuning and the faith, and because the hour and the time had arrived, the Lord in his providences poured out the Holy Ghost upon the First Presidency and the Twelve in a miraculous and marvelous manner, beyond anything that any then present had ever experienced.... To carnal people who do not understand the operating of the Holy Spirit of God upon the souls of man, this may sound like gibberish or jargon or uncertainty or ambiguity; but to those who are enlightened by the power of the Spirit and who have themselves felt its power, it will have a ring of veracity and truth, and they will know of its verity. I cannot describe in words what happened; I can only say that it happened and that it can be known and understood only by the feeling that can come into the heart of man." (P, 126-37.)

See also: Upper Room
