Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Agency

The very principle over which warfare was waged in the pre-mortal life was that of agency: man's inherent right to choose his course and accept the consequences thereof. Satan not only rebelled against God, but he also "sought to destroy the agency of man" (Moses 4:3). His followers exercised their agency by similarly pursuing the perditious path of evil, where they now wallow in wickedness (D&C 29:36).

"It is easy to see what a sad condition the world would be in if Lucifer's plan had succeeded," said Elder Joseph Fielding Smith. "Chaos would have ruled supreme. Every soul would have become a nonentity; individuality would have been destroyed and all righteousness, mercy, truth, would have passed away forever, and this would have brought destruction to the universe. How true are the words of the Lord: 'All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence!' (D&C 93:30.)

"... Force and compulsion are principles that obtain in Satan's realms. Upon these his kingdom was founded and because of these it shall fall.

"The great gift of agency is like fire: if properly controlled it becomes an agency of life; if improperly used it becomes the agency of death. The right to choose which has been given us, if we use it wisely, will bring exaltation. Through it we may become sons of God, enjoying the fulness of his kingdom. If improperly used it becomes the agency of banishment from the presence of God into outer darkness where we may become sons of Perdition, the slaves of sin." (WTP, 179-81; italics added.)

As previously mentioned, free will-man's agency or right to choose-also implies responsibility to accept the consequences of choice: condemnation and sorrow for sin or blessings and happiness for righteousness (D&C 93:31). Elder Neal A. Maxwell observed: "So many have erred, thinking that freedom included both freedom to obey or not to obey eternal laws and, wrongly, that it included freedom to change those laws. Not so. Ultimately, freedom involves choice between eternal alternatives, but not the altering of the alternatives. We can choose wickedness or happiness, but not wickedness with happiness." (DSY 1976, 199; italics added.)

The Lord made it clear that men are not pawns of forces extraneous to themselves, "for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves" (D&C 58:26-29; italics added). President Spencer W. Kimball has said: "There are those today who say that man is the result of his environment and cannot rise above it. Those who justify mediocrity, failure, and even weakness and criminality are certainly misguided. Surely the environmental conditions found in childhood and youth are an influence of power. But the fact remains that every normal soul has its free agency and the power to row against the current and to lift himself to new planes of activity and thought and development. Man can transform himself.... Abraham did. He came out of an idol-worshiping family; yet he headed a dispensation of worshipers of the true and living God." (DSY 1974, 239.)

"Next to life itself," declared President David O. McKay, "free agency is the greatest gift of God to man" (CR, Apr. 1952, p. 13).
