Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Constitution (#1)

The fundamental law of the United States, defining the principal organs of government as well as the rights of its citizens, is the Constitution. It was drafted by the Constitutional Convention in 1787 and declared in effect by Congress on March 4, 1789. Ratification of the first ten amendments, known as the Bill of Rights, occurred on December 15, 1791. The divine stamp of approval was placed on this sacred document when the Lord declared, "I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose" (D&C 101:80; italics added). He has mandated that his people befriend the "constitutional law of the land" and has cautioned all to seek diligently for good and wise men who will uphold this basic document of free people (D&C 98:5-10).

Brigham Young once observed, "The spirit and letter of our Constitution and laws will always give us our rights, and under them we could have served God in Missouri and Illinois as well as in the courts of high heaven. But the administrators of the law trampled it under their feet, and wilfully and openly desecrated the holy principles held forth in the Constitution of our country." (JD 10:41.) Thus, though the document is divine, the men who administer it are fallible mortals. Joseph Smith's declared feelings for this inspired instrument of freedom were: "The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun ...; the Constitution of the United States is true." (HC 3:304.) For further information on LDS theology, and even some mistaken mythology, regarding the Constitution, see the June 1976 Ensign, pages 60-65 and the September 1987 Ensign, pages 6-19.

See also: United States
