Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Cowdery, Oliver

No man except the Prophet Joseph Smith had a more responsible position in the early days of the fledgling Church than did Oliver Cowdery. Coparticipant in receiving keys of authority from heavenly messengers, Oliver felt divine hands laid upon his head from the following angelic beings: John the Baptist (D&C 13; 27:7-8; JS-H 1:66-75); Peter, James, and John (D&C 27:12; 128:20); Moses, Elijah, and Elias (D&C 110).

At the time the Church was organized, Oliver was called as the "second elder" thereof. On December 5, 1834, he received the promised ordination as the Assistant President of the Church, which placed him ahead of the two counselors in the First Presidency (HC 2:176; DS 1:212). It is of interest to note that in the preface of the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, under date of February 17, 1835, Oliver's signature preceded those of the two counselors in the First Presidency.

Oliver came into the Prophet's life on April 5, 1829, when he arrived in Harmony, Pennsylvania, to inquire personally after Joseph's work on the Book of Mormon. The effect of that visit had eternal ramifications, for within two days he was serving as the scribe for Joseph Smith. He personally penned almost the entire first copy of the translation.

His first month with the Prophet brought to Oliver at least four revelations (D&C 6, 7, 8, 9). Among these was the reminder from the Lord that Oliver had been brought to Joseph's aid through the manifestations of the Spirit (D&C 6:14-24). Evidently Oliver desired to participate in the translating process but learned that great things do not come without great effort (D&C 9).

It was Oliver's contacts with the Whitmer family that made their home available for the completion of the translation. The Whitmer home later served as the setting for the organization of the Church, of which Oliver was a charter member. His testimony as one of the three special witnesses of the Book of Mormon can be found at the forepart of that sacred volume. Second only to Joseph Smith in being mentioned the most times in the Doctrine and Covenants, Oliver's life was an integral part of the restoration movement. Perhaps that led to overconfidence on his part regarding his indispensability to the divine work.

One of the early Apostles of the Church, George A. Smith, reported the following: "It is said, and I presume correctly, that Oliver Cowdery remarked at one time to Joseph Smith, 'If I should apostatize and leave the Church, the Church would be broken up.' The answer of the Prophet was, 'What and who are you? This is the work of God, and if you turn against it and withdraw from it, it will still roll on and you will not be missed.' It was not long until Oliver turned away, but the work continued. God raised up men from obscurity to step forth and shoulder the burdens, and it was hardly known when and where he went. In about ten years he came back again, came before a local conference at Mosquito Creek, Pottawattomie Co., Iowa, Oct., 1848, and acknowledged his faults. He bore testimony of the mission of the Prophet, Joseph Smith, and of the truth of the Book of Mormon; he exhorted the Saints to follow the authority of the Holy Priesthood, which he assured them was with the Twelve Apostles. He said, 'when the Saints follow the main channel of the stream, they find themselves in deep water and always right, pursuing their journey with safety; but when they turn aside into sloughs and bayous, they are left to flounder in the mud and are lost, for the Angel of God said unto Joseph in my hearing that this Priesthood shall remain on the earth until the end.'

"Oliver declared he took pleasure in bearing this testimony to the largest congregation of Saints he had ever seen together. He was rebaptized and made arrangements to come to the mountains, but died soon after, while on a visit to the Whitmers, in Missouri." (JD 13:347-8.)

Of particular interest regarding Oliver's detoured destiny is the following observation by President Joseph Fielding Smith: "I am firmly of the opinion that had Oliver Cowdery remained true to his covenants and obligations as a witness with Joseph Smith, and retained his authority and place, he and not Hyrum Smith, would have gone with Joseph Smith as a prisoner and to martyrdom at Carthage" (DS 1:219). Perhaps this is what the Lord alluded to in a revelation of April 1829, when the possibility of Oliver's death was pronounced (D&C 6:30). Thus, by his own choice, Oliver was denied the martyr's crown and a chance "to stand with the Prophet Joseph Smith through all time and eternity, holding the keys of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times" (CHMR 1:121).

See also: Apostle; Book of Mormon; First Preacher; Gift of Aaron; Gift Possessed by Oliver Cowdery; Gifts ... Once ... Put Upon ... Oliver Cowdery; Keys Whereby He May Ask and Receive; Olihah; Second Elder; Spokesman; Three Witnesses
