Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Day of Warning

An 1831 revelation declared "this is a day of warning, and not a day of many words" (D&C 63:58). In earlier revelations, the Lord counseled his servants to "say nothing but repentance unto this generation" (D&C 6:9; 11:9; 19:21).

The day of warning is a day of repentance, a day in which to prepare to meet the Messiah, the resurrected Lord, when he returns to claim his earthly kingdom. It is a day when the message of the restoration of the gospel-of keys of authority, additional scripture, and living prophets-is being proclaimed to the world.

In his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord said, "the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days" (D&C 1:4-5; italics added). One of these "chosen disciples," President George F. Richards, said: "I understand that the Lord expects every person who had received the gospel to be a missionary for him throughout his life-not necessarily to go abroad by special call only, but to seek opportunity to preach the gospel to his non-member neighbors as well." (CR, Apr. 1950, p. 24.)

Another of these "chosen disciples," Elder Boyd K. Packer, has stated: "We continually strive to share the gospel with others, but we cannot dilute it to suit their taste. We did not set the standards; the Lord did. It is his church. We ask those of you who are not yet members of the Church to be patient if we seem too anxious to share what we have. If we do not share it, we may lose it. That is one of the requirements if we are to keep it. Therefore, missionary work is not casual; it is very determined." (CR, Oct 1974, p. 125.)

This day of warning will continue until every creature has heard the gospel (Mark 16:15-16). The gospel shall be preached "either to the convincing of them unto peace and life eternal, or unto the deliverance of them to the hardness of their hearts" (1 Ne. 14:7), in which case they shall be left without excuse before the judgment seat of Christ.

See also: Voice of Warning
