Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Destroying Angel

In the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom, the promise is made that all who abide by the principles of health set forth therein by the Lord would find "the destroying angel" passing them by (D&C 89:21). In commenting on this promise, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., said: "This does not say and this does not mean, that to keep the Word of Wisdom is to insure us against death, for death is, in the eternal plan, co-equal with birth....But it does mean that the destroying angel, he who comes to punish the unrighteous for their sins, as he in olden time afflicted the corrupt Egyptians in their wickedness (Ex. 12:23, 29), shall pass by the Saints, 'who are walking in obedience to the commandments,' and who 'remember to keep and do these sayings.' These promises do mean that all those who qualify themselves to enjoy them will be permitted so to live out their lives that they may gain the full experiences and get the full knowledge which they need in order to progress to the highest exaltation in eternity, all these will live until their work is finished and God calls them back to their eternal home, as a reward." (CR, Oct. 1940, pp. 17-18; italics added.)

Elder Spencer W. Kimball noted: "No promise is made through the Word of Wisdom that the faithful observer will not die.... With ancient Israel it was physical life or physical death. In our modern promise, it is spiritual life or spiritual death. If one ignores 'these sayings' and fails in 'obedience to the commandments' his death is certain, but if he obeys implicitly, his eternal life through perfection is assured. The angel of death cuts one short of mortal life for disobedience; the angel of light makes the way clear for the spiritual life eternal." (MF, 210-11.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie said that while "such expressions as 'destroying angel' and 'sword of vengeance' may be figurative, they are intended to convey the reality that the Lord's hand is involved in what takes place and that he is using his powers to bring to pass his ends. Deity, for instance, slew the firstborn in all the houses of Egypt (Ex. 12:23, 29), and this is figuratively spoken of as having been done by 'the destroying angel.' (D&C 89:21.)" (DNTC 2:117-18.)

See also: Great and Dreadful Day of the Lord
