Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Discerning of Spirits

"Two spirits are abroad in the earth," wrote Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "one is of God, the other of the devil. The spirit which is of God is one that leads to light, truth, freedom, progress, and every good thing; on the other hand, the spirit which is of Lucifer leads to darkness, error, bondage, retrogression, and every evil thing. One spirit is from above, the other from beneath; and that which is from beneath never allows more light or truth or freedom to exist than it can help....

In general, the more righteous and saintly a person is, the easier it will be for him to receive communications from heavenly sources; and the more evil and corrupt he is, the easier will it befor evil spirits to implant their nefarious schemes in his mindand heart." (DNTC 3:392-93.) An important gift of the Spirit, therefore, is the "discerning of spirits" (D&C 46:23; 1 Cor.12:10).

To be discerning is to have revealing insight and understanding, to distinguish between that which is of God and that which isof the devil. It is to correctly perceive the right course of action (D&C 63:41) and to recognize subtle differences that may not be apparent to others (D&C 131:7).God is a "discerner of the thought and intents of the heart" (D&C33:1), meaning he perceives and comprehends our every thoughtand desire.

Joseph Smith said, "No manknows the spirit of the devil, andhis power and influence, but bypossessing intelligence which ismore than human, and havingunfolded through the medium ofthe Priesthood the mysterious operations of his devices. A man must have the discerning of spirits before he can drag into daylight this hellish influence and unfold it unto the world in all its soul-destroying, diabolical, and horrid colors; for nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God." (TPJS, 205; see also 1 Cor. 2:10-16; 1 John 4:1-6.)

"The discerning of spirits is and can be practiced in righteousness only where the true Church and kingdom of God is found. In the final analysis, it takes apostles, prophets, priesthood, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and a knowledge of God's laws and the manner in which he operates, in order to separate the spirits into their two opposing camps. Only where these things are found can error be segregated from truth, because only there are the channels of revelation open." (DNTC 3:395.)

It is important to remember that revelation from God will be edifying, will not contradict that which has been revealed through the Lord's authorized and recognized servants, and will not concern an area over which we have no stewardship (HC 1:355; TPJS, 214-15; D&C 129). "We get our answers from the source of the power we list to obey," said President Harold B. Lee. "If we're following the ways of the devil, we'll get our answers from the devil. If we're keeping the commandments of God, we'll get our answers from God." (SHP, 138.)
