Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Doctrine and Covenants

The Book of Commandments, intended for publication in 1833, was the name of the original volume of revelations which have since been incorporated into the Doctrine and Covenants. This latter volume has over twice as many revelations as the original book. The origin of the name is unclear, although it does appear in an entry in Joseph Smith's journal, dated November 3, 1831 (HC 1:229). It was first published under this name in 1835. It is a book containing "doctrine" and "covenants" given by the Lord to his people in these last days. "'Doctrine' means 'teaching,' 'instruction.' It denotes more especially what is taught as truth, for us to believe, as distinct from precepts, by which rules, to be obeyed are given. 'Doctrine' refers to belief; precept to conduct.... The word 'covenant' is a term by which God indicates the settled arrangement between Him and His people." (SS, 14.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith made the following observations regarding the book and its title: "The Doctrine and Covenants.... how much more significant it is than the Book of Commandments. A Book of Commandments means, if we accept the title at its face value, that it contains only commandments. But this title which the Lord gave ... is very significant and tells the story of what this book actually is. It contains the doctrine of the Church; it contains the covenants the Lord will make with the Church, if we are willing to receive them.

"In my judgment there is no book on earth yet come to man as important as the book known as the Doctrine and Covenants." (DS 3:198.)

The significance of the Doctrine and Covenants to the entire world was stressed in an early conference address by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith in the following words: "The Lord has given so many revelations, in our own day. We have this Doctrine and Covenants full of them, all pertaining unto the Latter-day Saints and to the world. For this is not our book alone.... The Lord has given it unto the world for their salvation...; it belongs to all the world, not only to the Latter-day Saints, and they will be judged by it, and you will be judged by it ... and if we fail to comprehend these things, if we will not take hold on the things which the Lord has revealed unto us, then his condemnation shall rest upon us, and we shall be removed from his presence and from his kingdom." (CR, Oct. 1919, p. 146.)

The Lord's admonition regarding this book of scripture is, "Search these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled" (D&C 1:37).

See also: Book of Commandments
