Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Elijah

Elijah the prophet is spoken of in seven different revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, most of which refer to his special premillennial mission of restoring the promised sealing powers of the priesthood (2:1-3; 27:9; 35:4; 110:13-16; 128:17-18; 138:46-48). In only one section is he mentioned without referring to his special mission (133:55).

The Prophet Joseph described the mission of Elijah as follows: "Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. 'And I will send Elijah the Prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord,' etc., etc. Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." (TPJS, 172.)

In a further clarification of Elijah's mission of "turning" the hearts of the fathers and children to one another, the Prophet said: "Now, the word turn here should be translated bind, or seal" (TPJS, 330). "Elijah shall reveal the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers" (TPJS, 323).

Malachi's ancient prophecy (Mal. 4:5-6) which initially foretold of Elijah's special mission is found in each of the other standard works of the Church (D&C 2:1-3; 3 Ne. 25:5-6; JS-H 1:38-39; other passages already cited). The Jewish people still anticipate the arrival of Elijah, and each year during their Paschal service a place is set for the ancient prophet and the door is opened to admit him as the "forerunner" of the promised Messiah. It is of interest to note that on April 3, 1836, the Jewish people celebrated their Paschal service, opening their doors to Elijah's return (DS 2:100-101). On that very day, he did return to the Kirtland Temple, where he bestowed the long-awaited keys of the sealing power (D&C 110:13-16).

Elijah's power from God extends back to his "sealing" the heavens for a period of three years so that no rain or dew fell on the parched earth (1 Kgs. 17:1). His classic showdown with the wicked priests of Baal is another example of his extraordinary faith and power, and one would do well to contemplate Elijah's searing inquiry: "How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him." (1 Kgs. 18:21.)

Elijah was taken to heaven in "a chariot of fire," without tasting death (2 Kgs. 2:1-11). In other words, he became a translated being with temporary power over death. This was necessary in order that he might return to the Mount of Transfiguration and bestow keys of authority on Peter, James, and John, for he had to possess a tangible earthly body for that mission (DS 2:110-11; Matt. 17:3; Luke 9:30). Following the resurrection of Christ-the "first fruits" thereof-Elijah passed through death and was a resurrected being when he appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple.

See also: Earth to Be Utterly Wasted; Elias; Hearts ... Shall Turn to Fathers; Mount, The; Priesthood (#2); Promises Made to the Fathers; Translated
