Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Ephraim

Ephraim was the second son born to Joseph, one of the twelve sons of Jacob, before the great famine in Egypt (Gen. 41:50-52). His mother was Asenath, daughter of the high priest of the state religion and descendant of Abraham (AGQ 1:170-71). Ephraim was given the birthright blessing by his grandfather Jacob in preference to his elder brother, Manasseh (Gen. 48; Jer. 31:9). Both brothers received a full portion of inheritance among the sons of Jacob and became the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh (JST, Gen. 48:5-6).

When the united kingdom of Israel separated into two groups, Jeroboam, an Ephraimite, became king of the northern kingdom, which became known as the kingdom of Israel (1 Kgs. 11). The northern kingdom consisted of all but the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, who became the southern kingdom, known as the kingdom of Judah. Ephraim was one of those tribes led away into captivity, thus becoming a "lost tribe" (WTP, 130).

However, "Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people," declared the prophet Hosea (Hos. 7:8). Ephraim "was scattered more than any other among the people of other nations," and though he exists as a distinct tribe among the others of the ten lost tribes, yet he has posterity among the known nations of the earth today (DS 3:250-54). "At this present time," declared President Joseph Fielding Smith, "most of those who are receiving the gospel are of the tribe of Ephraim" (AGQ 5:70).

It is Ephraim's responsibility to preach the gospel to the inhabitants of the earth today, and when the lost tribes come back, "they will have to receive the crowning blessings from their brother Ephraim, the 'firstborn' in Israel" (DS 3:252-53). The Lord has said of this tribe that "the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim" (D&C 64:36). Those of this tribe might be said to have the "believing blood."

See also: Blood of Ephraim; Children of Ephraim; Stick of Ephraim; They Who Are in the North Countries
