Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Fasting

In 1832, the Lord declared, "I give unto you a commandment that ye shall continue in prayer and fasting from this time forth" (D&C 88:76). The principle of fasting has existed on this planet from the time of Adam, and the Lord was here reemphasizing an eternal source of spiritual strength.

The term fasting is equated with "rejoicing" by the Lord, when applied to Sabbath day activities; in that sense, fasting may not mean abstaining from food and drink, although abstinence from activities pursued the other six days of the week is expected (D&C 59:13-14). This abstinence must be coupled with mighty prayer to make the fasting complete (3 Ne. 27:1). "To make a fast most fruitful," said President Ezra Taft Benson, "it should be coupled with prayer and meditation; physical work should be held to a minimum, and it's a blessing if one can ponder on the scriptures and the reason for the fast" (En., Nov. 1974, p. 67).

Some of the benefits accruing from fasting are gaining and strengthening a testimony (Alma 5:45-46); receiving revelation and the spirit of prophecy (Alma 17:3); eliminating contention (4 Ne. 1:12-13); gaining power to resist temptation (1 Cor. 7:5); and healing the afflicted (Mark 9:17-29). According to Isaiah, a proper fast is not merely going through the motions of bowing one's head and abstaining from food: it requires one "to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens [of self and others], and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke" (Isa. 58:5-6). "The greatest of all benefits" from fasting, said President David O. McKay, "is the spiritual strength derived by the subjection of physical appetite to the will of the individual" (CR, Oct. 1974, p. 19).

A monthly fast day is observed by the Saints of God. Brigham Young credited Joseph Smith with starting this procedure in Kirtland. The Prophet determined that the money or commodities saved by fasting one day a month should be contributed to the poor. It was not regularly practiced until about 1852, however, when the first Thursday of each month was set aside as a day of sacrifice. This continued until 1896, when the First Presidency changed the day from Thursday to the first Sunday of the month. (CR, Nov. 1974, pp. 17-19.) Accordingly, on this day, "Proper observance of the monthly fast consists of going without food and drink for two consecutive meals, attending the fast and testimony meeting, and making a generous offering to the bishop for the care of those in need. 'Without drink' applies to water as well as other liquids. A minimum offering is defined as the equivalent of the value of two meals." (NE, Sept. 1971, p. 18; italics added.)
