Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Fayette, New York

The Prophet penned the following entry in his journal in the spring of 1829: "Shortly after commencing to translate, I became acquainted with Mr. Peter Whitmer, of Fayette, Seneca county, New York, and also with some of his family. In the beginning of the month of June, his son, David Whitmer, came to the place where we were residing, and brought with him a two-horse wagon, for the purpose of having us [Joseph and Oliver Cowdery] accompany him to his father's place, and there remain until we should finish the work. It was arranged that we should have our board free of charge, and the assistance of one of his brothers to write for me, and also his own assistance when convenient. Having much need of such timely aid in an undertaking so arduous, and being informed that the people in the neighborhood of the Whitmers were anxiously awaiting the opportunity to inquire into these things, we accepted the invitation, and accompanied Mr. Whitmer to his father's house, and there resided until the translation was finished and the copyright secured." (HC 1:48-49.)

Not only was the translation of the Book of Mormon completed at Fayette, but it was also here that the heavenly messenger Moroni showed the Three Witnesses the plates from which the record was translated, and the voice of God was heard bearing witness as to their authenticity. On April 6, 1830, the "kingdom" destined to "consume" all other kingdoms was organized at Fayette (Dan. 2:44; D&C 38:9). Two months later, the first conference of this fledgling kingdom convened at the same location. Between June 1829 and January 1831, twenty of the revelations found in the Doctrine and Covenants were received within the borders of Fayette (D&C 14-18; 20-21; 28-40). In obedience to the Lord's wishes (D&C 37:1), the Prophet moved the headquarters of the Church to Ohio in January 1831, and Fayette receded into the pages of history.

See also: Wilderness of Fayette, Seneca County
