Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

First Presidency of the Church

By revelation, the Lord designated "three Presiding High Priests" to form a "quorum of the Presidency of the Church" (D&C 107:22). These three men, and the quorum they represent, are referred to by several designations in the Doctrine and Covenants: "First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood" (D&C 68:15; see also 107:17); "Presidency of the High Priesthood" (81:2): "Quorum of the Presidency of the Church" (D&C 107:22); and "Presidency of the Church" (D&C 107:33).

The requirements for their selection, as revealed by the Lord, are summarized as follows: "First, it was requisite that there be three presiding high priests. Second, they were to be chosen by the body (which has been construed to be the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles). Third, they must be appointed and ordained by the same body-the Quorum of the Twelve. Fourth, they must be upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayers of the Church." (SHP, 165.)

When the President of the Church dies, his counselors are automatically released, for they cannot serve as counselors in a quorum that has no president (TPJS, 106; see also GK, 165). "Immediately following the death of a President, the next ranking body, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, becomes the presiding authority," declared President Harold B. Lee, "with the President of the Twelve automatically becoming the acting President of the Church" (CR, Apr. 1970, p. 123: see also DS 3:156).

The only way one other than the senior Apostle could become the President of the Church is "if the Lord reveals to that President of the Twelve that someone other than himself could be selected" (CR, Apr. 1970, p. 123). It seems unlikely that such would ever happen, for as President Spencer W. Kimball has observed, "This is the way of the Lord, and he retains the leadership in his divine hands" (CR, Apr. 1970, p. 118).

In reorganizing the First Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve sustain and set apart the new President of the Church, who in turn selects his two counselors. These counselors need not be Apostles, but they must be sustained by the Twelve as well as the body of the Church (GD, 173; DS 3:157). Once chosen and sustained, "the supreme governing power of the Church is vested in the President with his counselors. The First Presidency preside over all councils, all quorums, and all organizations of the Church, with supreme appointing power and power of nomination." (IE, Nov. 1966, p. 78.)

Although these men cannot claim infallibility (GT 1:206), nor have they ever asserted such to be the case, "what they say as a presidency is what the Lord would say if he were here in person" (Marion G. Romney, CR, Apr. 1945, p. 90). Joseph Smith noted that "revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church, are to come through the Presidency. This is the order of heaven." (TPJS, 111.)

"The voice of the First Presidency and the united voice of others who hold with them the keys of the kingdom shall always guide the Saints and the world in those paths where the Lord wants them to be," declared President Joseph Fielding Smith. "I testify," said he, "that if we shall look to the First Presidency and follow their counsel and direction, no power on earth can stay or change our course as a church, and as individuals we shall gain peace in this life and be inheritors of eternal glory in the world to come." (CR, Apr. 1972, p. 99.)

See also: Chosen by the Body; Presidency of the High Priesthood
