Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

First Resurrection

The "first resurrection" is spoken of in several sections of the Doctrine and Covenants (45:54; 63:18; 76:64; 132:19, 26). It has been defined in the following terms: "While there was a general resurrection of the righteous at the time Christ arose from the dead, it is customary for us to speak of the resurrection of the righteous at the Second Coming of Christ as the first resurrection. It is the first to us, for we have little thought or concern over that which is past. The Lord has promised that at the time of his Second Advent the graves will be opened, and the just shall come forth to reign with him on the earth for a thousand years." (DS 2:295.)

"It is the opinion of some that the resurrection is going on all the time now, but this is purely speculation without warrant in the scriptures. It is true that the Lord has power to call forth any person or persons from the dead, as he may desire, especially if they have a mission to perform which would require their resurrection. For example, we have the cases of Peter, James, and Moroni.

"We are given to understand that the first resurrection yet future, which means the coming forth of the righteous, will take place at one particular time, which is when our Savior shall appear in the clouds of heaven, when he shall return to reign." (DS 2:299.)

If we look upon the resurrections which have already taken place as a prelude to the "first resurrection," as defined above, then there are three more phases of this "first resurrection" to consider. First, there will be the resurrection of the righteous who have died since the days of the Savior. These will join those worthy souls who are living on the earth at the time of Christ's coming in being "caught up to meet him" and accompany him in his descent to earth. This latter group will pass through an immediate "quickening"; that is, their death and resurrection will be instantaneous (D&C 88:96-98).

The second phase of the "first resurrection" will involve "those who are Christ's at his coming" (D&C 88:99). "In this resurrection will come forth those of the terrestrial order, who were not worthy to be caught up to meet him, but who are worthy to come forth to enjoy the millenial reign" (DS 2:296-97).

The third phase will involve those who live during the thousand years of peace, who shall "not sleep ... in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye" when they reach "the age of a tree," or "an hundred years old" (D&C 101:29-31; Isa. 65:20).

See also: Celestial; Resurrection; Terrestrial; Those Who Are Christ's at His Coming
