Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

General Authorities

Although it is an often-used term among Latter-day Saints today, the term general authorities appears but once in the Doctrine and Covenants (102:32). At the time of this revelation, February 17, 1834, the First Presidency was the only "general" quorum of authority in the Church. That is to say, it was the only standing quorum with general jurisdiction over the entire Church. The minutes of the meeting during which this revelation was received speak of the "traveling high council composed of the twelve apostles" (D&C 102:30). However, these twelve "general authorities" were not chosen for another year.

Inasmuch as the revelation applies to the structure of the Church in our day, it is necessary to identify the meaning of General Authorities today. At the present time, those who receive this designation are the following: members of the First Presidency, Quorum of the Twelve, Quorums of the Seventy, the Presiding Bishopric, and the Patriarch to the Church. This latter position was made emeritus in 1979 (CR, Oct. 1979, p. 25).

General Authorities are given general jurisdiction over the entire Church rather than being confined to a local area. Their authority is in a vertical descent from the First Presidency to the Twelve to the Seventy, with the higher quorum taking precedence over the lower one (D&C 107:22-34). One of their number has written: "Though general authorities are authorities in the sense of having power to administer church affairs, they may or may not be authorities in the sense of doctrinal knowledge, the intricacies of church procedures, or the receipt of the promptings of the Spirit. A call to an administrative position of itself adds little knowledge or power of discernment to an individual, although every person called to a position in the Church does grow in grace, knowledge, and power by magnifying the calling given him." (MD, 309.)

See also: Apostle: First Presidency of the Church; Seventy, The; Spiritual Authorities of the Church
