Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Gentiles

The term Gentiles is one of the most often used yet least understood words in Mormon culture. Its usage in scripture generally refers to those who are not of the house of Israel (descendants of Abraham through the lineage of Jacob and his twelve sons). However, the principle of adoption applies to all who join The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; they become of Israel regardless of their blood lines (Abr. 2:9-11; Gal. 3:26-29; TPJS, 149-50).

The term Gentile has been used in the following ways: (1) to refer to the descendants of Noah's son, Japheth (Gen. 10:1-5); (2) to identify those who have not descended from Abraham; (3) to classify those who have not descended from Jacob; (4) to identify those who have not descended from Judah; and (5) to distinguish the "non-Mormon." It is interesting to note that the term Gentile has been translated as "not of Judah" in both the German (Nichtjuden) and Dutch (Niet-Joden) editions of the Book of Mormon.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "After the Kingdom of Israel was destroyed and the Ten Tribes were led away into Assyrian captivity, those of the Kingdom of Judah called themselves Jews and designated all others as Gentiles. It is this concept that would have been taught to Lehi, Mulek and the other Jews who came to the Western Hemisphere to found the great Nephite and Lamanite civilizations. It is not surprising, therefore, to find the Book of Mormon repeatedly speaking of Jew and Gentile as though this phrase marked a division between all men; to find the United States described as a Gentile Nation (1 Ne. 13; 3 Ne. 21); and to find the promise that the Book of Mormon would come forth 'by way of the Gentile!' (Title page of Book of Mormon; D&C 20:9.)

"Actually, of course, the house of Israel has been scattered among nations, and Joseph Smith (through whom the Book of Mormon was revealed) was of the Tribe of Ephraim. At the same time the Prophet was of the Gentiles, meaning that he was a citizen of a Gentile Nation and also that he was not a Jew. Members of the Church in general are both of Israel and of the Gentiles. Indeed, the gospel has come forth in the last days in the times of the Gentiles and, in large measure, will not go to the Jews until the Gentile fulness comes in. (D&C 45:28-30.)" (MD, 311.)

See also: Times of the Gentiles
