Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Granger, Oliver

The Lord is very complimentary in a revelation mentioning Oliver Granger: "His name shall be had in sacred remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the Lord" (D&C 117:12-15). His biography is found in the Prophet's journal: "He was the son of Pierce and Clarissa Granger, born in the town of Phelps, Ontario county, New York, 7th February, 1794; received a common school education, was two years a member of the Methodist Church and was a licensed exhorter. On the 8th September, 1813, he married Lydia Dibble; in the year 1827, he in a great measure lost his sight by cold and exposure; he was sheriff of Ontario county, and colonel of the militia. He received the Gospel on reading the Book of Mormon, which he providentially obtained, and was baptized at Sodus, Wayne county, and ordained an Elder by Brigham and Joseph Young, they being the first Elders he saw, and immediately devoted his time to preaching and warning the people.

"In the year 1833 he moved to Kirtland, and then took a mission to the east with Elder Samuel Newcome; returned and was ordained a High Priest; took another mission in the spring of 1836 to New York with John P. Greene; and after his return built up a branch at Huntsburg, Geauga county, Ohio; also a branch at Perry, Richfield county, where he baptized Bradley Wilson and his seven sons and their wives. When the Church left Kirtland he was appointed to settle the Church business.

"In June, 1838, he went to Far West, and returned in August of same year; in October he again started, taking his family; he went seventy miles into Missouri, and was driven back by the mob; in the spring of 1839 he went to Nauvoo; in 1840 removed to Kirtland with his family, where he remained until his death.

"He was a man of good business qualifications, but had been for many years nearly blind." (HC 4:408-9.) He died in August 1841 in Kirtland, where he had been looking after the affairs of the Church.
