Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Grover, Thomas

A man of impeccable character who exemplified the principles of charity, consecration, and trust was Thomas Grover (D&C 124:132). He is one who epitomizes the truth of J. Reuben Clark's statement that "in the service of the Lord, it is not where you serve but how" (CR, Apr. 1951, p. 154).

Although he served faithfully on high councils in Kirtland, Far West, Nauvoo, and Utah, his real achievements in life were in the unheralded acts of charitable service to others. For example, after his arrival in Kirtland, he called on the Prophet. "As he knocked at the door the Prophet opened it and said, putting out his hand: 'How do you do, Brother Grover. If God ever sent a man he sent you. I want to borrow every dollar you can spare for immediate use.' Brother Grover entered the house and conversed with the Prophet about the situation, offering to let Joseph have what money he needed. Brother Joseph accepted the offer and told Brother Grover to look around and find a location that suited him for a home and then return, when the money he had advanced would be returned to him. In a short time the place was selected, but Brother Grover refused to receive back his money, saying, 'I have sufficient for my needs without it.' "From that day the devotion of Thomas Grover to Joseph Smith never wavered.

On another occasion, the son of Widow Brown came to Grover to buy "a little flour." "Brother Grover sent his son to fill a grain sack full of flour and put it on the boy's wagon. The flustered youth asked how much a whole sack of flour would cost, adding that he had only a little money. To which Brother Grover replied, 'I do not sell flour to widows and fatherless children.' As the sack was placed upon the wagon the happy boy drove away in tears."

Grover once refused to sell a harvest of seven hundred bushels of wheat at the market price of five dollars a bushel, but instead "loaned or sold every bushel of it, except enough for his own family, for the tithing office price of two dollars a bushel." Numerous are the accounts of his providing goods and service to those in need without any thought of recompense.

Brigham Young paid tribute to Grover in these words: "Brother Grover, if every Latter-day Saint would do as you have done there would be no need of a tithing among this people."

Grover's personal philosophy was expressed in this motto he coined: "A debt can never be outlawed; a dollar is due until it is paid. If I were going to be hanged I should go on time."

His daughter rendered the following tribute to him: "My father was loved by all who knew him. He never spoke evil of anyone; he did not boast, and he did not take honor unto himself. Many times he has divided his last meal with a sufferer. His word was as good as his bond. He could neither be bought or sold. He was incapable of a little mean or treacherous trick. Not one of his children has apostatized."

In addition to his acts of charity, Grover was a man of physical courage. He served as one of the Prophet's bodyguards and was instrumental in releasing Joseph when he had been kidnapped by a couple of renegade sheriffs from Missouri. Grover was serving a mission in June 1844 when he was warned in a dream to return to Nauvoo. He arrived in time to join the procession carrying the slain prophets back to Nauvoo and helped in preparing the bodies for burial.

He died true to the faith on February 20, 1886, following a lifetime of service to the Church and his fellowmen. "About the last Sunday in the life of Thomas Grover he attended the sacrament meeting in Farmington Ward. As the amen was spoken and the people were about to move, Brother Thomas suddenly raised his hand and said, 'Wait a minute, Bishop.' Then he added, that he could not go home until he had borne testimony that the Gospel was true and that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God." (Jenson 4: 137-42.)
