Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Arm of Flesh

In his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord declared, "Man should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust in his arm of flesh" (D&C 1:19). Similarly, an ancient prophet proclaimed, "I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh" (2 Ne. 4:34). The arm of flesh represents mortal man and the "wisdom of the wise" of this world (D&C 76:9; 2 Ne. 9:28), and is thus contrary to the whisperings of the Spirit.

Elder Boyd K. Packer observed: "There are too many in the Church who seem to be totally dependent, emotionally and spiritually, upon others. They subsist on some kind of emotional welfare. They are unwilling to sustain themselves. They become so dependent that they endlessly need to be shored up, lifted up, endlessly need encouragement, and they contribute little of their own.

"It is critically important that you understand that you already know right from wrong, that you're innately, inherently, and intuitively good. When you say, 'I can't! I can't solve my problems!' I want to thunder out, 'Don't you realize who you are? Haven't you learned yet that you are a son or a daughter of Almighty God? Do you not know that there are powerful resources inherited from him that you can call upon to give you steadiness and courage and great power?'" (DSY, 1975, pp. 346, 355.)

Depending on the Spirit does not mean that counseling from our fellowmen should be avoided. Elder Packer noted that "there should not be the slightest embarrassment on the part of any member of the Church who needs counsel to receive that counsel. At times it may be crucial that you seek and that you accept counsel." (Ibid, p. 354.) The key to accepting counseling appears in the Book of Mormon: "Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Ne. 28:31; italics added).

See also: Wisdom of the Wise
