Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Harris, Martin

Outside of the Smith family itself, Martin Harris was one of the earliest supporters of Joseph Smith's divine work. In the fall of 1827, shortly after Joseph received the gold plates from the angel Moroni, Martin made a present of fifty dollars to the young Prophet which enabled him to get to Pennsylvania where he could pursue the work of translation without the severe hindrance he suffered in New York.

In February 1828, Martin visited Joseph and persuaded the latter to allow him to copy from the plates some of the characters, which Harris then took to New York City to show some learned professors. The result was that an ancient prophecy by Isaiah was fulfilled (Isa. 29:11-14; 2 Ne. 27:15-22; JS-H 1:61-65).

Martin's role as a chief participant in the fulfillment of further prophecy was again brought to the forefront when he was responsible for losing the first 116 pages of translated writings from the Book of Mormon plates. The Lord, having foreseen this eventuality, had prepared a second set of plates which Joseph was later allowed to translate, following a severe rebuke for his carelessness in losing the first manuscript (HC 1:20-28; 1 Ne. 9; Words of Morm. 1:3-7). This event was the setting which precipitated the revelations found in sections 3 and 10 of the Doctrine and Covenants. For his role in becoming a dupe of the devil, Martin was labeled "a wicked man" by the Lord (D&C 3:12; 10:7).

Although his loss of the sacred manuscript denied him further participation as a scribe for Joseph Smith, Martin's repentance allowed him to serve as one of the three special witnesses to the Book of Mormon (D&C 17; HC 1:52-57). In this capacity, he saw the gold plates from which the sacred book was translated; saw the heavenly messenger who brought the plates; viewed the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, and the Liahona; and heard the voice of God declaring the record to be true.

Martin mortgaged his farm in order to help finance the first printing of the Book of Mormon and was cautioned by the Lord not to "covet [his] own property, but [to] impart it freely" (D&C 19:26). He served on the first high council of the Church at Kirtland (D&C 102:3, 34) and was one of the select few first called to participate in a united order (D&C 58:35). In order to keep his identity secret on several occasions, the Lord referred to him as "Ma-hemson" (D&C 82:11; 104:24, 26; pre-1981 ed.).

The month prior to Joseph Smith's fleeing Kirtland for fear of his life, Martin Harris and other disaffected Mormons were excommunicated from the Church (IE, March 1969, p. 36). Martin remained in Kirtland for the next thirty-two years until he was persuaded to come to Utah. Edward Stevenson was instrumental in raising funds to accomplish this purpose, and Martin arrived in Salt Lake on August 30, 1870. Five of the Quorum of the Twelve witnessed his rebaptism, and one of them, Orson Pratt, confirmed him a member of the Church.

Although far removed from Church activity for many years, Martin was true to his witness of the divinity of the Book of Mormon. On one occasion, when some of his acquaintances deliberately got him "tipsy," he was questioned about the truthfulness of his declaration of belief regarding the Book of Mormon. "Now, Martin," they cajoled, "do you really believe you did see an angel when you were awake?" To the delight of the crowd, Harris replied, "No! I do not believe it." However their glee was short-lived, for he then said: "Gentlemen, what I have said is true, from the fact that my belief is swallowed up in knowledge; for I want to say to you that as the Lord lives I do know that I stood with the Prophet Joseph Smith in the presence of the angel, and it was in the brightness of day."

He died in Clarkstoa, Utah, on July 10, 1875, shortly after taking the beloved book in his hands and bearing final testimony of its truthfulness. (Jenson 1:271-76.)

See also: Mahemson: Three Witnesses; Wicked Man, A
