Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Holy Ghost

"The Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit," declared the Lord through his prophet (D&C 130:22-23). This third member of the Godhead, in whom we declare our belief (Articles of Faith 1: 1), "is a Spirit in the form of a man" (DS 1:38). Whether he will ever have a physical body has not been revealed, and, in the words of a prophet, "It is a waste of time to speculate" on this subject (DS 1:39). He has a specific size and dimension and "can no more be omnipresent in person than can the Father or the Son, but by his intelligence, his knowledge, his power and influence, over and through the laws of nature, he is and can be omnipresent throughout all the works of God" (GD, 61).

Some become confused about the personage of the Holy Ghost because prophets and gospel writers have written that following Jesus' baptism, "the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove" (D&C 93:15; 1 Ne. 11:27; 2 Ne. 31:8; Matt. 3:16; Mark 1:10). Joseph Smith said: "The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of the dove, but in [the] sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence." (TPJS, 276.)

President Harold B. Lee suggested that the office of the Holy Ghost involved pronouncing "one free from guilt or blame ... to absolve" one from the stain of sin (SHP, 51). This is what was meant when the Lord proclaimed, "by the Spirit ye are justified" (Moses 6:60).

A major mission of the Holy Ghost is to testify of the reality of Jesus as the Christ. As Paul wrote to the Corinthians, "no man can know that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost" (JST, 1 Cor. 12:3; italics added). Additionally, the Doctrine and Covenants states that "to some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world" (D&C 46:13; see also Moro. 10:6-7).

The power of the Holy Ghost -the ability to receive revelation-is based upon faith in Christ and righteousness (1 Ne. 10:17). The effect of this upon man is to expand his mind and his whole soul with "pure intelligence" (TPJS, 149-50).

See also: Blasphemy Against the Holy Ghost; Comforter; Gift of the Holy Ghost; God; Holy Spirit of Promise; Spirit; Spirit of the Lord; Spirit of Truth; Unspeakable Gift of the Holy Ghost
