Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Huntington, William

The name of William Huntington surfaces in the Doctrine and Covenants as a member of the Nauvoo high council in 1841 (D&C 124:132). However, this faithful Saint was known in the circles of the Church for some time prior to this. Before the Church was organized, it was revealed to him that he would live to see the true Church, which he boldly proclaimed. When he first heard of "Mormonism" in the winter of 1832-33, he "read the Book of Mormon, believed it with all his heart and preached it almost every day, to his neighbors and everybody he could see." He was finally baptized in 1835, after which his home became a meetinghouse for the Saints. He lived in Kirtland for some time, where he suffered the persecution heaped upon the members who were faithful. "His house was a hiding place for Father Joseph Smith, Hyrum, Samuel and Don Carlos, while they were trying to escape from the persecutions in Kirtland. The Egyptian mummies were also hid in his house for a long time, and many of the pursued and persecuted Saints found a retreat there and a hiding place from apostates' persecution."

He served as a high councilor in Kirtland and as commissary for the Saints in Far West. He worked on the Nauvoo Temple as a stone cutter, and later within its sacred walls as an ordinance worker. He helped lay one of the corner stones of this edifice on April 6, 1841. Huntington served as one of the leaders of the pioneer companies and presided over the Church at the Mt. Pisgah, Iowa, settlement. "In this place his labors were extreme and unremitting for the good and welfare of the people, and the comfort of the sick of which there were a great many." He died on August 19, 1846, while serving his people. Huntington's biographical epitaph reads: "In life he was beloved by all the Saints. His love and zeal for the cause of God were unsurpassed by any. His judgment was respected and his conduct never questioned; he never had a trial or difficulty with any person in the Church." (Jenson 1:368-70.)
