Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Independence, Missouri

In July 1831, the Lord revealed Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, as the "center place" for the "city of Zion" and "spot for the temple" (D&C 57:1-3). On August 3 of that year, Joseph Smith dedicated the temple site and the Saints proceeded to build up Zion (HC 1:199). During the next two years, however, circumstances prevented their accomplishing the desired objectives, and they were ruthlessly driven from the county in the latter part of 1832.

Although the Saints looked upon the expulsion as temporary, over a century has passed since the Lord's decree. President Joseph Fielding Smith has said, "Some of the members of the Church seem to be fearful lest the word of the Lord shall fail. Others have tried to convince themselves that the original plan has been changed and that the Lord does not require at our hands this mighty work which has been predicted by the prophets of ancient times. We have not been released from this responsibility, nor shall we be. The word of the Lord will not fail.

"If we look back and examine his word carefully, we will discover that nothing has failed of all that he has predicted, neither shall one jot or tittle pass away unfulfilled. It is true that the Lord commanded the saints to build to his name a temple in Zion. This they attempted to do, but were prevented by their enemies, so the Lord did not require the work at their hands at that time. [D&C 124:49-54.] The release from the building of the temple did not, however, cancel the responsibility of building the City and the House of the Lord, at some future time. When the Lord gets ready for it to be accomplished, he will command his people, and the work will be done." (DS 3:78-79.)

"It should be remembered that the great temple, which is yet to be built in the City Zion, will not be one edifice, but twelve. Some of these temples will be for the lesser priesthood." (DS 3:93; see also HC 1:357-59.)

Thus, the seat of Jackson County-Independence-located on the Kansas-Missouri border, almost as a suburb of Kansas City, will one day rise in glory and fame under the title of the "New Jerusalem."

See also: Center Place; City of Zion; Goodly Land; Jackson County; Missouri; New Jerusalem; Work of the Gathering; Zion
