Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Intelligence

A revelation of 1833 declared, "The glory of God is intelligence, or in other words, light and truth" (D&C 93:36). Elder John A. Widtsoe said, "The word intelligence, as used in common speech, means readiness in learning, quickness of mind. Its higher gospel meaning is more profound. The intelligent man is he who seeks knowledge and uses it in accordance with the plan of the Lord for human good.... Intelligence, [is] but another name for wisdom. In the language of mathematics we may say that knowledge, plus the proper use of knowledge, equals intelligence, or wisdom." (CR, Apr. 1938, p. 50.)

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote that "there is a vast difference between the meaning of intelligence and that of knowledge. The former, while it includes the latter, is more potent and has a great significance. Intelligence is more than the capacity to understand and communicate truth. The intelligent man glories in righteousness not only does he know truth, but wisely applies it in all his actions." (WTP, 227.)

The same revelation mentioned above proclaims that light and truth, or intelligence, "forsake that evil one." (D&C 93:37). Therefore, as President Joseph F. Smith declared, "Satan possesses knowledge, far more than we have but he has not intelligence, or he would render obedience to the principles of truth and right" (WTP, 231). "A man who has intelligence will worship God and repent of his sins; he will seek to know the will of God and follow it." (DS 1:290-91.) God "is perfect intelligence," or, in other words, his every thought and act is in perfect harmony with truth and right (TPJS, 55).

A second meaning for intelligence is implied in Doctrine and Covenants 93:29, wherein it is stated that "intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." Joseph Smith taught that "the spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be eternal." (TPJS, 158; 373.) In commenting on this statement, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "In saying the spirit of man is not created the Prophet without any doubt had in mind the intelligence as explained in the Doctrine and Covenants, Sec. 93:29.... From this we gather that the intelligence in man was not created, but the Prophet taught very clearly that man is in very deed the offspring of God, and that the spirits of men were born in the spirit world the children of God." (TPJS, 158, footnote.) When Abraham wrote of the "intelligences that were organized before the world was," he spoke of the spirit children of our Father in Heaven begotten from an eternal intelligence (Abr. 3:22).
