Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Israel

The name Israel appears over forty times in the Doctrine and Covenants. It is the name initially given to Jacob, the father of the twelve sons who became the twelve tribes of Israel (Gen. 32:28; 35:10).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, "Literally, the name Israel means contender with God, the sense and meaning indicating one who has succeeded in his supplication before the Lord, who has enlisted as a soldier of God, who has become a prince of God" (MD, 389). By extension, and by promised blessing to Abraham's posterity, the name Israel applies to the faithful in all ages and not just a single man or nation (Abr. 2:10; Gal. 3:29).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "one of the most important points in the faith of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, through the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, is the gathering of Israel" (TPJS, 92-93). This gathering is proceeding for both the living and the dead as worldwide missionary and temple activity continues to increase and intensify. The Lord declared, "My arm is stretched out in the last days, to save my people Israel" (D&C 136:22).

Historically, the name Israel has been used in the following ways: (1) a personal name for Jacob; (2) a name applied to all of Jacob's descendants; (3) the titular name bestowed on the faithful followers of Christ; (4) the name whereby the northern tribes were known, especially after the division of the United Kingdom (1 Sam. 11:8); (5) the name whereby Judah, the nation of Jews, has been known, whether as a distinct body occupying a land called Israel, or as a group of scattered people. A careful reading of each reference in the Doctrine and Covenants should readily identify the sense in which it is being used.

See also: Army of Israel; Camp of Israel; Children of Israel; Children of Jacob; Covenant People; God of Israel; Heirs According to the Covenant; House of Israel; Israel's God; Jacob; Judge in Israel; Keys of the Gathering of Israel; Remnants of Israel; Remnants of Jacob; Restoration of the Scattered Israel; Sons of Jacob; Stone of Israel; Tribes of Israel
