Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Jacob Shall Flourish in the Wilderness

In March 1831, the Lord promised that "Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose" (D&C 49:24). This has reference to the descendants of Jacob (Israel) whose forefathers came to the Americas shortly after 600 B.C. and whose record is contained within the pages of the Book of Mormon. These are those we know today as the Lamanites, or American Indians, who can be found from the northern tip of Alaska to the southern tip of Chile.

The rapid growth of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints among these people is evidence that the promised blossoming and flourishing has commenced. In an area conference of the Church in Chile, for example, an Apostle of the Lord uttered a remarkable prophecy regarding that land of Lamanites: "I foresee the day," said Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "when The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will be the most powerful influencing leaven in this entire nation."

Another of the Lord's special witnesses, President Marion G. Romney, promised those people of Jacob in Bolivia that they would "live to see the day when millions of Indians will join The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." ("The Day of the Lamanite," devotional address at the Salt Lake Institute of Religion by Duane V. Cardall, April 1, 1977, pp. 5-6.)

At a special area conference of the Church in Mexico City in February 1977, President Spencer W. Kimball related a dramatic dream to the people of that great land. "Maybe it was a vision," he declared, speaking of this special spiritual experience of three decades earlier. In this "vision" the prophet saw the "flourishing" and "blossoming" of the Lamanite people in Mexico as they rose to responsible positions within the community and Church. He saw "stakes by the hundreds" and "a temple." (CN, Feb. 19, 1977, C-3.) Thus, at general conference in 1947, he declared, "The Lamanites must rise in majesty and power" (CR, Oct. 1947, p. 22).

That this has occurred was well documented in an address by Elder J. Thomas Fyans in which the details of this "blossoming" were described. (CR, Apr. 1976, pp. 16-19.) The "flourishing" has only begun, for declared the Lord's prophet to the assembled Saints in Mexico, "I look forward to another thirty years of tremendous progress. I can see things unbelievable almost which will happen to you and your children." (CN, Feb. 19, 1977, C-3.)

See also: Lamanites; Line Running Between Jew and Gentile
