Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Atonement

A revelation given in January 1832 to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon speaks of the "perfect atonement through the shedding of [Christ's] own blood" (D&C 76:69). The word atonement appears twice more in the Doctrine and Covenants (74:7; 138:4); a derivative appears once (29:1). Nevertheless, the doctrine of the Atonement is, in the words of Elder James E. Talmage, "the fundamental doctrine of all scripture, the very essence of the spirit of prophecy and revelation, the most prominent of all the declarations of God unto man" (AF, 77). Of course, the title Redeemer and variations of that word are generously sprinkled through the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants.

"The structure of the word in its present form is suggestive of the true meaning: it is literally at-one-ment, 'denoting reconciliation, or the bringing into agreement of those who have been estranged'" (AF, 75). Through the fall of Adam, mankind became "estranged" from God, subject to both temporal and spiritual death (Alma 42:7). Of necessity, One was appointed to reconcile the demands of mercy and justice and pay the ransom of death and hell (2 Ne. 9:6-13; DS 1:124-26). "Not only did he redeem us from Adam's transgression, but he also redeemed us from our own sins, on condition that we obey the laws and ordinances of the gospel" (DS 1: 121).

Christ was the only being qualified to pay such a ransom. He was qualified because it was his divine appointment, bestowed on him in the pre-earth life (1 Pet. 1:19-20; MA, 97). He became the Only Begotten of the Father, with power to retain or lay down his life (D&C 49:5; John 10:15-18); his could be the only sinless sacrifice, for he alone never succumbed to sin (D&C 20:22; 45:4; Heb. 4:15).

He voluntarily shed his blood in Gethsemane for our sins (Luke 22:44; D&C 19:15-20; DS 1:130) and likewise allowed his blood to be shed on Calvary in order that death might be conquered and the resurrection brought to pass (Mosiah 16:6-8). "To the last He had the means of terminating the tortures of His persecutors by the exercise of His inherent powers" (AF, 78; Matt. 26:51-54).

His supreme example of self-restraint is a model to those who selfishly struggle on smaller scales, such as is mentioned in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5:38-44).

"The motive inspiring and sustaining Him through all the scenes of His mission, from the time of His primeval ordination to the moment of victorious consummation on the cross, was two-fold: first, the desire to do His Father's will in accomplishing the redemption of mankind; second, His love for humanity, of whose welfare and destiny He had assumed charge" (AF, 80; 3 Ne. 27:13; John 13:34).

The nature of this sacrifice was discussed by President John Taylor: "In some mysterious, incomprehensible way, Jesus assumed the responsibility which naturally would have devolved upon Adam; but which could only be accomplished through the mediation of Himself, and by taking upon Himself their sorrows, assuming their responsibilities, and bearing their transgressions or sins. In a manner to us incomprehensible and inexplicable, He bore the weight of the sins of the whole world; not only of Adam, but of His posterity; and in doing that, opened the kingdom of heaven, not only to all believers and all who obeyed the law of God, but to more than one-half of the human family who die before they come to years of maturity, as well as to the heathen, who, having died without law, will through His mediation, be resurrected without law, and be judged without law, and thus participate, according to their capacity, works and worth, in the blessings of His atonement." (MA, 148-49.)

See also: Advocate with the Father; Bitter Cup; Bleed at Every Pore; Eternal Life; Fall, The; Grace; Immortality; Jesus Christ; Justice; Justification; Mercy; Redemption; Resurrection; Resurrection of the Just; Resurrection of the Unjust; Rid Their Garments; Salvation; Saved; Shrink
