Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

John the Baptist

"Among those that are born of women," said the Savior, "there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist" (Matt. 11:11).

He was, in a sense, a miracle child, for he was born to Elisabeth and Zacharias at a time when they were "well stricken with years." His was a birth foretold not only by angelic announcement (Luke 1:13) but also by prophetic pronouncements on two separate continents (Isa. 40:3; 1 Ne. 10:7-10). When only eight days old, he received an "ordination" from "the angel of God" which empowered him "to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord" (D&C 84:28).

Regarding this ordination, Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated that it was "not to the Aaronic Priesthood, for such would come later, after his baptism and other preparation" (DNTC 1:89). What he received was "the divine commission to serve as the greatest forerunner of all the ages," the prophet who would prepare the way for the Lord. That John understood his secondary position to that of Jesus is well illustrated by his own declarations: "He that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear." (Matt. 3:11.) "He must increase, but I must decrease" (John 3:30).

Both the Savior and the Apostle John identified the Baptist as an Elias, or as one who prepares the way for something greater (John 1:20-28; Matt. 17:12-13; D&C 27:7). The Prophet Joseph Smith declared: "The spirit of Elias is to prepare the way for a greater revelation of God, which is the priesthood of Elias, or the priesthood that Aaron was ordained into. And when God sends a man into the work to prepare for a greater work, holding the keys of the power of Elias, it was called the doctrine of Elias." (TPJS, 335-36.)

Though it was claimed that "John did no miracle" (John 10:41), yet his greatness is unquestioned by those who understand his ministry. Joseph Smith enumerated on the reasons for his greatness as follows: (1) "He was entrusted with a divine mission of preparing the way before the face of the Lord. Whoever had such a trust committed to him before or since? No man." (2) "He was entrusted with the important mission, and it was required at his hands, to baptize the Son of Man. Whoever had the honor of doing that? Whoever has so great a privilege and glory? Whoever led the Son of God into the waters of baptism ... ?" (3) "John, at that time, was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth, and holding the keys of power. The Jews had to obey his instructions or be damned, by their own law; and Christ Himself fulfilled all righteousness in becoming obedient to the law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made it honorable, instead of destroying it. The son of Zacharias wrested the keys, the kingdom, the power, the glory from the Jews, by the holy anointing and decree of heaven, and these three reasons constitute him the greatest prophet born of a woman." (TPJS, 275-76.)

John was given additional keys which were not held by any of the priests of his day, including his faithful father, Zacharias (AGQ 5:2). In addition to those powers mentioned above, John held the keys of presidency in the Aaronic Priesthood (TPJS, 272-73, 319; DS 3:88-89). Though he was beheaded by those whose sins he openly denounced (Mark 6:17-28), yet he returned to earth, on May 15, 1829, as a complete resurrected being to give those keys to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (D&C 13; 27:8; 133:55).

Thus, John was not only the forerunner for the earthly ministry of the Savior, but, through the first restoration of priesthood keys in nearly two centuries, he has likewise prepared the way for His second coming.

See also: Elias; John
