Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Joseph

Most instances in which the name Joseph appears in the Doctrine and Covenants refer to the Prophet of the restoration (e.g., D&C 3:9; 5:7; 6:18). However, there are several instances in which the name Joseph refers to the Old Testament prophet-leader (D&C 27:10; 98:32). Joseph was the eleventh son born to the ancient patriarch Jacob, and first son of Rachel. As a great-grandson of Abraham, he became heir to the promises given by God to the patriarchal fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. His history can be found in chapters 37-50 of the book of Genesis.

Joseph's life was characterized by his unwavering fidelity to God, regardless of the circumstances in which he found himself. For example, following his being sold as a slave into Egypt by his jealous brothers (Gen. 37), Joseph suffered himself to be wrongfully cast into prison rather than to submit to the seductive advances of his master's wife. His classic answer to her should be repeated by all when faced with the trials of temptation: "How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?" (Gen. 39:9.)

Joseph's two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, were born to him by his wife, Asenath, who was the daughter of Potipherah, the priestly head of the state religion. She was a descendant of the Hyksos, Semitic shepherds who were ruling in the land of Egypt during Joseph's sojourn in that country. This marriage brought Joseph into the "very heart of the royal circle," and placed him on a "footing of equality with the highest nobles of Egypt" (AGQ 1:169-71). Additionally, Pharaoh placed Joseph next to him in authority throughout the land of Egypt. From this position of power, he was able to save both the Egyptians and his own family, the Israelites, from the destructive forces of a famine (Gen. 41-47).

Just as his spiritual strength and prophetic foresight saved an ancient people from temporal starvation, so shall the strength of his sons and daughters save a modern-day people from spiritual starvation. Through his lineage the Prophet Joseph Smith was born, and through his posterity the world is receiving the teachings and saving ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ (2 Ne. 3; AGQ 5:70-71).

Of Joseph, Pharaoh said that "there is none so discreet and wise" and that he was a man in whom the spirit of God resided (Gen. 41:38-39).

See also: Ephraim; House of Joseph; Israel; Josephites: Seth (Joseph): Smith, Joseph Jr.
