Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Keys of the Ministering of Angels

Both the Lord and John the Baptist declared that the "keys of the ministering of angels" are vested in the Aaronic Priesthood (D&C 13; 84:26-27). Nevertheless, in their fulness all priesthood keys are held by only one man on earth at a time, that man being the President and prophet of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (D&C 132:7). However, "he may delegate any portion of this power to another, in which case that person holds the keys of that particular labor" (GD, 136). Thus, a bishop, as president of the Aaronic Priesthood within his ward, holds the keys of the ministering of angels (D&C 107:87-88). These keys contain the right, when necessary, to receive instruction from "angels" sent to declare the word of God.

The ancient Nephite prophet Moroni taught that "it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain" (Moro. 7:37). President George Q. Cannon defined an angel as "any being who acts as a messenger for our heavenly Father.... be he a God, a resurrected man, or the spirit of a just man" (JI 26:53). In a very real sense, therefore, those priesthood leaders who have been called by divine revelation to direct the affairs of the kingdom here upon the earth also act in the capacity of ministering angels as they impart the word of God. This is affirmed in this statement by Heber C. Kimball: "While in the act of ministering the Gospel, the servants of God may be considered angels" (JD 10:103).

Lee A. Palmer suggested the following categories of ministering angels: (1) Unembodied spirits-those who have not yet received a body of flesh and bones, but who belong to this earth and shall yet be born thereon; (2) Translated beings-those who have been granted a temporary stay of death to continue their mortal ministry, such as John the Beloved (D&C 7; John 21:20-25); (3) Resurrected beings; (4) Departed spirits in paradise-those who have died and not yet been resurrected; (5) And those who will remain angels forever in the hereafter (D&C 131:1-4; 132:17: APTC, 300).

The ministering of angels is not restricted to priesthood bearers only, for the prophet Alma declared that God imparts "his word by angels unto men, yea, not only men but women also" (Alma 32:23). The Book of Mormon records a marvelous outpouring of the Spirit when angels ministered unto little children (3 Ne. 17:21-25).
