Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Kimball, Spencer W.

On September 30, 1978, a momentous revelation on priesthood was presented for approval to the assembled Saints at the 148th Semiannual General Conference of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This revelation, known as Official Declaration-2 (OD-2) in the Doctrine and Covenants, was received the previous June in a sacred meeting of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve Apostles. Spencer W. Kimball, twelfth prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church in this dispensation, had his prayerful petition answered as the Lord manifested his will.

This prophet of God was born on March 28, 1895 to Andrew Kimball, then serving as president of the Indian Territory Mission, and Olive Wooley Kimball. That he was destined to become one of the Lord's anointed was evidenced early to those who were close to him and in touch with the Spirit. When Spencer was but ten years of age, his father said to a neighbor: "That boy, Spencer, is an exceptional boy.... I have dedicated him to be one of the mouthpieces of the Lord-the Lord willing. You will see him some day as a great leader." (IE, Nov. 1943, p. 702.) This inspired pronouncement was in keeping with the Prophet Joseph Smith's observation that "every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council in heaven before this world was" (HC 6:364).

Spencer's Aunt Mary Kimball was also moved by the spirit of inspiration when she said of the young boy, "That boy will some day be the prophet of the Lord" (En., May 1974, p. 60). Almost seven decades later, as the seventy-seven-year-old Apostle underwent open-heart surgery, that same spirit of inspiration whispered its warm message to the noble surgeon who performed this delicate operation. Dr. Russell M. Nelson, who himself would one day receive the Apostolic office, was inspired to know that the man lying on that operating table was the choice of Providence to become one of his prophets and preside over his church (SWK, 8).

When Elder Kimball was called to the Apostleship in 1943, one of his acquaintances said of this new church leader, "Two of his outstanding characteristics are, first, his love for people, a love which begets love.... and second, his relentless attention to the duties of the day" (IE, Oct. 1943, p. 639). These two characteristics became trademarks of his ministry both as an Apostle and later as President of the Church.

He was set apart to the "highest office in the world" (CR, Oct. 73, p. 53) on December 30, 1973. From that day, the inspiration guiding his hand in the administration of Church affairs was evident. One of the most significant events of his ministry was the organization of the First Quorum of the Seventy, which included the calling of General Authorities from the international areas of the Church. Numerous innovations in Church procedure came under his inspired leadership. However, he should not be remembered for his genius in governing, but for his spiritual strengths.

One of his fellow Apostles said of him, "Above all his other talents, he developed the talent for spirituality-the talent to believe and accept the truth, the talent to desire righteousness" (En., May 1974, p. 73). Another of his Apostolic Brethren said, "When he prays we feel the Lord's power near.... To pray with President Kimball is a spiritual refreshment." (En., May 1974, pp. 36-37.)

This prophet is a prototype of spirituality for all to follow. His marvelous, mortal ministry came to a close when he passed away on November 5, 1985.
