Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Knight, Joseph, Sr.

The name of Joseph Knight appears in two places in the Doctrine and Covenants, once in the preface of section 12, a revelation directed to him personally, and once in section 23, verse 6. The first revelation was a direction to help "establish the cause of Zion," and the second revelation admonishes him to take up his "cross" and "pray vocally before the world as well as in secret." Knight was baptized shortly after this latter revelation was received.

This kindly "old gentleman" is first mentioned in the Prophet's history when he came to Joseph's assistance by bringing a quantity of provisions which enabled the work of the translation of the Book of Mormon to continue. This help was rendered on several occasions thereafter. (HC 1:47.) Knight also employed the Prophet and was at the Smith home when Joseph went to obtain the plates from the Hill Cumorah.

Under the date of August 22, 1842, the Prophet wrote the following tribute to Joseph Knight, Sr.: "I am now recording in the Book of the Law of the Lord, of such as have stood by me in every hour of peril, for these fifteen long years past, say, for instance, my aged and beloved brother, Joseph Knight, Sen., who was among the number of the first to administer to my necessities, while I was laboring in the commencement of the bringing forth of the work of the Lord, and of laying the foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. For fifteen years he has been faithful and true, and even-handed and exemplary, and virtuous and kind, never deviating to the right hand or to the left. Behold he is a righteous man, may God Almighty lengthen out the old man's days; and may his trembling, tortured, and broken body be renewed, and in the vigor of health turn upon him, if it be Thy will, consistently, O God; and it shall be said of him, by the sons of Zion, while there is one of them remaining, that this man was a faithful man in Israel; therefore his name shall never be forgotten." (HC 5:124-25.)

Joseph Knight, Sr., died a faithful member of the Church on February 3, 1847, at Mount Pisgah, Iowa, during the exodus.
