Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Knowledge

The Lord promised that those who faithfully sought him would receive "revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge.... that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal" (D&C 42:61; see also 1:28; 2 Ne. 28:30). Joseph Smith declared that "a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge" (TPJS, 217). However, "the fact is, knowledge alone is not sufficient to save men. They must put their knowledge into practice and act up to that which they know." (GT 2:273.) Thus, when the Lord decreed that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" (D&C 131:6), he had specific reference to the saving ordinances of the gospel and the proper application of knowledge to righteous ends. (DS 1:290.)

Elder Marion G. Romney taught, "the knowledge one must have to be saved is that which comes with a testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, including all the principles that it teaches" (LTG, 45). Those who lack this knowledge because of their own "wilful and sinful neglect" will be accordingly condemned, while those who lacked opportunity to gain this knowledge will find this but a "temporary deficiency; for Eternal Justice provides means of education beyond the grave" (VM, 278).

There is, of course, other knowledge which should be sought. "As a people the Latter-day Saints are ardent friends of learning, true seekers after knowledge," declared President George Q. Cannon (GT 2:234). The Lord admonished Joseph Smith "to obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man, and all this for the salvation of Zion" (D&C 93:53). Similarly, the patrons of the School of the Prophets were likewise admonished to obtain a knowledge of temporal as well as spiritual things (D&C 88:77-80).

Ultimately one must acquire a knowledge of all things to become as omniscient as God is. However, knowledge alone will not be sufficient to give one the "fulness" which the Father hath (DS 1:291; D&C 93:26-27). President Spencer W. Kimball said, "It is my understanding that when we have learned all we need to know about creation of worlds, that we shall still need the power of the Priesthood to effect the creation" ("The New and Everlasting Covenant," Ten-Stake Fireside Address, BYU, September 30, 1973, manuscript copy, p. 6).

Satan's knowledge gives him temporary power, but he, and those who follow him, will never experience the joy that the power of the priesthood provides the righteous. And, regardless of the extent of his knowledge, he will always be subservient to the power of the Priesthood.

See also: Hidden Treasures of Knowledge; Treasures; Unfruitful in the Knowledge of the Lord; Word of Knowledge
