Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Laughter

If one were to rely strictly on the few references to laughter in the Doctrine and Covenants as a measure of the place of humor in life, superficial sobriety might abound. Therefore, it is important to understand the setting in which the statements regarding laughter were made. It is in connection with Sabbath activities that the Lord counsels us to have "cheerful hearts and countenances," but to avoid "much laughter" (D&C 59:15).

To the participants in the school of the prophets the admonition was to cast away their "excess of laughter," and to "cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter, from all your lustful desires" (D&C 88:69, 121). The purposes of this spiritual school made it inappropriate to mingle jest and joviality with the serious and sacred matters under consideration. In this particular setting, light-mindedness had no place.

In our day there are places where light-mindedness and loud laughter are inappropriate. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith counseled that "amusement, laughter, [and] light-mindedness, are all out of place in the sacrament meetings of the Latter-day Saints" (CR, Oct. 1929, p. 62). This same counsel was applied to general conference sessions when the Lord's spokesman, President Harold B. Lee, cautioned the speakers and congregation about "great crescendos" of laughter "that might be mistaken by those who are listening on the outside" (CR, Oct. 1972, p. 176).

The scriptures remind us that "to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven," including "a time to laugh" (Eccl. 3:1-4). Elder Boyd K. Packer has observed that the Savior himself "would chuckle with approval when at times of recreation the music is comical or melodramatic or exciting. Or at times when a carnival air is in order that decorations be bright and flashy, even garish."

Nevertheless, Elder Packer cautioned, "I am sure He would be offended at immodesty and irreverence in music, in art, in poetry, in writing, in sculpture, in dance, or in drama" (DSY, 1976, p. 279).

There is a standard which governs the appropriateness of merriment. In this respect Elder Joseph Fielding Smith counseled: "I do not believe the Lord intends and desires that we should pull a long face and look sanctimonious and hypocritical. I think he expects us to be happy and of a cheerful countenance, but he does not expect of us the indulgence in boisterous and unseemly conduct and the seeking after the vain and foolish things which amuse and entertain the world." (CR, Oct. 1916, p. 70.) That which evokes our laughter must be celestially compatible with Christ's sense of humor.

Appropriate laughter and a smiling countenance should be part of a religion that espouses the doctrine that "men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25), and whose founding Prophet proclaimed, "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God" (TPJS, 255-56). Latter-day Saints must not be "pallbearer types," quipped Elder Paul H. Dunn; "you can be spiritual and have fun too" (CN, Apr. 15, 1978, p. 14).

See also: Light-Mindedness
