Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Lee, Ann

Although she is not mentioned in the text of a revelation, Ann Lee is mentioned in the preface of section 49 in 1981 editions of the Doctrine and Covenants. She is believed to have been born in Manchester, England, on February 29, 1736, and spent her early life as a member of the Anglican Church. She married Abraham Stanley, by whom she had four children, all of whom died in infancy. She converted to the "Shaking Quakers" in 1758, a sect headed in England by Jane and James Wardley, and later became a leader in that movement.

Lee believed that the deaths of her children were judgments upon her sexual desires, and she developed the doctrine that sexual expression is a source of sin. She also claimed to have seen a vision that showed Adam and Eve transgressed sexually. This led to the practice of celibacy among her followers.

The Shaking Quakers got their name from their practice of whirling, trembling, and shaking during religious services, which they believed helped rid them of their sins. Lee began exercising this practice in Anglican church services and finally was imprisoned for blasphemy. The Wardleys became convinced that Christ would come the second time in the form of a woman, and when Lee was released from prison she was declared the fulfillment of that role. She then became known as "Mother Ann" or "Ann of the Word."

She emigrated to the United States in 1774 and established a communal society in Watervliet, New York, near Albany. The Quakers, also known as the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing, believed strongly in personal confession before two witnesses. Lee died on September 8, 1784, but others carried the work forward. Quakerism was at its peak between 1830-1850 but today is virtually extinct, due largely to the practice of celibacy. (See Encyclopedia Americana, vols. 17, 24, 1985 ed.)

See also: One Wife; Shakers; Son of Man Cometh Not in the Form of a Woman
