Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Light of Christ

The "light of Christ" (D&C 88:7) is synonymous with "the light of truth" (D&C 88:6), "the Spirit of Jesus Christ" (D&C 84:45-47), "the Spirit of the Lord" (D&C 121:37), and "the Spirit of Christ" (Moro. 7:16). It is that power which gives light to men's minds, as well as to the sun, moon, and stars, "which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space-The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God" (D&C 88:6-13).

President Joseph Fielding Smith said, "This Light of Christ is not a personage. It has no body. I do not know what it is as far as substance is concerned; but it fills the immensity of space and emanates from God. It is the light by which the worlds are controlled, by which they are made." Furthermore, it "is impersonal and has no size, nor dimension." It "is the active agency by which the great discoveries in these modern times have been accomplished. It is this Spirit which the Lord declares he will withdraw from the world [D&C 63:32], and which he said to Noah would not always 'strive with man,' and not the Holy Ghost which they never had. [Moses 8:17; Gen. 6:3; D&C 1:33.] It is this Spirit which led Columbus in his discoveries." (DS 1:52-53.) The Light of Christ should not be confused with the Holy Ghost, who is "a personage of Spirit." (D&C 130:22.) However, "the person of the Holy Ghost can work through the Spirit of Christ that permeates everything, or he can work by personal contacts" (DS 1:54).

An ancient prophet declared that "the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil" (Moro. 7:16). In other words, it acts as our conscience. A modern-day prophet said, "Every soul who walks the earth, wherever he lives, in whatever nation he may have been born, no matter whether he be in riches or in poverty, had at birth an endowment of that first light which is called the Light of Christ, the Spirit of Truth, or the Spirit of God-that universal light of intelligence with which every soul is blessed" (SHP, 115). It is this Spirit which touches one's heart, declaring the truthfulness of the gospel to the soul. Brigham Young proclaimed that this Spirit has "enlightened, instructed, and taught by revelation" every man or woman who has ever been upon the face of the earth (JD 2:139-40).

See also: Conscience
