Hoyt W. Brewster, Doctrine and Covenants Encyclopedia ( 1988)

Manuscript, 116 Lost Pages of

The 116 manuscript pages referred to in the prefaces of sections 3 and 10 represented the book of Lehi. Joseph Smith gave it this name in his preface to the first edition of the Book of Mormon. This book was part of an abridged record the ancient prophet Mormon had placed in the safekeeping of his son, Moroni (Words of Mormon; Morm. 6:6). Moroni, in turn, gave the sacred record into the hands of a young prophet who translated the writings and published them as the Book of Mormon. The book of Lehi is not contained in this sacred volume and its loss is explained by Joseph Smith in the following words:

"Some time after Mr. [Martin] Harris had begun to write for me, he began to importune me to give him liberty to carry the writings home and show them; and desired of me that I would inquire of the Lord, through the Urim and Thummim, if he might not do so. I did inquire and the answer was that he must not. However, he was not satisfied with this answer, and desired that I should inquire again. I did so and the answer was as before. Still he could not be contented, but insisted that I should inquire once more. After much solicitation, I again inquired of the Lord, and permission was granted him to have the writings on certain conditions; which were that he show them only to his brother Preserved Harris, his own wife, his father and his mother, and a Mrs. Cobb, a sister to his wife. In accordance with this last answer, I required of him that he should bind himself in a covenant to me in the most solemn manner that he would not do otherwise than had been directed. He did so. He bound himself as I required of him, took the writings, and went his way. Notwithstanding, however, the great restrictions which he had been laid under, and the solemnity of the covenant which he had made with me, he did show them to others, and by strategem they got them away from him, and they have never been recovered." (HC 1:21.)

In the preface of the first edition of the Book of Mormon, the Prophet Joseph added the following information: "As many false reports have been circulated respecting the following work, and also many unlawful measures taken by evil designing persons to destroy me, and also the work, I would inform you that I translated, by the gift and power of God, and caused to be written, one hundred and sixteen pages, the which I took from the Book of Lehi, which was an account abridged from the plates of Lehi, by the hand of Mormon; which said account, some person or persons have stolen and kept from me, notwithstanding my utmost exertions to recover it again-and being commanded of the Lord that I should not translate the same over again, for Satan had put it into their hearts to tempt the Lord their God, by altering the words, that they did read contrary from that which I translated and caused to be written: and if I should bring forth the same words again, or, in other words, if I should translate the same over again, they would publish that which they had stolen, and Satan would stir up the hearts of this generation, that they might not receive this work" (see D&C 10:10-46).

The chronological period covered by the book of Lehi is covered in the first six books of our present edition of the Book of Mormon. These writings were taken from the plates known as the "small plates," while the lost manuscript was taken from the "large plates" of Nephi (see 1 Ne. 9; Words of Mormon).

See also: Book of Mormon; Harris, Martin; Plates of Nephi; Wicked Man, A
