Chapter 7

# Enlarging People’s Memory and Rejoicing in Christ

As Alma neared the end of his life and ministry, “he caused that his sons should be gathered together, that he might give unto them every one his charge, separately, concerning the things pertaining unto righteousness” (Alma 35:16). The charge he gave to his son Helaman relates to your work as a missionary at one of the Church’s historic sites.

Alma told Helaman, “I command you that ye take the records which have been entrusted with me.” He gave Helaman the plates of Nephi and the plates of brass. “And I also command you,” Alma continued, “that ye keep a record of this people, according as I have done, upon the plates of Nephi, and keep all these things sacred which I have kept, even as I have kept them; for it is for a wise purpose that they are kept” (Alma 37:1–2).

Alma reminded Helaman that the plates contained scripture and the genealogy of their ancestors. He said, “It has been prophesied by our fathers, that they should be kept and handed down from one generation to another, and be kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord until they should go forth unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.”

Perhaps Alma looked directly into his son’s eyes when he said:

“If they are kept they must retain their brightness; yea, and they will retain their brightness. … Now ye may suppose that this is foolishness in me; but behold I say unto you, that by small and simple things are great things brought to pass” (Alma 37:4–6; see also verse 3).

Your calling is not the same as Helaman’s, but it is more similar than different. A prophet of God has entrusted you with one of God’s sacred records: a historic site of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Like the scriptures, the Church’s historic sites are kept “for a wise purpose.” They are “kept and handed down from one generation to another”—something you will see as visitors bring their children and their children’s children to experience your site. They have been “kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord” so they can bless God’s children throughout the world. You have been called to “keep all these things sacred” and ensure that “they will retain their brightness” (Alma 37:2, 4–5).

If you ever find yourself thinking that the small and simple things you do are insignificant, you might stop for a moment and remember that the Lord Himself works in small and simple ways. You might imagine Alma looking directly into your eyes. “Behold I say unto you,” he says, “that by small and simple things are great things brought to pass. … The Lord God doth work by means to bring about his great and eternal purposes; and by very small means the Lord … bringeth about the salvation of many souls” (Alma 37:6–7).

Alma’s words about the scriptures are also true of the Church’s historic sites:

“It has hitherto been wisdom in God that these things should be preserved; for behold, they have enlarged the memory of this people. …

“… They brought them to the knowledge of the Lord their God, and to rejoice in Jesus Christ their Redeemer” (Alma 37:8–9).
