The Day Appointed for Organizing the Church--Revelation on Church Government.

[Sidenote: Directions for the Organization of the Church.]

We now became anxious to have that promise realized to us, which the angel that conferred upon us the Aaronic Priesthood had given us, viz., that provided we continued faithful, we should also have the Melchisedek Priesthood, which holds the authority of the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. We had for some time made this matter a subject of humble prayer, and at length we got together in the chamber of Mr. Whitmer's house, in order more particularly to seek of the Lord what we now so earnestly desired; and here, to our unspeakable satisfaction, did we realize the truth of the Savior's promise--"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you"--for we had not long been engaged in solemn and fervent prayer, when the word of the Lord came unto us in the chamber, [1] commanding us  that I should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ; and that he also should ordain me to the same office; and then to ordain others, as it should be made known unto us from time to time. We were, however, commanded to defer this our ordination until such times as it should be practicable to have our brethren, who had been and who should be baptized, assembled together, when we must have their sanction to our thus proceeding to ordain each other, and have them decide by vote whether they were willing to accept us as spiritual teachers or not; when also we were commanded to bless bread and break it with them, and to take wine, bless it, and drink it with them; afterward proceed to ordain each other according to commandment; then call out such men as the Spirit should dictate, and ordain them; and then attend to the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, upon all those whom we had previously baptized, doing all things in the name of the Lord. The following commandment will further illustrate the  nature of our calling to this Priesthood, as well as that of others who were yet to be sought after:

    Revelation to Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery and David
    Whitmer, making known the calling of Twelve Apostles in these last
    days; and also instructions relative to building up the Church of
    Christ according to the fulness of the Gospel. Given in Fayette,
    New York, June, 1829. [2]

    1. Now, behold, because of the thing which you, my servant Oliver
    Cowdery, have desired to know of me, I give unto you these words:

    2. Behold, I have manifested unto you, by my Spirit in many
    instances, that the things which you have written are true;
    wherefore you know that they are true;

    3. And if you know that they are true, behold, I give unto you a
    commandment, that you rely upon the things which are written;

    4. For in them are all things written concerning the foundation of
    my Church, my Gospel and my rock.

    5. Wherefore, if you shall build up my Church, upon the foundation
    of my Gospel and my rock, the gates of hell shall not prevail
    against you.

    6. Behold, the world is ripening in iniquity, and it must needs be
    that the children of men are stirred up unto repentance, both the
    Gentiles and also the house of Israel;

    7. Wherefore, as thou hast been baptized by the hands of my servant
    Joseph Smith, Jun., according to that which I have commanded him,
    he hath fulfilled the thing which I commanded him.

    8. And now marvel not that I have called him unto mine own purpose,
    which purpose is known in me; wherefore, if he shall be diligent in
    keeping my commandments, he shall be blessed unto eternal life, and
    his name is Joseph.

    9. And now, Oliver Cowdery, I speak unto you, and also unto David
    Whitmer, by the way of commandment; for, behold, I command all men
    everywhere to repent, and I speak unto you, even as unto Paul mine
    Apostle, for you are called even with that same calling with which
    he was called.

    10. Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

    11. For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the
    flesh; wherefore He suffered the pain of all men, that all men
    might repent and come unto Him.

    12. And He hath risen again from the dead, that He might bring all
    men unto Him, on conditions of repentance.

    13. And how great is His joy in the soul that repenteth!

    14. Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people;

     15. And if it so be that you should labor all your days in
    crying repentance unto this people, and bring save it be one soul
    unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my
    Father!

    16. And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have
    brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be
    your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!

    17. Behold, you have my Gospel before you, and my rock, and my
    salvation.

    18. Ask the Father in my name, in faith believing that you shall
    receive, and you shall have the Holy Ghost, which manifesteth all
    things which are expedient unto the children of men.

    19. And if you have not faith, hope, and charity, you can do
    nothing.

    20. Contend against no church save it be the church of the devil.

    21. Take upon you the name of Christ, and speak the truth in
    soberness;

    22. And as many as repent, and are baptized in my name, which is
    Jesus Christ, and endure to the end, the same shall be saved.

    23. Behold, Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father,
    and there is none other name given whereby man can be saved;

    24. Wherefore, all men must take upon them the name which is given
    of the Father for in that name shall they be called at the last day;

    25. Wherefore, if they know not the name by which they are called,
    they cannot have place in the kingdom of my Father.

    26. And now, behold, there are others who are called to declare my
    Gospel, both unto Gentile and unto Jew:

    27. Yea, even Twelve, and the Twelve shall be my disciples, and
    they shall take upon them my name; and the Twelve are they who
    shall desire to take upon them my name with full purpose of heart;

    28. And if they desire to take upon them my name with full purpose
    of heart, they are called to go into all the world to preach my
    Gospel unto every creature;

    29. And they are they who are ordained of me to baptize in my name
    according to that which is written;

    30. And you have that which is written before you; wherefore, you
    must perform it according to the words which are written.

    31. And now I speak unto you the Twelve--Behold, my grace is
    sufficient for you: you must walk uprightly before me and sin not.

    32. And, behold, you are they who are ordained of me to ordain
    Priests and Teachers; to declare my Gospel; according to the power
    of the Holy Ghost which is in you, and according to the callings
    and gifts of God unto men;

    33. And I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it.

    34. These words are not of men, nor of man, but of me; wherefore,
    you shall testify they are of me, and not of man;

     35. For it is my voice which speaketh them unto you, for they
    are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them
    one to another, and save it were by my power, you could not have
    them;

    36. Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and
    know my words.

    37. And now, behold, I give unto you, Oliver Cowdery, and also unto
    David Whitmer, that you shall search out the Twelve, who shall have
    the desires of which I have spoken;

    38. And by their desires and their works you shall know them.

    39. And when you have found them, you shall show these things unto
    them.

    40. And you shall fall down and worship the Father in my name;

    41. And you must preach unto the world, saying, You must repent and
    be baptized, in the name of Jesus Christ;

    42. For all men must repent and be baptized, and not only men, but
    women, and children who have arrived to the years of accountability.

    43. And now, after that you have received this, you must keep my
    commandments in all things;

    44. And by your hands I will work a marvelous work among the
    children of men, unto the convincing of many of their sins, that
    they may come unto repentance, and that they may come unto the
    kingdom of my Father.

    45. Wherefore, the blessings which I give unto you are above all
    things.

    46. And after that you have received this, if you keep not my
    commandments you cannot be saved in the kingdom of my Father.

    47. Behold, I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, and your
    Redeemer, by the power of my Spirit have spoken it. Amen.

[Sidenote: Instructions on Church Organization.]

In this manner did the Lord continue to give us instructions from time to time, concerning the duties which now devolved upon us; and among many other things of the kind, we obtained of Him the following, by the spirit of prophecy and revelation; which not only gave us much information, but also pointed out to us the precise day upon which, according to His will and commandment, we should proceed to organize His Church once more here upon the earth:

    A Revelation on Church Government. [3]

    1. The rise of the Church of Christ in these last days, being one
    thousand eight hundred and thirty years since the coming of our
    Lord and  Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh, it being regularly
    organized and established agreeable to the laws of our country, by
    the will and commandments of God, in the fourth month, and on the
    sixth day of the month which is called April;

    2. Which commandments were given to Joseph Smith, Jun., who was
    called of God, and ordained an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the
    first Elder of this Church;

    3. And to Oliver Cowdery, who was also called of God, an Apostle of
    Jesus Christ, to be the second Elder of this Church, and ordained
    under his hand;

    4. And this according to the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus
    Christ, to whom be all glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

    5. After it was truly manifested unto this first Elder that he had
    received a remission of his sins, he was entangled again in the
    vanities of the world.

    6. But after repenting, and humbling himself sincerely, through
    faith, God ministered to him by an holy angel, whose countenance
    was as lightning, and whose garments were pure and white above all
    other whiteness;

    7. And gave unto him commandments which instilled him;

    8. And gave him power from on high, by the means which were before
    prepared, to translate the Book of Mormon;

    9. Which contains a record of a fallen people, and the fulness of
    the Gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also;

    10. Which was given by inspiration, and is confirmed to others by
    the ministering of angels, and is declared unto the world by them;

    11. Proving to the world that the Holy Scriptures are true, and
    that God does inspire men and call them to His holy work in this
    age and generation, as well as in generations of old,

    12. Thereby showing that He is the same God yesterday, today, and
    for ever. Amen.

    13. Therefore, having so great witnesses, by them shall the world
    be judged, even as many as shall hereafter come to a knowledge of
    this work;

    14. And those who receive it in faith, and work righteousness,
    shall receive a crown of eternal life;

    15. But those who harden their hearts in unbelief, and reject it,
    it shall turn to their own condemnation;

    16. For the Lord God hath spoken it; and we, the Elders of the
    Church, have heard and bear witness to the words of the glorious
    Majesty on high, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

    17. By these things we know that there is a God in heaven, who is
    infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same
    unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things
    which are in them;

    18. And that He created man, male, and female, after His own image
    and in His own likeness, created He them,

    19. And gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve
    Him, the only living and true God, and that He should be the only
    being whom they should worship.

    20. But by the transgression of these holy laws, man became sensual
    and devilish, and became fallen man.

    21. Wherefore, the Almighty God gave His Only Begotten Son, as it
    is written in those scriptures which have been given of Him.

    22. He suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them.

    23. He was crucified, died, and rose again the third day;

    24. And ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the
    Father, to reign with almighty power according to the will of the
    Father.

    25. That as many as would believe and be baptized in His holy name,
    and endure in faith to the end, should be saved:

    26. Not only those who believed after He came in the meridian of
    time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as
    many as were before He came, who believed in the words of the
    holy prophets, who spake as they were inspired by the gift of the
    Holy Ghost, who truly testified of Him in all things, should have
    eternal life,

    27. As well as those who should come after, who should believe
    in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost which beareth
    record of the Father and of the Son;

    28. Which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, infinite and
    eternal, without end. Amen.

    29. And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name
    of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in His name, and endure
    in faith on His name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the
    kingdom of God.

    30. And we know that justification through the grace of our Lord
    and Savior Jesus Christ, is just and true;

    31. And we know also, that sanctification through the grace of our
    Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is just and true, to all those who
    love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength.

    32. But there is a possibility that man may fall from grace and
    depart from the living God;

    33. Therefore let the Church take heed and pray always, lest they
    fall into temptation;

    34. Yea and even let those who are sanctified take heed also.

    35. And we know that these things are true and according to the
     revelations of John, neither adding to, nor diminishing from
    the prophecy of his book, the Holy Scriptures, or the revelations
    of God which shall come hereafter by the gift and power of the Holy
    Ghost, the voice of God, or the ministering of angels.

    36. And the Lord God has spoken it; and honor, power and glory be
    rendered to His holy name, both now and ever. Amen.

    37. And again, by way of commandment to the Church concerning the
    manner of baptism.--All those who humble themselves before God,
    and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and
    contrite spirits, and witness before the Church that they have
    truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them
    the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve Him to
    the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received
    of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be
    received by baptism into His Church.

    38. The duty of the Elders, Priests, Teachers, Deacons, and
    members of the Church of Christ.--An Apostle is an Elder, and it
    is his calling to baptize;

    39. And to ordain other Elders, Priests, Teachers, and Deacons;

    40. And to administer bread and wine--the emblems of the flesh and
    blood of Christ;

    41. And to confirm those who are baptized into the Church, by the
    laying on of hands for the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost,
    according to the Scriptures;

    42. And to teach, expound, exhort, baptize, and watch over the
    Church;

    43. And to confirm the Church by the laying on of the hands, and
    the giving of the Holy Ghost;

    44. And to take the lead of all meetings.

    45. The Elders are to conduct the meetings as they are led by the
    Holy Ghost, according to the commandments and revelations of God.

    46. The Priest's duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, and
    baptize, and administer the sacrament;

    47. And visit the house of each member, and exhort them to pray
    vocally and in secret, and attend to all family duties.

    48. And he may also ordain other Priests, Teachers, and Deacons.

    49. And he is to take the lead of meetings when there is no Elder
    present;

    50. But when there is an Elder present, he is only to preach,
    teach, expound, exhort, and baptize,

    51. And visit the house of each member, exhorting them to pray
    vocally and in secret, and attend to all family duties.

    52. In all these duties the Priest is to assist the Elder if
    occasion requires.

     53. The Teacher's duty is to watch over the church always, and
    be with and strengthen them;

    54. And see that there is no iniquity in the Church--neither
    hardness with each other--neither lying, back biting, nor evil
    speaking;

    55. And see that the Church meet together often, and also see that
    all the members do their duty;

    56. And he is to take the lead of meetings in the absence of the
    Elder or Priest--

    57. And is to be assisted always, in all his duties in the Church,
    by the Deacons, if occasion requires.

    58. But neither Teachers nor Deacons have authority to baptize,
    administer the sacrament, or lay on hands;

    59. They are, however, to warn, expound, exhort, and teach and
    invite all to come unto Christ.

    60. Every Elder, Priest, Teacher, or Deacon is to be ordained
    according to the gifts and callings of God unto him; and he is to
    be ordained by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is in the one who
    ordains him.

    61. The several Elders composing this Church of Christ are to meet
    in conference once in three months, or from time to time as said
    conferences shall direct or appoint;

    62. And said conferences are to do whatever Church business is
    necessary to be done at the time.

    63. The Elders are to receive their licenses from other Elders, by
    vote of the church to which they belong, or from the conferences.

    64. Each Priest, Teacher, or Deacon, who is ordained by a Priest,
    may take a certificate from him at the time, which certificate,
    when presented to an Elder, shall entitle him to a license, which
    shall authorize him to perform the duties of his calling, or he may
    receive it from a conference.

    65. No person is to be ordained to any office in this Church, where
    there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote
    of that Church;

    66. But the presiding Elders, traveling Bishops, High Councilors,
    High Priests, and Elders, may have the privilege of ordaining,
    where there is no branch of the Church that a vote may be called.

    67. Every president of the High Priesthood (or presiding Elder),
    Bishop, High Councilor and High Priest, is to be ordained by the
    direction of a High Council or general conference. [4]

    68. The duty of the members after they are received by
    baptism.--The Elders or Priests are to have a sufficient time to
    expound all things  concerning the Church of Christ to their
    understanding, previous to their partaking of the Sacrament and
    being confirmed by the laying on of the hands of the Elders, so
    that all things may be done in order.

    69. And the members shall manifest before the Church, and also
    before the Elders, by a godly walk and conversation, that they are
    worthy of it, that there may be works and faith agreeable to the
    Holy Scriptures--walking in holiness before the Lord.

    70. Every member of the Church of Christ having children is to
    bring them unto the Elders before the Church, who are to lay their
    hands upon them in the name of Jesus Christ, and bless them in His
    name.

    71. No one can be received into the Church of Christ, unless he has
    arrived unto the years of accountability before God, and is capable
    of repentance.

    72. Baptism is to be administered in the following manner unto all
    those who repent:--

    73. The person who is called of God, and has authority from Jesus
    Christ to baptize, shall go down into the water with the person
    who has presented himself or herself for baptism, and shall say,
    calling him or her by name--Having been commissioned of Jesus
    Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
    and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

    74. Then shall he immerse him or her in the water, and come forth
    again out of the water.

    75. It is expedient that the Church meet together often to partake
    of bread and wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus;

    76. And the Elder or Priest shall administer it; and after this
    manner shall he administer it: he shall kneel with the Church and
    call upon the Father in solemn prayer, saying--

    77. O God, the Eternal Father, we ask Thee in the name of Thy Son,
    Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all
    those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the
    body of Thy Son, and witness unto Thee, O God, the Eternal Father,
    that they are willing to take upon them the name of Thy Son, and
    always remember Him and keep His commandments which He has given
    them, that they may always have His Spirit to be with them. Amen.

    78. The manner of administering the wine: He shall take the cup
    also, and say--

    79. O God, the Eternal Father, we ask Thee in the name of Thy Son,
    Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all
    those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the
    blood of Thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness
    unto Thee, O God,  the Eternal Father, that they do always
    remember Him, That they may have His Spirit to be with them. Amen.

    80. Any member of the Church of Christ transgressing, or being
    overtaken in a fault, shall be dealt with as the Scriptures direct.

    81. It shall be the duty of the several churches, composing the
    Church of Christ, to send one or more of their Teachers to attend
    the several conferences held by the Elders of the Church,

    82. With a list of the names of the several members uniting
    themselves with the Church since the last conference, or send by
    the hand of some Priest, so that a regular list of all the names
    of the whole Church may be kept in a book by one of the Elders
    whomsoever the other Elders shall appoint from time to time;

    83. And also, if any have been expelled from the Church, so that
    their names may be blotted out of the general Church record of
    names.

    84. All members removing from the church where they reside, if
    going to a church where they are not known, may take a letter,
    certifying that they are regular members and in good standing,
    which certificate may be signed by any Elder or Priest if the
    member receiving the letter is personally acquainted with the Elder
    or Priest, or it may be signed by the Teachers or Deacons of the
    Church.

Footnotes

1. This occasion is unquestionably the one that the Prophet Joseph alludes to in his letter to the Saints in Nauvoo, under date or September 6th 1842, (Doctrine and Covenants sec. 128:21) where he says: "Again what do we hear * * * the voice of God in the chamber of old father Peter Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places through all the travels and tribulations of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." It must not be thought because of the reference in the text above to the desire of Joseph and Oliver to have the Melchizedek Priesthood conferred upon them, and the commandment given that they should ordain each other Elders of the Church--it must not be thought because of this, I repeat, that there is any conflict between what is here stated in the text and what has been said with reference to the restoration of the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood by Peter, James and John. This "voice of God in the chamber of old Father Peter Whitmer, in Fayette," commanding Joseph and Oliver to ordain each other "Elders of the Church," but also commanding them to defer said ordinations until their brethren who had been and should be baptized could be assembled together to give their sanction to such procedure--was all previous to their ordination to the Apostleship under the hands of Peter, James and John and; to be regarded as instruction to them as to how they should proceed in the matter of ordaining each other, and calling and ordaining others to the same ministry, after they themselves should have received the keys of this Melchizedek Priesthood. The ordination of each other to be Elders of the Church was deferred until the meeting at which the Church was organized, the 6th of April, 1830. (see p. 75.) But this voice of God in Peter Whitmer's chamber, which told them how to proceed in the matter of ordaining each other, was given in or before June, 1829. The evidence of this is in the fact that the revelation in Whitmer's chamber, about ordaining each other "Elders of the Church," precedes the one immediately following the paragraph of narrative above: and that revelation, making known the calling to the Twelve Apostles, was given in June, 1829, ten months before the instructions relative to ordaining each other to be Elders in the Church was carried out. Meantime, as we have seen (see note pp. 40, 41, 42,) before the 6th of April, 1830, and probably before that very month of June, 1829, had expired Peter, James and John had come and conferred upon Joseph and Oliver the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, the holy apostleship, by which authority they were authorized to organize the Church, ordain each other Elders, and also call and ordain others to the same office.

2. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 18.

3. Doctrine and Covenants, section 20.

4. Verses 65, 66 and 67 were added by the Prophet some time after the rest of the revelation was given.
