The Prophecy on the War of the Rebellion--The Olive Leaf--Communication to Mr. Seaton--Warning to Zion.

[Sidenote: State of the World at the Close of 1832.]

Appearances of troubles among the nations became more visible this season than they had previously been since the Church began her journey out of the wilderness. The ravages of the cholera were frightful in almost all the large cities on the globe. The plague broke out in India, while the United States, amid all her pomp and greatness, was threatened with immediate dissolution. The people of South Carolina, in convention assembled (in November), passed ordinances, declaring their state a free and independent nation; and appointed Thursday, the 31st day of January, 1833, as a day of humiliation and prayer, to implore Almighty God to vouchsafe His blessings, and restore liberty and happiness within their borders. President Jackson issued his proclamation against this rebellion, called out a force sufficient to quell it, and implored the blessings of God to assist the nation to extricate itself from the horrors of the approaching and solemn crisis.

On Christmas day [1832], I received the following revelation and prophecy on war.

    Revelation and Prophecy. [1]

    1. Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will
    shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina,
    which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many
    souls;

    2. And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all
    nations, beginning at this place.

    3. For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the
    Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other
    nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and
    they shall also call upon  other nations, in order to defend
    themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured out
    upon all nations.

    4. And it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up
    against their masters, who shall be marshaled and discipled for war.

    5. And it shall come to pass also that the remnants who are left
    of the land will marshal themselves, and shall become exceedingly
    angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation.

    6. And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the
    earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and
    the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also,
    shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and
    indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the
    consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations;

    7. That the cry of the saints, and the blood of the saints, shall
    cease to come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, from the
    earth, to be avenged of their enemies.

    8. Wherefore, stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the
    day of the Lord come; for behold, it cometh quickly, saith the
    Lord. Amen.

Two days after the preceding prophecy, on the 27th of December, I received the following:

    Revelation. [2]

    1. Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you who have assembled
    yourselves together to receive his will concerning you:

    2. Behold, this is pleasing unto your Lord, and the angels rejoice
    over you; the alms of your prayer have come up into the ears of the
    Lord of Sabaoth, and are recorded in the book of the names of the
    sanctified, even them of the celestial world.

    3. Wherefore, I now send upon you another Comforter, even upon you
    my friends, that it may abide in your hearts, even the Holy Spirit
    of promise; which other Comforter is the same that I promised unto
    my disciples, as is recorded in the testimony of John.

    4. This Comforter is the promise which I give unto you of eternal
    life, even the glory of the celestial kingdom;

    5. Which glory is that of the church of the Firstborn, even of God,
    the holiest of all, through Jesus Christ his Son--

    6. He that ascended up on high, as also he descended below all
     things, in that he comprehended all things, that he might be
    in all and through all things, the light of truth;

    7. Which truth shineth. This is the light of Christ. As also he
    is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by
    which it was made.

    8. As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the
    power thereof by which it was made;

    9. As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which
    they were made;

    10. And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon
    which you stand.

    11. And the light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through
    him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that
    quickeneth your understandings;

    12. Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill
    the immensity of space--

    13. The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all
    things, which is the law by which all things are governed, even the
    power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of
    eternity, who is in the midst of all things.

    14. Now, verily I say unto you, that through the redemption which
    is made for you is brought to pass the resurrection from the dead.

    15. And the spirit and the body are the soul of man.

    16. And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the
    soul.

    17. And the redemption of the soul is through him that quickeneth
    all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek
    of the earth shall inherit it.

    18. Therefore, it must needs be sanctified from all
    unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory;

    19. For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall
    be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father;

    20. That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it
    forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and
    for this intent are they sanctified.

    21. And they who are not sanctified through the law which I have
    given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another
    kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial
    kingdom.

    22. For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom
    cannot abide a celestial glory.

    23. And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot
    abide a terrestrial glory.

    24. And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom cannot
    abide a telestial glory; therefore he is not meet for a kingdom
    of glory.  Therefore he must abide a kingdom which is not a
    kingdom of glory.

    25. And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of
    a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation,
    and transgresseth not the law.

    26. Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it
    shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power
    by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it.

    27. For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a
    spiritual body.

    28. They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body
    which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and
    your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened.

    29. Ye who are quickened by a portion of the celestial glory shall
    then receive of the same, even a fulness.

    30. And they who are quickened by a portion of the terrestrial
    glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

    31. And also they who are quickened by a portion of the telestial
    glory shall then receive of the same, even a fulness.

    32. And they who remain shall also be quickened; nevertheless, they
    shall return again to their own place, to enjoy that which they are
    willing to receive, because they were not willing to enjoy that
    which they might have received.

    33. For what doth it profit a man if a gift is bestowed upon him,
    and he receive not the gift? Behold, he rejoices not in that which
    is given unto him, neither rejoices in him who is the giver of the
    gift.

    34. And again, verily I say unto you, that which is governed by law
    is also preserved law and perfected and sanctified by the same.

    35. That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh
    to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and
    altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by
    mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore, they must remain filthy
    still.

    36. All kingdoms have a law given;

    37. And there are many kingdoms; for there is no space in the which
    there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in which there is no
    space, either a greater or a lesser kingdom.

    38. And unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there
    are certain bounds also and conditions.

    39. All beings who abide not in those conditions are not justified.

    40. For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth
    wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth
    unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own;
    justice continueth its course and claimeth its own; judgment goeth
     before the face of him who sitteth upon the throne and
    governeth and executeth all things.

    41. He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and
    all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and
    in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all
    things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever
    and ever.

    42. And again, verily I say unto you, he hath given a law unto all
    things, by which they move in their times and their seasons;

    43. And their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens
    and the earth, which comprehend the earth and all the planets.

    44. And they give light to each other in their times and in their
    seasons, in their minutes, in their hours, in their days, in their
    weeks, in their months, in their years--all these are one year with
    God, but not with man.

    45. The earth rolls upon her wings, and the sun giveth his light
    by day, and the moon giveth her light by night, and the stars also
    give their light, as they roll upon their wings in their glory, in
    the midst of the power of God.

    46. Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand?

    47. Behold, all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any
    or the least of these hath seen God moving in his majesty and power.

    48. I say unto you, he hath seen him; nevertheless, he who came
    unto his own was not comprehended.

    49. The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth
    it not; nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend
    even God, being quickened in him and by him.

    50. Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I
    am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise
    ye could not abound.

    51. Behold, I will liken these kingdoms unto a man having a field,
    and he sent forth his servants into the field to dig in the field.

    52. And he said unto the first: Go ye and labor in the field, and
    in the first hour I will come unto you, and ye shall behold the joy
    of my countenance.

    53. And he said unto the second: Go ye also into the field, and in
    the second hour I will visit you with the joy of my countenance.

    54. And also unto the third, saying: I will visit you;

    55. And unto the fourth, and so on unto the twelfth.

    56. And the lord of the field went unto the first in the first
    hour, and tarried with him all that hour, and he was made glad with
    the light of the countenance of his lord.

    57. And then he withdrew from the first that he might visit the
    second also, and the third, and the fourth, and so on unto the
    twelfth.

     58. And thus they all received the light of the countenance
    of their lord, every man in his hour, and in his time, and in his
    season--

    59. Beginning at the first, and so on unto the last, and from the
    last unto the first, and from the first unto the last;

    60. Every man in his own order, until his hour was finished, even
    according as his lord had commanded him, that his lord might be
    glorified in him, and he in his lord, that they all might be
    glorified.

    61. Therefore, unto this parable I will liken all these kingdoms,
    and the inhabitants thereof--every kingdom in its hour, and in its
    time, and in its season, even according to the decree which God
    hath made.

    62. And again, verily I say unto you, my friends, I leave these
    sayings with you to ponder in your hearts, with this commandment
    which I give unto you, that ye shall call upon me while I am near;

    63. Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me
    diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock
    and it shall be opened unto you.

    64. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto
    you, that is expedient for you;

    65. And if ye ask anything that is not expedient for you, it shall
    turn unto your condemnation.

    66. Behold, that which you hear is as the voice of one crying in
    the wilderness--in the wilderness, because you cannot see him--my
    voice, because my voice is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth
    abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound.

    67. And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall
    be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and
    that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things.

    68. Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single
    to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will
    unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in
    his own way, and according to his own will.

    69. Remember the great and last promise which I have made unto you;
    cast away your idle thoughts and your excess of laughter far from
    you.

    70. Tarry ye, tarry ye in this place, and call a solemn assembly,
    even of those who are the first laborers in this last kingdom.

    71. And let those whom they have warned in their traveling call on
    the Lord, and ponder the warning in their hearts which they have
    received, for a little season.

    72. Behold, and lo, I will take care of your flocks, and will raise
    up elders and send unto them.

    73. Behold, I will hasten my work in its time.

    74. And I give unto you, who are the first laborers in this last
    kingdom, a commandment that you assemble yourselves together, and
     organize yourselves, and prepare yourselves, and sanctify
    yourselves; yea, purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands and
    your feet before me, that I may make you clean;

    75. That I may testify unto your Father, and your God, and my God,
    that you are clean from the blood of this wicked generation; that I
    may fulfil this promise, this great and last promise, which I have
    made unto you, when I will.

    76. Also, I give unto you a commandment that ye shall continue in
    prayer and fasting from this time forth.

    77. And I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one
    another the doctrine of the kingdom.

    78. Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may
    be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine,
    in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the
    kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

    79. Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth;
    things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly
    come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad;
    the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments
    which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of
    kingdoms--

    80. That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you
    again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the
    mission with which I have commissioned you.

    81. Behold, I sent you out to testify and warn the people, and it
    becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor.

    82. Therefore, they are left without excuse, and their sins are
    upon their own heads.

    83. He that seeketh me early shall find me, and shall not be
    forsaken.

    84. Therefore, tarry ye, and labor diligently, that you may be
    perfected in your ministry to go forth among the Gentiles for the
    last time, as many as the mouth of the Lord shall name, to bind up
    the law and seal up the testimony, and to prepare the saints for
    the hour of judgment which is to come;

    85. That their souls may escape the wrath of God, the desolation of
    abomination which awaits the wicked, both in this world and in the
    world to come. Verily, I say unto you, let those who are not the
    first elders continue in the vineyard until the mouth of the Lord
    shall call them, for their time is not yet come; their garments are
    not clean from the blood of this generation.

    86. Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free; entangle
    not yourselves in sin, but let your hands be clean, until the Lord
    comes.

    87. For not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to
     and fro as a drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face,
    and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in
    blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast
    themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree.

    88. And after your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the
    people.

    89. For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes,
    that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall
    upon the ground, and shall not be able to stand.

    90. And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and
    the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice
    of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds.

    91. And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts
    shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people.

    92. And angels shall fly through the midst of heaven, crying with a
    loud voice, sounding the trump of God, saying: Prepare ye, prepare
    ye, O inhabitants of the earth; for the judgment of our God is
    come: behold, and lo! the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet Him.

    93. And immediately there shall appear a great sign in heaven, and
    all people shall see it together.

    94. And another angel shall sound his trump, saying, That great
    church, the mother of abominations, that made all nations drink
    of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, that persecuteth the
    Saints of God, that shed their blood; she who sitteth upon many
    waters, and upon the islands of the sea; behold, she is the tares
    of the earth, she is bound in bundles, her bands are made strong,
    no man can loose them; therefore, she is ready to be burned. And
    he shall sound his trump both long and loud, and all nations shall
    hear it.

    95. And there shall be silence in heaven for the space of half
    an hour, and immediately after shall the curtain of heaven be
    unfolded, as a scroll is unfolded after it is rolled up, and the
    face of the Lord shall be unveiled;

    96. And the Saints that are upon the earth, who are alive, shall be
    quickened, and be caught up to meet Him.

    97. And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth; for
    their graves shall be opened, and they also shall be caught up to
    meet Him in the midst of the pillar of heaven:

    98. They are Christ's, the first fruits: they who shall descend
    with Him first, and they who are on the earth and in their graves,
    who are first caught up to meet Him: and all this by the voice of
    the sounding of the trump of the angel of God.

    99. And after this another angel shall sound, which is the second
    trump; and then cometh the redemption of those who are Christ's at
     His coming; who have received their part in that prison which
    is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be
    judged according to men in the flesh.

    100. And again, another trump shall sound, which is the third
    trump; and then come the spirits of men who are to be judged, and
    are found under condemnation:

    101. And these are the rest of the dead, and they live not again
    until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of
    the earth.

    102. And another trump shall sound, which is the fourth trump,
    saying, There are found among those who are to remain until that
    great and last day, even the end, who shall remain filthy still.

    103. And another trump shall sound, which is the fifth trump, which
    is the fifth angel who committeth the everlasting Gospel,--flying
    through the midst of heaven, unto all nations, kindreds, tongues,
    and people;

    104. And this shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all
    people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth;
    for every ear shall hear it, and every knee shall bow, and every
    tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump,
    saying, Fear God, and give glory to Him who sitteth upon the
    throne, for ever and ever: for the hour of His judgment is come.

    105. And again, another angel shall sound his trump, which is the
    sixth angel, saying, She is fallen who made all nations drink of
    the wine of the wrath of her fornication: she is fallen! is fallen!

    106. And again, another angel shall sound his trump, which is the
    seventh angel, saying, It is finished! It is finished! The Lamb
    of God hath overcome and trodden the wine-press alone: even the
    wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God;

    107. And then shall the angels be crowned with the glory of His
    might, and the Saints shall be filled with His glory, and receive
    their inheritance and be made equal with Him.

    108. And then shall the first angel again sound his trump in the
    ears of all living, and reveal the secret acts of men, and the
    mighty works of God in the first thousand years.

    109. And then shall the second angel sound his trump, and reveal
    the secret acts of men, and the thoughts and intents of their
    hearts, and the mighty works of God in the second thousand years.

    110. And so on, until the seventh angel shall sound his trump: and
    he shall stand forth upon the land and upon the sea, and swear in
    the name of Him who sitteth upon the throne, that there shall be
    time no longer; and Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who
    is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a
    thousand years.

     111. And then he shall be loosed for a little season, that he
    may gather together his armies:

    112. And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall
    gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven.

    113. And the devil shall gather together his armies, even the hosts
    of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies:

    114. And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and
    his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall
    not have power over the saints any more at all;

    115. For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him
    who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the
    Lamb.

    116. This is the glory of God, and the sanctified; and they shall
    not any more see death.

    117. Therefore, verily I say unto you, my friends, call your solemn
    assembly, as I have commanded you.

    118. And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one
    another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words
    of wisdom; seek learning even by study, and also by faith.

    119. Organize yourselves, prepare every needful thing, and
    establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a
    house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of
    order, a house of God;

    120. That your incomings may be in the name of the Lord; that your
    outgoings may be in the name of the Lord; that all your salutations
    may be in the name of the Lord, with uplifted hands unto the Most
    High.

    121. Therefore, cease from all your light speeches; from all
    laughter; from all your lustful desires; from all your pride and
    light-mindedness, and from all your wicked doings.

    122. Appoint among yourselves a teacher, and let not all be
    spokesmen at once; but let one speak at a time and let all listen
    unto his sayings, that when all have spoken, that all may be
    edified of all, and that every man may have an equal privilege.

    123. See that ye love one another; cease to be covetous, learn to
    impart one to another as the gospel requires:

    124. Cease to be idle; cease to be unclean; cease to find fault one
    with another; cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to thy
    bed early, that ye may not be weary; rise early, that your bodies
    and your minds may be invigorated.

    125. And above all things, clothe yourselves with the bond of
    charity, as with a mantle, which is the bond of perfectness and
    peace;

    126. Pray always, that ye may not faint, until I come: behold, and
    lo, I will come quickly, and receive you unto myself. Amen.

     127. And again, the order of the house prepared for the
    presidency of the school of the prophets, established for their
    instruction in all things that are expedient for them, even for all
    the officers of the church, or in other words, those who are called
    to the ministry in the church, beginning at the high priests, even
    down to the Deacons;

    128. And this shall be the order of the house of the presidency of
    the school: He that is appointed to be president, or teacher, shall
    be found standing in his place in the house which shall be prepared
    for him.

    129. Therefore, he shall be first in the house of God, in a place
    that the congregation in the house may hear his words, carefully
    and distinctly, not with loud speech.

    130. And when he cometh into the house of God, (for he should be
    first in the house; behold, this is beautiful, that he may be an
    example),

    131. Let him offer himself in prayer upon his knees before God, in
    token or remembrance of the everlasting covenant.

    132. And when any shall come in after him, let the teacher arise,
    and, with uplifted hands, to heaven; yea, even directly, salute his
    brother or brethren with these words:

    133. Art thou a brother or brethren? I salute you in the name of
    the Lord Jesus Christ, in token or remembrance of the everlasting
    covenant, in which covenant I receive you to fellowship, in a
    determination that is fixed, immovable, and unchangeable, to be
    your friend and brother through the grace of God, in the bonds
    of love, to walk in all the commandments of God blameless, in
    thanksgiving, forever and ever. Amen.

    134. And he that is found unworthy of this salutation, shall not
    have place among you; for ye shall not suffer that mine house shall
    be polluted by him.

    135. And he that cometh in and is faithful before me, and is a
    brother, or if they be brethren, they shall salute the president or
    teacher with uplifted hands to heaven, with this same prayer and
    covenant, or by saying Amen, in token of the same.

    136. Behold, verily, I say unto you, this is an ensample unto you
    for a salutation to one another in the house of God, in the school
    of the prophets.

    137. And ye are called to do this by prayer and thanksgiving as
    the Spirit shall give utterance in all your doings in the house
    of the Lord, in the school of the prophets, that it may become a
    sanctuary, a tabernacle of the Holy Spirit to your edification.

    138. And ye shall not receive any among you into this school save
    he is clean from the blood of this generation;

     139. And he shall be received by the ordinance of the washing
    of feet, for unto this end was the ordinance of the washing of feet
    instituted.

    140. And again, the ordinance of washing feet is to be administered
    by the president, or Presiding Elder of the Church.

    141. It is to be commenced with prayer; and after partaking of
    bread and wine, he is to gird himself according to the pattern
    given in the thirteenth chapter of John's testimony concerning me.
    Amen.

I wrote to N. E. Seaton, Esq., [3] editor of the--, as follows: [4]

    Kirtland, January 4th, 1833.

    Mr. Editor:--Sir, Considering the liberal principles upon which
    your interesting and valuable paper is published, myself being a
    subscriber, and feeling a deep interest in the cause of Zion, and
    in the happiness of my brethren of mankind, I cheerfully take up my
    pen to contribute my mite at this very interesting and important
    period.

    For some length of time I have been carefully reviewing the state
    of things, as it now appears, throughout our Christian land; and
    have looked at it with feelings of the most painful anxiety.
    While upon one hand I behold the manifest withdrawal of God's
    Holy Spirit, and the veil of stupidity which seems to be drawn
    over the hearts of the people; upon the other hand, I behold the
    judgments of God that have swept, and are still sweeping hundreds
    and thousands of our race (and I fear unprepared) down to the
    shades of death. With this solemn and alarming fact before me, I am
    led to exclaim, "O that my head were  waters, and mine eyes a
    fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night."

    I think that it is high time for a Christian world to awake out of
    sleep, and cry mightily to that God, day and night, whose anger we
    have justly incurred. Are not these things a sufficient stimulant
    to arouse the faculties and call forth the energies of every man,
    woman or child that possesses feelings of sympathy for their
    fellows, or that is in any degree endeared to the budding cause
    of our glorious Lord! I leave an intelligent community to answer
    this important question, with a confession, that this is what has
    caused me to overlook my own inability, and expose my weakness to
    a learned world; but, trusting in that God who has said that these
    things are hid from the wise and prudent and revealed unto babes, I
    step forth into the field to tell you what the Lord is doing, and
    what you must do, to enjoy the smiles of your Savior in these last
    days.

    The time has at last arrived when the God of Abraham, of Isaac,
    and of Jacob, has set His hand again the second time to recover
    the remnants of His people, which have been left from Assyria,
    and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam,
    and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the
    sea, and with them to bring in the fulness of the Gentiles, and
    establish that covenant with them, which was promised when their
    sins should be taken away. See Isaiah xi, Romans xi, 25, 26 and
    27, and also Jeremiah xxxi, 31, 32 and 33. This covenant has never
    been established with the house of Israel, nor with the house of
    Judah, for it requires two parties to make a covenant, and those
    two parties must be agreed, or no covenant can be made.

    Christ, in the days of His flesh, proposed to make a covenant with
    them, but they rejected Him and His proposals, and in consequence
    thereof, they were broken off, and no covenant was made with them
    at that time. But their unbelief has not rendered the promise of
    God of none effect: no, for there was another day limited in David,
    which was the day of His power; and then His people, Israel, should
    be a willing people;--and He would write His law in their hearts,
    and print it in their thoughts; their sins and their iniquities He
    would remember no more.

    Thus after this chosen family had rejected Christ and His
    proposals, the heralds of salvation said to them, "Lo, we turn
    unto the Gentiles;" and the Gentiles received the covenant, and
    were grafted in from whence the chosen family were broken off: but
    the Gentiles have not continued in the goodness of God, but have
    departed from the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, and
    have broken the covenant in which their fathers were established
    (See Isaiah xxiv, 5); and have  become high-minded, and have
    not feared; therefore, but few of them will be gathered with the
    chosen family. Have not the pride, high-mindedness, and unbelief of
    the Gentiles, provoked the Holy One of Israel to withdraw His Holy
    Spirit from them, and send forth His judgments to scourge them for
    their wickedness? This is certainly the case.

    Christ said to His disciples (Mark xvi:17 and 18), that these signs
    should follow them that believe:--"In my name shall they cast out
    devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
    serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt
    them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover;"
    and also, in connection with this, read 1st Corinthians, 12th
    chapter. By the foregoing testimonies we may look at the Christian
    world and see the apostasy there has been from the apostolic
    platform; and who can look at this and not exclaim in the language
    of Isaiah, "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants
    thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the
    ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant?"

    The plain fact is this, the power of God begins to fall upon the
    nations, and the light of the latter-day glory begins to break
    forth through the dark atmosphere of sectarian wickedness, and
    their iniquity rolls up into view, and the nations of the Gentiles
    are like the waves of the sea, casting up mire and dirt, or all
    in commotion, and they are hastily preparing to act the part
    allotted them, when the Lord rebukes the nations, when He shall
    rule them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a
    potter's vessel. The Lord declared to His servants, some eighteen
    months since, that He was then withdrawing His Spirit from the
    earth; and we can see that such is the fact, for not only the
    churches are dwindling away, but there are no conversions, or but
    very few: and this is not all, the governments of the earth are
    thrown into confusion and division; and Destruction, to the eye
    of the spiritual beholder, seems to be written by the finger of
    an invisible hand, in large capitals, upon almost every thing we
    behold.

    And now what remains to be done, under circumstances like these?
    I will proceed to tell you what the Lord requires of all people,
    high and low, rich and poor, male and female, ministers and
    people, professors of religion and non-professors, in order that
    they may enjoy the Holy Spirit of God to a fulness, and escape
    the judgments of God, which are almost ready to burst upon the
    nations of the earth. Repent of all your sins, and be baptized in
    water for the remission of them, in the name of the Father, and
    of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and receive the ordinance of
    the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto
    this power, that ye may receive the Holy Spirit of God; and this
    is according to the Holy Scriptures, and the Book of Mormon; and
    the only way that man can enter into the celestial  kingdom.
    These are the requirements of the new covenant, or first principles
    of the Gospel of Christ; then "Add to your faith, virtue; and to
    virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
    patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly
    kindness: and to brotherly kindness, charity [or love]; for if
    these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall
    neither be barren nor unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord
    Jesus Christ."

    The Book of Mormon is a record of the forefathers of our western
    tribes of Indians; having been found through the ministration of
    an holy angel, and translated into our own language by the gift
    and power of God, after having been hid up in the earth for the
    last fourteen hundred years, containing the word of God which was
    delivered unto them. By it we learn that our western tribes of
    Indians are descendants from that Joseph which was sold into Egypt,
    and that the land of America is a promised land unto them, and
    unto it all the tribes of Israel will come, with as many of the
    Gentiles as shall comply with the requisitions of the new covenant.
    But the tribe of Judah will return to old Jerusalem. The city of
    Zion spoken of by David, in the one hundred and second Psalm, will
    be built upon the land of America, "And the ransomed of the Lord
    shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon
    their heads" (Isaiah xxxv:10); and then they will be delivered
    from the overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land. But
    Judah shall obtain deliverance at Jerusalem. See Joel ii:32; Isaiah
    xxvi:20 and 21; Jeremiah xxxi:12, Psalm 1:5; Ezekiel xxxiv:11, 12
    and 13. These are testimonies that the Good Shepherd will put forth
    His own sheep, and lead them out from all nations where they have
    been scattered in a cloudy and dark day, to Zion, and to Jerusalem;
    besides many more testimonies which might be brought.

    And now I am prepared to say by the authority of Jesus Christ,
    that not many years shall pass away before the United States shall
    present such a scene of bloodshed as has not a parallel in the
    history of our nation; pestilence, hail, famine, and earthquake
    will sweep the wicked of this generation from off the face of
    the land, to open and prepare the way for the return of the lost
    tribes of Israel from the north country. The people of the Lord,
    those who have complied with the requirements of the new covenant,
    have already commenced gathering together to Zion, which is in
    the state of Missouri; therefore I declare unto you the warning
    which the Lord has commanded to declare unto this generation,
    remembering that the eyes of my Maker are upon me, and that to him
    I am accountable for every word I say, wishing nothing worse to my
    fellow-men than their eternal salvation; therefore, "Fear God, and
    give glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come." Repent
    ye, repent ye, and embrace the everlasting  covenant, and flee
    to Zion, before the overflowing scourge overtake you, for there
    are those now living upon the earth whose eyes shall not be closed
    in death until they see all these things, which I have spoken,
    fulfilled. Remember these things; call upon the Lord while He is
    near, and seek him while He may be found, is the exhortation of
    your unworthy servant,

    [Signed] Joseph Smith, Jun.

Important Correspondence with the Brethren in Zion.

Kirtland, January 14, 1833.

    Brother William W. Phelps:

    I send you the "olive leaf" which we have plucked from the Tree
    of Paradise, [5] the Lord's message of peace to us; for though
    our brethren in Zion indulge in feelings towards us, which are
    not according to the requirements of the new covenant, yet, we
    have the satisfaction of knowing that the Lord approves of us,
    and has accepted us, and established His name in Kirtland for the
    salvation of the nations; for the Lord will have a place whence
    His word will go forth, in these last days, in purity; for if Zion
    will not purify herself, so as to be approved of in all things, in
    His sight, He will seek another people; for His work will go on
    until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear His voice,
    must expect to feel His wrath. Let me say unto you, seek to purify
    yourselves, and also all the inhabitants of Zion, lest the Lord's
    anger be kindled to fierceness. Repent, repent, is the voice of
    God to Zion; and strange as it may appear, yet it is true, mankind
    will persist in self-justification until all their iniquity is
    exposed, and their character past being redeemed, and that which is
    treasured up in their hearts be exposed to the gaze of mankind. I
    say to you (and what I say to you I say to all), hear the warning
    voice of God, lest Zion fall, and the Lord sware in His wrath the
    inhabitants of Zion shall not enter into His rest.

    The brethren in Kirtland pray for you unceasingly, for, knowing
    the terrors of the Lord, they greatly fear for you. You will see
    that the Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God,
    and establish a school for the Prophets, [6] this is the word of
    the Lord to us, and we must, yea, the Lord helping us, we will
    obey: as on conditions of our obedience He has promised us great
    things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with His own
    presence. We greatly fear before the Lord lest we should fail of
    this great honor, which our  Master proposes to confer on us;
    we are seeking for humility and great faith lest we be ashamed in
    His presence. Our hearts are greatly grieved at the spirit which
    is breathed both in your letter and that of Brother Gilbert's,
    the very spirit which is wasting the strength of Zion like a
    pestilence; and if it is not detected and driven from you, it will
    ripen Zion for the threatened judgments of God. Remember God sees
    the secret springs of human action, and knows the hearts of all
    living.

    Brother, suffer us to speak plainly, for God has respect to
    the feelings of His Saints, and He will not suffer them to
    be tantalized with impunity. Tell Brother Gilbert that low
    insinuations God hates; but He rejoices in an honest heart, and
    knows better who is guilty than he does. We send him this warning
    voice, and let him fear greatly for himself, lest a worse thing
    overtake him; all we can say by way of conclusion is, if the
    fountain of our tears be not dried up, we will still weep for Zion.
    This from your brother who trembles for Zion, and for the wrath of
    heaven, which awaits her if she repent not.

    [Signed] Joseph Smith, Jun.

    P. S.--I am not in the habit of crying peace, when there is no
    peace; and, knowing the threatened judgments of God, I say, Wo unto
    them who are at ease in Zion; fearfulness will speedily lay hold of
    the hypocrite. I did not suspect you had lost the commandments, but
    thought from your letters you had neglected to read them, otherwise
    you would not have written as you did.

    It is in vain to try to hide a bad spirit from the eyes of them who
    are spiritual, for it will show itself in speaking and in writing,
    as well as in all our other conduct. It is also needless to make
    great pretensions when the heart is not right; the Lord will expose
    it to the view of His faithful Saints. We wish you to render the
    Star as interesting as possible, by setting forth the rise,
    progress, and faith of the Church, as well as the doctrine; for
    if you do not render it more interesting than at present, it will
    fall, and the Church suffer a great loss thereby.

    [Signed] J. S. Jun.

    Kirtland Mills, [7] Geauga Co., Ohio,

    January 14, 1833.

From a Conference of Twelve High Priests, to the Bishop, his Council and the Inhabitants of Zion.

    Orson Hyde, and Hyrum Smith being appointed by the said
    conference to write this epistle in obedience to the commandment,
    given the 22nd and 23rd of September last, which says: "But verily
    I say unto all those to whom the kingdom has been given, from you
    it must be preached unto them, that they shall repent of their
    former evil works, for they are to be upbraided for their evil
    hearts of unbelief; and your brethren in Zion, for their rebellion
    against you at the time I sent you." [8]

    Brother Joseph, and certain others, have written to you on this
    all-important subject, but you have never been apprised of these
    things by the united voice of the conference of those High Priests
    that were present at the time this commandment was given.

    We therefore, Orson and Hyrum, the committee appointed by said
    conference to write this epistle, having received the prayers of
    said conference, that we might be enabled to write the mind and
    will of God upon this subject, now take up our pen to address you
    in the name of the conference, relying upon the arm of the Great
    Head of the Church.

    In the commandment above alluded to, the children of Zion were all,
    yea, even every one, under condemnation, and were to remain in that
    state until they repented and remembered the new covenant, even the
    Book of Mormon, and the former commandments, which the Lord had
    given them, not only to say, but to do them, and bring forth fruit
    meet for the Father's kingdom; otherwise there remaineth a scourge
    and a judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion: for
    "shall the children of the kingdom pollute my holy land? I say unto
    you, Nay." [9]

    The answers received from those letters, which have been sent to
    you upon this subject, have failed to bring to us that satisfactory
    confession and acknowledgment, which the spirit of our Master
    requires. We, therefore, feeling a deep interest for Zion, and
    knowing the judgments of God that will come upon her except she
    repent, resort to these last, and most effectual means in our
    power, to bring her to a sense of her standing before the Most High.

    At the time Joseph, Sidney, and Newel left Zion, all matters
    of hardness and misunderstanding were settled and buried (as
    they supposed), and you gave them the hand of fellowship; but,
    afterwards, you brought up all these things again, in a censorious
    spirit, accusing Brother Joseph in rather an indirect way of
    seeking after monarchial power and authority. This came to us in
    Brother Corrill's letter of June 2nd. We are sensible that this is
    not the thing Brother Joseph is seeking after, but to magnify the
    high office and calling whereunto he has been called and appointed
    by the command of God, and the united  voice of this Church.
    It might not be amiss for you to call to mind the circumstances of
    the Nephites, and the children of Israel rising up against their
    Prophets, and accusing them of seeking after kingly power, and see
    what befel them, and take warning before it is too late.

    Brother Gilbert's letter of December 10th, has been received and
    read attentively, and the low, dark, and blind insinuations, which
    were in it, were not received by us as from the fountain of light,
    though his claims and pretensions to holiness were great. We are
    not unwilling to be chastened or rebuked for our faults, but we
    want to receive it in language that we can understand, as Nathan
    said to David, "Thou art the man." We are aware that Brother
    Gilbert is doing much, and has a multitude of business on hand; but
    let him purge out all the old leaven, and do his business in the
    spirit of the Lord, and then the Lord will bless him, otherwise
    the frown of the Lord will remain upon him. There is manifestly an
    uneasiness in Brother Gilbert, and a fearfulness that God will not
    provide for His Saints in these last days, and these fears lead
    him on to covetousness. This ought not so to be; but let him do
    just as the Lord has commanded him, and then the Lord will open
    His coffers, and his wants will be liberally supplied. But if this
    uneasy, covetous disposition be cherished by him, the Lord will
    bring him to poverty, shame, and disgrace.

    Brother Phelps' letter of December 15th, is also received and
    carefully read, and it betrays a lightness of spirit that ill
    becomes a man placed in the important and responsible station that
    he is placed in. If you have fat beef, and potatoes, eat them in
    singleness of heart, and boast not yourselves in these things.
    Think not, brethren, that we make a man an offender for a word;
    this is not the case; but we want to see a spirit in Zion, by which
    the Lord will build it up; that is the plain, solemn, and pure
    spirit of Christ. Brother Phelps requested in his last letter that
    Brother Joseph should come to Zion; but we say that Brother Joseph
    will not settle in Zion until she repent, and purify herself, and
    abide by the new covenant, and remember the commandments that have
    been given her, to do them as well as say them.

    You may think it strange that we manifest no cheerfulness of heart
    upon the reception of your letters; you may think that our minds
    are prejudiced so much that we can see no good that comes from you,
    but rest assured, brethren, that this is not the case.

    We have the best of feelings, and feelings of the greatest anxiety
    for the welfare of Zion: we feel more like weeping over Zion than
    we do like rejoicing over her, for we know that the judgments of
    God hang over her, and will fall upon her except she repent, and
    purify herself before the Lord, and put away from her every foul
    spirit. We now say to Zion, this once, in the name of the Lord,
    Repent! repent!  awake, awake, put on thy beautiful garments,
    before you are made to feel the chastening rod of Him whose anger
    is kindled against you. Let not Satan tempt you to think we want
    to make you bow to us, to domineer over you, for God knows this is
    not the case; our eyes are watered with tears, and our hearts are
    poured out to God in prayer for you, that He will spare you, and
    turn away His anger from you.

    There are many things in the last letters from Brothers Gilbert and
    Phelps that are good, and we esteem them much. The idea of having
    "certain ones appointed to regulate Zion, and Traveling Elders have
    nothing to do with this part of the matter," is something we highly
    approbate, and you will doubtless know before this reaches you, why
    William E. M'Lellin opposed you in this move. We fear there was
    something in Brother Gilbert, when he returned to this place from
    New York last fall, in relation to his brother William, that was
    not right: for Brother Gilbert was asked two or three times about
    his brother William, but gave evasive answers, and at the same
    time, he knew that William was in Cleveland: but the Lord has taken
    him. We merely mention this, that all may take warning to work in
    the light, for God will bring every secret thing to light.

    We now close our epistle by saying unto you, the Lord has commanded
    us to purify ourselves, to wash our hands and our feet, that He may
    testify to His Father and our Father, to His God and our God, that
    we are clean from the blood of this generation; and before we could
    wash our hands and our feet, we were constrained to write this
    letter. Therefore, with the feelings of inexpressible anxiety for
    your welfare, we say again, Repent, repent, or Zion must suffer,
    for the scourge and judgment must come upon her.

    Let the Bishop read this to the Elders, that they may warn the
    members of the scourge that is coming, except they repent. Tell
    them to read the Book of Mormon, and obey it; read the commandments
    that are printed, and obey them; yea, humble yourselves under the
    mighty hand of God, that peradventure He may turn away His anger
    from you. Tell them that they have not come up to Zion to sit down
    in idleness, neglecting the things of God, but they are to be
    diligent and faithful in obeying the new covenant.

    There is one clause in Brother Joseph's letter which you may not
    understand; that is this, "If the people of Zion did not repent,
    the Lord would seek another place, and another people." Zion is
    the place where the temple will be built, and the people gathered,
    but all people upon that holy land being under condemnation, the
    Lord will cut off, if they repent not, and bring another race
    upon it, that will serve Him. The Lord will seek another place to
    bring forth and prepare his word to go forth to the nations, and
    as we said before, so we say again.  Brother Joseph will not
    settle in Zion, except she repent, and serve God, and obey the new
    covenant. With this explanation, the conference sanctions Brother
    Joseph's letter.

    Brethren, the conference meets again this evening to hear this
    letter read, and if it meet their minds, we have all agreed to
    kneel down before the Lord, and cry unto Him with all our hearts,
    that this epistle, and Brother Joseph's, and the revelations also,
    may have their desired effect, and accomplish the thing whereunto
    they are sent, and that they may stimulate you to cleanse Zion,
    that she mourn not. Therefore when you get this, know ye that a
    conference of twelve High Priests have cried unto the Lord for
    you, and are still crying, saying, Spare thy people, O Lord, and
    give not thy heritage to reproach. We now feel that our garments
    are clean from you, and all men, when we have washed our feet and
    hands, according to the commandment.

    We have written plainly at this time, but we believe not harshly.
    Plainness is what the Lord requires, and we should not feel
    ourselves clear, unless we had done so; and if the things we have
    told you be not attended to, you will not long have occasion to
    say, or to think rather, that we may be wrong in what we have
    stated. Your unworthy brethren are determined to pray unto the Lord
    for Zion, as long as we can shed the sympathetic tear, or feel any
    spirit to supplicate the throne of grace in her behalf.

    The School of the Prophets will commence, if the Lord will, in two
    or three days. It is a general time of health with us. The cause
    of God seems to be rapidly advancing in the eastern country; the
    gifts are beginning to break forth so as to astonish the world,
    and even believers marvel at the power and goodness of God. Thanks
    be rendered to His holy name for what He is doing. We are your
    unworthy brethren in the Lord, and may the Lord help us all to do
    His will, that we may at last be saved in His kingdom.

    Orson Hyde,

    Hyrum Smith.

    N. B.--We stated that Brother Gilbert, when he was in Kirtland,
    knew that William was in Cleveland last fall. We wrote this upon
    the strength of hearsay; but William being left at St. Louis,
    strengthened our suppositions that such was the fact. We stated
    further respecting this matter, or this item, than the testimony
    will warrant us. With this exception the conference sanctions this
    letter.

    O. H.

    H. S.

Footnotes

1. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxvii.

2. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii. This is the revelation referred to as "The Olive Leaf," plucked from the Tree of Paradise, in the Prophet's letter of January 11, 1833. 3. This name is also spelled Sexton in the Ms. History. Mr. Seaton lived at Rochester, New York, and published a paper there, but the name of the paper cannot be ascertained.

4. The Prophet states subsequently that he wrote this communication by commandment of the Lord. The general condition of the world as noted by the Prophet at the commencement of this chapter, was doubtless the occasion of the Lord sending forth such a note of warning to the inhabitants of the earth as is here presented. It should be said, however, in addition to what is here set down, i.e. at the beginning of the chapter--that the "plague," or Asiatic cholera, which first broke out in India, spread also throughout the United States in that same year. One historian, speaking of its ravages in the United States, says: "It was on the 21st of June, 1832, that the eastern plague, known as the Asiatic cholera, made its first appearance in the United States, in the city of New York. Its rapid spread produced universal panic, though it was less fatal in the South Atlantic States than in the north and in the valley of the Mississippi. Thousands of persons of all ages and conditions died of it within a few months. The most robust constitutions in many instances became victims of its malignancy within thirty-six hours from its first attack."--History U. S., Stephens, p. 450.

5. This is the revelation beginning on p. 302, and section lxxxviii of the Doctrine and Covenants.

6. See p. 301, verses 119-136.

7. "Kirtland Mills" and "Kirtland" are identical. The name "Kirtland Mills" arose from the existence of some mills on the banks of the branch of the Chagrin river on which Kirtland is situated.

8. See p. 292, verse 76.

9. See p. 291, verses 55-59.

Chapter XXIII.

The Enjoyment of Spiritual Blessings in the Church--The Word of Wisdom.

[Sidenote: The Enjoyment of Spiritual Gifts.]

This winter [1832-33] was spent in translating the Scriptures; in the School of the Prophets; and sitting in conferences. I had many glorious seasons of refreshing. The gifts which follow them that believe and obey the Gospel, as tokens that the Lord is ever the same in His dealings with the humble lovers and followers of truth, began to be poured out among us, as in ancient days;--for as we, viz.: Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, Newel K. Whitney, Hyrum Smith, Zebedee Coltrin, [1] Joseph Smith, Sen., Samuel H. Smith, John Murdock, Lyman E. Johnson, [2] Orson Hyde, Ezra Thayer, High Priests; and Levi Hancock, [3] and William Smith, [4] Elders, were assembled in  conference, on the 22nd day of January, I spoke to the conference in another tongue, and was followed in the same gift by Brother Zebedee Coltrin, and he by Brother William Smith, after which the Lord poured out His Spirit in a miraculous manner, until all the Elders spake in tongues, and several members, both male and female, exercised the same gift. Great and glorious were the divine manifestations of the Holy Spirit. Praises were sung to God and the Lamb; speaking and praying, all in tongues, occupied the conference until a late hour at night, so rejoiced were we at the return of these long absent blessings.

[Sidenote: Ordinance of the Washing of Feet.]

On the 23rd of January, we again assembled in conference; when, after much speaking, singing, praying, and praising God, all in tongues, we proceeded to the washing of feet (according to the practice recorded in the 13th chapter of John's Gospel), as commanded of the Lord. Each Elder washed his own feet first, after which I girded myself with a towel and washed the feet of all of them, wiping them with the towel with which I was girded. Among the number, my father presented himself, but before I washed his feet, I asked of him a father's blessing, which he granted by laying his hands upon my head, in the name of Jesus Christ, and declaring that I should continue in the Priest's office until Christ comes. At the close of the scene, Brother Frederick G. Williams, being moved upon by the Holy Ghost, washed my feet in token of his fixed determination to be with me in suffering, or in journeying, in life or in death, and to be continually on my right hand; in which I accepted him in the name of the Lord.

[Sidenote: The Elders Pronounced Clean.]

I then said to the Elders, As I have done so do ye; wash ye, therefore, one another's feet; and by the power of the Holy Ghost I pronounced them all clean from the blood of this generation; but if any of them should sin wilfully after they were thus cleansed, and sealed up unto eternal life, they should be given over unto the buffetings of Satan until  the day of redemption. Having continued all day in fasting, and prayer, and ordinances, we closed by partaking of the Lord's supper. I blessed the bread and wine in the name of the Lord, when we all ate and drank, and were filled; then we sang a hymn, and the meeting adjourned.

[Sidenote: Revision of the New Testament Completed.]

I completed the translation and review of the New Testament, on the 2nd of February, 1833 and sealed it up, no more to be opened till it arrived in Zion. [5]

An Epistle

Of the First Presidency, to the Church of Christ in Thompson, Geauga County, Ohio.

Kirtland, February 6th, 1833.

    Dear Brethren,

    We salute you, by this our epistle, in the bonds of love, rejoicing
    in your steadfastness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus our
    Lord: and we desire your prosperity in the ways of truth and
    righteousness, praying for you continually, that your faith fail
    not, and that you may overcome all the evils with which you are
    surrounded, and become pure and holy before God, even our Father,
    to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

    It has seemed good unto the Holy Spirit and unto us, to send this
    our epistle to you by the hand of our beloved Brother Salmon Gee,
    your messenger, who has been ordained by us, in obedience to the
    commandments of God, to the office of Elder to preside over the
    Church in  Thompson, taking the oversight thereof, to lead
    you and to teach the things which are according to godliness; in
    whom we have great confidence, as we presume also you have, we
    therefore say to you, yea, not us only, but the Lord also, receive
    him as such, knowing that the Lord has appointed him to this office
    for your good, holding him up by your prayers, praying for him
    continually that he may be endowed with wisdom and understanding in
    the knowledge of the Lord, that through him you may be kept from
    evil spirits, and all strifes and dissensions, and grow in grace
    and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

    Brethren beloved, continue in brotherly love, walk in meekness,
    watching unto prayer, that you be not overcome. Follow after peace,
    as said our beloved brother Paul, that you may be the children of
    our Heavenly Father, and not give occasion for stumbling, to Saint
    or sinner. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that we may be enabled
    to do the work whereunto we are called, that you may enjoy the
    mysteries of God, even a fulness; and may the grace of our Lord
    Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

    Joseph Smith, Jun.,

    Sidney Rigdon,

    Frederick G. Williams.

[Sidenote: John Murdock's Message to the Thompson Branch.]

The following letter was written by John Murdock, a High Priest, (who had previously been with the Church in Thompson), to Salmon Gee, Elder of the Church in Thompson:

Kirtland, February 11, 1833.

    Beloved brethren and sisters in the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
    I beseech you in the bowels of mercy to remember the exhortation
    which I gave you while I was yet present with you, to beware of
    delusive spirits. I rejoice that our Heavenly Father hath blessed
    you greatly, as He also has me, in enabling me to speak the praises
    of God and the mysteries of the kingdom in other tongues according
    to promise: and this without throwing me down or wallowing me on
    the ground, or any thing unbecoming or immoral; also, without any
    external operation of the system, but it is the internal operation
    and power of the Spirit of God, so that I know that those odd
    actions and strange noises are not caused by the Spirit of the
    Lord as is represented by Brother King. Therefore in the name of
    the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Spirit of the living God, according
    to the authority of the Holy Priesthood committed to me, I command
    Brother Thomas King, (as though I were present), to  cease
    from your diabolical acts of enthusiasm, and also from acting as
    an Elder in this Church of Christ, until you come and give full
    testimony to the High Priests in Kirtland, that you are worthy of
    that holy calling; because those are the things of God, and are to
    be used in the fear of God: and I now not only command you, but
    exhort you in behalf of your soul's salvation, to submit, and let
    Brother Gee be upheld by the prayer of faith of every brother and
    sister, and if there be this union of spirit, and prayer of faith,
    every false spirit shall be bound, and cast out from among you.

    My beloved children in the bonds of the Gospel, and the bowels of
    mercy, which is the everlasting love of God, I do beseech you to
    live faithful and in obedience to the commandments of God; and
    in the name of the Lord Jesus, I say, the blessings of God shall
    attend you.

    John Murdock.

[Sidenote: Concerning the Prophet's Communication to Seaton.]

February 12.--Having received Seaton's paper, from Rochester, New York, containing a part of my communication, written on the 4th of January, I wrote as follows:

    To N. E. Seaton, Rochester.

    Dear Sir:--I was somewhat disappointed on receiving my paper with
    only a part of my letter inserted in it. The letter which I wrote
    you for publication, I wrote by the commandment of God, and I am
    quite anxious to have it all laid before the public, for it is of
    importance to them: but I have no claim upon you, neither do I wish
    to urge you, beyond that which is reasonable, to do it. I have only
    to appeal to your extended generosity to all religious societies
    that claim that Christ has come in the flesh; and also to tell you
    what will be the consequence of a neglect to publish it.

    Some parts of the letter were very severe upon the wickedness of
    sectarianism, I acknowledge; and the truth, remember, is hard and
    severe against all iniquity and wickedness, but this is no reason
    why it should not be published, but the very reason why it should
    be. I lay the ax at the root of the tree, and I long to see many
    of the sturdy oaks, which have long cumbered the ground, fall
    prostrate. I now say unto you, that if you wish to clear your
    garments from the blood of your readers, I exhort you to publish
    that letter entire; but if not, the sin be upon your head. Accept,
    sir the good wishes and tender regard of your unworthy servant,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

[Sidenote: Case of Burr Riggs.]

February 13.--A council of High Priests assembled to investigate the proceedings of Brother Burr Riggs, who was accused of failing to magnify his calling as High Priest, and had been guilty of neglect of duty, of abusing the Elders, and of treating their admonitions with contempt. After the council had considered the case, Brother Riggs agreed to make satisfaction, but did not show much humility.

February 15.--In a council I ordained Harpin Riggs, and Isaac McWethy Elders.

February 17.--In conference I ordained John Johnson to the office of Elder.

[Sidenote: Consideration of Missouri Correspondence of the 11th and 12th of January.]

February 26.--A special council of High Priests assembled in Zion, to take into consideration my letter to Brother Phelps, of the 11th of January, and the revelation called the Olive Leaf, referred to in my letter, and the epistle of Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith of the 14th of January, in behalf of the conference of High Priests: and Oliver Cowdery, William W. Phelps, and John Corrill were appointed a committee to write an epistle from the conference to the brethren in Kirtland; which was written and sanctioned by the conference.

[Sidenote: Excommunication of Burr Riggs.]

The same day a conference of High Priests was again called in Kirtland, concerning Brother Burr Riggs, who was accused of neglecting to make satisfaction to the Church as he had agreed, and disgracing the High Priesthood by neglect of duty, and saying he did not care how soon he was cut off from the Church. He was cut off by a unanimous vote of the council.

February 27.--I received the following revelation:

    The Word of Wisdom. [6]

    A Word of Wisdom, for the benefit of the council of high priests,
    assembled in Kirtland, and the church; and also the Saints in Zion.
    To  be sent greeting; not by commandment or constraint, but
    by revelation and the word of wisdom, showing forth the order and
    will of God in the temporal salvation of all Saints in the last
    days; given for a principle with promise, adapted to the capacity
    of the weak and the weakest of all Saints, who are or can be called
    Saints.

    1. Behold, verily, thus said the Lord unto you, in consequence
    of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of
    conspiring men in the last days, I have warned you, and forewarn
    you, by giving unto you this word of wisdom by revelation,

    2. That inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among
    you, behold it is not good, neither meet in the sight of your
    Father, only in assembling yourselves together to offer up your
    sacraments before him.

    3. And, behold, this should be wine, yea, pure wine of the grape of
    the vine, of your own make.

    4. And, again, strong drinks are not for the belly, but for the
    washing of your bodies.

    5. And again, tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly,
    and is not good for man, but is an herb for bruises and all sick
    cattle, to be used with judgment and skill.

    6. And again, hot drinks are not for the body or belly.

    7. And again, verily I say unto you, all wholesome herbs God hath
    ordained for the constitution, nature, and use of man.

    8. Every herb in the season thereof, and every fruit in the season
    thereof; all these to be used with prudence and thanksgiving.

    9. Yea, flesh also of beasts and of the fowls of the air, I,
    the Lord, have ordained for the use of man with thanksgiving;
    nevertheless they are to be used sparingly;

    10. And it is pleasing unto me that they should not be used only in
    times of winter, or of cold, or famine.

    11. All grain is ordained for the use of man and of beasts, to
    be the staff of life, not only for man but for the beasts of the
    field, and the fowls of heaven, and all wild animals that run or
    creep on the earth.

    12. And these hath God made for the use of man only in times of
    famine and excess of hunger.

    13. All grain is good for the food of man, as also the fruit of the
    vine, that which yieldeth fruit, whether in the ground or above the
    ground.

    14. Nevertheless, wheat for man, and corn for the ox, and oats for
    the horse, and rye for the fowls and for swine, and for all beasts
    of the  field, and barley for all useful animals, and for mild
    drinks, as also other grain.

    15. And all saints who remember to keep and do these sayings,
    walking in obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in
    their naval and marrow to their bones,

    16. And shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even
    hidden treasures;

    17. And shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint;

    18. And I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying
    angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay
    them. Amen.

[Sidenote: A Word of Comfort to the Prophet]

March 8.--I received the following revelation:

    Revelation. [7]

    1. Thus saith the Lord, verily, verily I say unto you my son, thy
    sins are forgiven thee, according to thy petition, for thy prayers
    and the prayers of thy brethren have come up into my ears;

    2. Therefore thou art blessed from henceforth that bear the keys of
    the kingdom given unto you; which kingdom is coming forth for the
    last time.

    3. Verily I say unto you, the keys of this kingdom shall never be
    taken from you, while thou art in the world, neither in the world
    to come;

    4. Nevertheless, through you shall the oracles be given to another;
    yea, even unto the church.

    5. And all they who receive the oracles of God, let them beware how
    they hold them lest they are accounted as a light thing, and are
    brought under condemnation thereby; and stumble and fall, when the
    storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat
    upon their house.

    6. And again verily I say unto thy brethren, Sidney Rigdon and
    Frederick G. Williams, their sins are forgiven them also, and they
    are accounted as equal with thee in holding the keys of this last
    kingdom,

    7. As also through your administration the keys of the school of
    the prophets, which I have commanded to be organized,

    8. That thereby they may be perfected in their ministry for the
    salvation of Zion, and of the nations of Israel, and of the
    Gentiles, as many as will believe;

     9. That through your administration they may receive the
    word, and through their administration the word may go forth unto
    the ends of the earth, unto the Gentiles first, and then, behold,
    and lo, they shall turn unto the Jews:

    10. And then cometh the day when the arm of the Lord shall be
    revealed in power in convincing the nations, the heathen nations,
    the house of Joseph, of the Gospel of their salvation.

    11. For it shall come to pass in that day, that every man shall
    hear the fulness of the Gospel in his own tongue, and in his own
    language, through those who are ordained unto this power, by the
    administration of the Comforter, shed forth upon them for the
    revelation of Jesus Christ.

    12. And now, verily I say unto you, I give unto you a commandment
    that you continue in the ministry and Presidency,

    13. And when you have finished the translation of the Prophets, you
    shall from thenceforth preside over the affairs of the Church and
    the school;

    14. And from time to time, as shall be manifested by the Comforter,
    receive revelations to unfold the mysteries of the kingdom,

    15. And set in order the churches, and study and learn, and become
    acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and
    people.

    16. And this shall be your business and mission in all your lives,
    to preside in council, and set in order all the affairs of this
    church and kingdom.

    17. Be not ashamed, neither confounded; but be admonished in all
    your high-mindedness and pride, for it bringeth a snare upon your
    souls.

    18. Set in order your houses; keep slothfulness and uncleanness far
    from you.

    19. Now, verily I say unto you, let there be a place provided as
    soon as it is possible, for the family of thy counselor and scribe,
    even Frederick G. Williams.

    20. And let mine aged servant, Joseph Smith, Sen., continue with
    his family upon the place where he now lives, and let it not be
    sold until the mouth of the Lord shall name.

    21. And let my counselor, even Sidney Rigdon, remain where he now
    resides, until the mouth of the Lord shall name.

    22. And let the Bishop search diligently to obtain an agent, and
    let him be a man who has got riches in store--a man of God, and of
    strong faith;

    23. That thereby he may be enabled to discharge every debt; that
    the storehouse of the Lord may not be brought into disrepute before
    the eyes of the people.

     24. Search diligently, pray always, and be believing, and all
    things shall work together for your good if ye walk uprightly and
    remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another.

    25. Let your families be small, especially mine aged servant Joseph
    Smith's, Sen., as pertaining to those who do not belong to your
    families;

    26. That those things that are provided for you, to bring to pass
    my work, be not taken from you and given to those that are not
    worthy,

    27. And thereby you be hindered in accomplishing those things which
    I have commanded you.

    28. And again, verily I say unto you, it is my will that my
    handmaid, Vienna Jaques, should receive money to bear her expenses,
    and go up unto the land of Zion;

    29. And the residue of the money may be consecrated unto me, and
    she be rewarded in mine own due time.

    30. Verily I say unto you, that it is meet in mine eyes that she
    should go up unto the land of Zion, and receive an inheritance from
    the hand of the Bishop,

    31. That she may settle down in peace inasmuch as she is faithful,
    and not be idle in her days from henceforth.

    32. And behold, verily I say unto you, that ye shall write this
    commandment, and say unto your brethren in Zion, in love greeting,
    that I have called you also to preside over Zion in mine own due
    time:

    33. Therefore, let them cease wearying me concerning this matter.

    34. Behold, I say unto you that your brethren in Zion begin to
    repent, and the angels rejoice over them;

    35. Nevertheless, I am not well pleased with many things, and I am
    not well pleased with my servant William E. M'Lellin, neither with
    my servant Sidney Gilbert; and the Bishop also, and others have
    many things to repent of;

    36. But verily I say unto you, that I, the Lord, will contend with
    Zion, and plead with her strong ones, and chasten her until she
    overcomes and is clean before me:

    37. For she shall not be removed out of her place. I the Lord, have
    spoken it. Amen.

[Sidenote: The Apocrypha.]

March 9.--Having come to that portion of the ancient writings called the Apocrypha, I received the following:

    Revelation. [8]

    1. Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you concerning the Apocrypha,
     there are many things contained therein that are true, and it
    is mostly translated correctly.

    2. There are many things contained therein that are not true, which
    are interpolations by the hands of men.

    3. Verily, I say unto you, that it is not needful that the
    Apocrypha should be translated.

    4. Therefore, whoso readeth it, let him understand, for the Spirit
    manifesteth truth;

    5. And whoso is enlightened by the Spirit, shall obtain benefit
    therefrom;

    6. And whoso receiveth not by the Spirit, cannot be benefited.
    Therefore it is not needful that it should be translated. Amen.

[Sidenote: A Mission to the East Appointed.]

March 12.--A council of High Priests assembled in the school room and decided that Horace Cowin and Zerubbabel Snow, Amasa M. Lyman [9] and William F. Cahoon, Jenkins Salisbury and Truman Wait, journey east on a mission, two by two,  paired as their names are written. Brothers Cowin and Salisbury were ordained at the same time.

[Sidenote: Case of Brother Lake.]

March 15.--A council was called to consider the case of Brother Lake, from Wooster, Wayne county, Ohio, who came professing to have received revelations. On investigation, it was unanimously agreed, that said Brother Lake was under the influence of an evil spirit, and that his license as Priest be taken from him.

The same day I received the following:

    Revelation to Enoch (Joseph Smith, Jun.,) given to the Saints in
    Kirtland. [10]

    1. Verily, thus saith the Lord, I give unto the united order,
    organized agreeable to the commandment previously given, a
    revelation and commandment concerning my servant Shederlaomach
    (Frederick G. Williams), that ye shall receive him into the order.
    What I say unto one I say unto all.

    2. And again, I say unto you my servant Shederlaomach, (Frederick
    G. Williams), you shall be a lively member in this order, and
    inasmuch as you are faithful in keeping all former commandments you
    shall be blessed forever. Amen.

Footnotes

1. Zebedee Coltrin was born at Ovid, Seneca county, New York, September 7, 1804. He was the son of John and Sarah Coltrin; and was baptized into the Church soon after its organization.

2. Lyman E. Johnson was born in Pomfret, Windsor county, Vermont, October 24, 1811. He was baptized into the Church in February, 1831, by Sidney Rigdon and was ordained an Elder under the hands of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

3. Levi Ward Hancock was born April 7, 1803, in Old Springfield, Hampden county, Massachusetts. He was the youngest son of Thomas Hancock and Amy Ward Hancock. When Levi was about two years old his family removed from Massachusetts to Ohio, settling in Chagrin, Cayahoga county, not far from Kirtland. Here Levi grew to manhood, occupied chiefly in farming with his father. In 1827, however, he purchased a farm in Ashtabula county, which is in the extreme northeast part of Ohio. He was directly in the pathway of Elders Cowdery, Pratt, Whitmer and Peterson, when journeying westward on their mission to the Lamanites; and shortly after they passed through his neighborhood he followed them to Kirtland, where he was baptized on the 16th of November, 1830, by Elder Parley P. Pratt, and was soon afterwards ordained an Elder under the hands of Oliver Cowdery.

4. William Smith was the fifth son of Joseph Smith, Sen., and Lucy Smith. He was born in Royalton, Windsor county, Vermont, March 13, 1811; and was baptized soon after the Church was organized.

5. It was the intention of the Prophet to have this revised version of the Scriptures, which he had made with such laborious care, published in Zion, at the printing establishment of the Church in that place, (New Testament and Book of Mormon to be published together; see p. 341), but before the work could even be commenced, the persecution arose which made the undertaking impracticable. And such was the unsettled state of the Church throughout the remaining years of the Prophet's life that he found no opportunity to publish the revised Scriptures, and to this day there is no authoritative publication of his translation of the Old and New Testaments given to the world, except in such excerpts as appear in the Pearl of Great Price. On this subject the late President George Q. Cannon, in his "Life of Joseph Smith," remarks in a foot note (p. 142)--"We have heard President Brigham Young state that the Prophet, before his death, had spoken to him about going through the translation of the Scriptures again and perfecting it upon points of doctrine which the Lord had restrained him from giving in plainness and fulness at the time of which we write [2nd Feb., 1833]."

6. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxix.

7. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xc.

8. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xci.

9. Amasa Mason Lyman was born in the township of Lyman, Grafton county, New Hampshire, on the 30th of March, 1813. He was the third son of Boswell Lyman and Martha Mason. His father dying when Amasa was about eight years of age, and some time later his mother marrying again, he was reared in the home of his grandfather, on the maternal side, Perez Mason, until he was eleven years of age. Perez Mason then retired from his farm to live with his eldest son, Perley Mason; with whom also, according to the wishes of his mother, Amasa lived during the next seven years. When young Lyman was in his eighteenth year he became thoughtful on the subject of religion and earnestly sought the favor of the Lord by righteous deportment, though without connecting himself with any of the religious sects. About one year later Elders Orson Pratt and Lyman E. Johnson passed through the section of New Hampshire where young Lyman lived, on a preaching tour. He believed the message proclaimed by these new evangels and was baptized on the 27th of April, 1832, by Elder Lyman E. Johnson, and confirmed on the following day by Elder Orson Pratt. In consequence of the ill feelings which arose in his uncle's family, owing to his joining the Church, Amasa departed from the home of his kindred, and set out on foot for the gathering place of the Saints in Ohio. After a journey of some seven hundred miles, in which he endured many hardships--for much of the journey was made on foot and with but scant means of subsistence--he arrived at Hiram in Portage county, and engaged to work for Father Johnson at ten dollars a month. It was at this time that the Prophet was making his home at Father Johnson's, though on the arrival of young Lyman at Hiram he was absent in Missouri. About the first of July, however, Joseph returned from his western journey, and Amasa had the joy of meeting the Prophet of the new dispensation. Of that meeting and the impressions it produced, he says: "Of the impressions produced I will here say, although there was nothing strange or different from other men in his personal appearance, yet when he grasped my hand in that cordial way (known to those who have met him in the honest simplicity of truth), I felt as one of old in the presence of the Lord; my strength seemed to be gone, so that it required an effort on my part to stand on my feet; but in all this there was no fear, but the serenity and peace of heaven pervaded my soul, and the still small voice of the Spirit whispered its living testimony in the depths of my soul, where it has ever remained, that he was the man of God."--Autobiographical Sketch of Amasa M. Lyman, Millennial Star, vol. xxvii, p. 473.

10. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xcii.
