Preparation for Building the Kirtland Temple--Trial and Excommunication of "Doctor" Philastus Hurlburt.

[Sidenote: The House of the Lord at Kirtland.]

June 1.--Great preparations were making to commence a house of the Lord; and notwithstanding the Church was poor, yet our unity, harmony and charity abounded to strengthen us to do the commandments of God. The building of the house of the Lord in Kirtland was a matter that continued to increase in its interest in the hearts of the brethren, and the building committee issued the following circular to the different branches of the Church:

    Circular.

    Kirtland, June 1, 1833.

    To the Church of Christ in----

    We feel under obligations to write to you as well as to all the
    brethren of the different branches; and we do this, that you, with
    us, may exert yourselves to bring about the fulfillment of the
    command of the Lord concerning the establishing, or preparing a
    house, wherein the Elders who have been commanded of the Lord so
    to do, may gather themselves together, and prepare all things,
    and call a solemn assembly, and treasure up words of wisdom, that
    they may go forth to the Gentiles for the last time; and now,
    in order to accomplish this, we are directed, yea, we are under
    the necessity, to call upon the whole Church as a body, that
    they make every possible exertion to aid temporally, as well as
    spiritually, in this great work that the Lord is beginning, and
    is about to accomplish. And unless we fulfill this command, viz:
    establish an house, and prepare all things necessary whereby the
    Elders may gather into a school, called the School of the Prophets,
    and  receive that instruction which the Lord designs they
    should receive, we may all despair of obtaining the great blessing
    that God has promised to the faithful of the Church of Christ;
    therefore it is as important, as our salvation, that we obey this
    above-mentioned command, as well as all the commandments of the
    Lord.

    Therefore, brethren, we write this epistle to you, to stir up your
    minds to make that exertion which the Lord requires of you, to lend
    a temporal aid in these things above written; and in order that you
    may know how to conduct the business, we will relate what we have
    done and are doing here.

    We have met in conference, and agreed to form a subscription, and
    circulate it through the churches. The conference also appointed
    Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and Jared Carter, a committee to
    superintend this business, viz: that of circulating subscriptions
    to establish a fund to build a house, and to aid the Elders to
    attend this school. The subscriptions are now in circulation among
    us, and our Heavenly Father is opening the hearts of our brethren
    beyond the expectation of many; and not one brother among us, as
    yet, refuses to exert himself to do something in a temporal way to
    bring about the establishing of this house and school; and we say,
    may our Heavenly Father open your hearts also, that you, with us,
    may gather together something to aid as a temporal benefit.

    Probably you had better call the officers of the Church immediately
    together, and appoint someone to circulate a subscription that
    each individual, after signing, may have a sufficient time to make
    preparations to pay what he subscribes; for it will be necessary,
    wherever the brethren are at a distance from Kirtland, that they
    exert themselves to send on their gift or assistance as soon as
    they can to Kirtland; though they can, if they believe best, wait
    on those that sign until the first of September, and then collect
    and send it to Kirtland.

    These considerations we have written to you, knowing it to be our
    duty thus to do, and may the Lord help you to exert yourselves with
    us, in raising the means to bring about the glorious work of the
    Lord; and may we all be kept by the grace of God unto eternal life.
    Amen.

    Hyrum Smith,

    Reynolds Cahoon,

    Jared Carter,

    Committee.

The same day [June 1st] I received the following:

    Revelation. [1]

    1. Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, whom I love, and whom I
     love I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven, for
    with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all
    things out of temptation, and I have loved you.

    2. Wherefore ye must needs be chastened and stand rebuked before my
    face.

    3. For ye have sinned against me a very grievous sin, in that ye
    have not considered the great commandment in all things, that I
    have given unto you concerning the building of mine house.

    4. For the preparation wherewith I design to prepare mine apostles
    to prune mine vineyard for the last time, that I may bring to pass
    my strange act, that I may pour out my Spirit upon all flesh.

    5. But behold, verily I say unto you, There are many who have been
    ordained among you, whom I have called, but few of them are chosen;

    6. They who are not chosen have sinned a very grievous sin, in that
    they are walking in darkness at noon-day;

    7. And for this cause I gave unto you a commandment that you should
    call your solemn assembly, that your fastings and your mourning
    might come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, which is by
    interpretation, the Creator of the first day, the beginning and the
    end.

    8. Yea, verily I say unto you, I gave unto you a commandment, that
    you should build a house, in the which house I design to endow
    those whom I have chosen with power from on high;

    9. For this is the promise of the Father unto you, therefore I
    command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem;

    10. Nevertheless my servants sinned a very grievous sin, and
    contentions arose in the School of the Prophets, which was very
    grievous unto me, saith your Lord; therefore I sent them forth to
    be chastened.

    11. Verily I say unto you, it is my will that you should build a
    house. If you keep my commandments you shall have power to build it;

    12. If you keep not my commandments, the love of the Father shall
    not continue with you, therefore you shall walk in darkness.

    13. Now here is wisdom, and the mind of the Lord; let the house be
    built, not after the manner of the world, for I give not unto you
    that ye shall live after the manner of the world;

    14. Therefore, let it be built after the manner which I shall show
    unto three of you, whom ye shall appoint and ordain unto this power.

    15. And the size thereof shall be fifty and five feet in width, and
    let it be sixty-five feet in length, in the inner court thereof.

    16. And let the lower part of the inner court be dedicated unto
    me for your sacrament offering, and for your preaching, and your
    fasting, and your praying, and the offering up of your most holy
    desires unto me, saith your Lord.

     17. And let the higher part of the inner court be dedicated
    unto me for the school of mine apostles, saith Son Ahman; or, in
    other words, Alphus; or, in other words, Omegus; even Jesus Christ
    your Lord. Amen.

[Sidenote: Trial of "Doctor" Hurlburt.]

June 3.--A conference of High Priests convened in the translating room in Kirtland. The first case presented was that of "Doctor" Philastus Hurlburt, who was accused of unchristian conduct with women, while on a mission to the east. On investigation it was decided that his commission be taken from him, and that he be no longer a member of the Church of Christ.

[Sidenote: The House of the Lord to be Built at Kirtland.]

The next matter before the conference was to ascertain what should be the dimensions or size of the house, that is to be built for a house of worship and for the School of the Prophets. I had received a revelation on the size of the house in which the word of the Lord was that it should be fifty-five feet wide, and sixty-five feet long, in the inner court. The conference appointed Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams to obtain a draft or construction of the inner court of the house.

[Sidenote: The French Farm.]

June 4.--A similar conference assembled at the same place and took into consideration how the French farm should be disposed of. The conference could not agree who should take charge of it, but all agreed to inquire of the Lord; accordingly we received the following:

    Revelation to Enoch [Joseph Smith Jun.] Showing the Order of the
    City or Stake of Zion, in Shinehah [Kirtland,] given for a Sample
    to the Saints in Kirtland. [2]

    1. Behold, I say unto you, here is wisdom, whereby ye may know
    how to act concerning this matter, for it is expedient in me that
    this stake that I have set for the strength of Zion should be made
    strong;

    2. Therefore, let my servant Ahashdah (Newel K. Whitney) take
    charge of the place which is named among you, upon which I design
    to build mine holy house;

    3. And again, let it be divided in lots, according to wisdom,
    for the benefit of those who seek inheritances, as it shall be
    determined in council among you.

    4. Therefore, take heed that ye see to this matter, and that
    portion that is necessary to benefit mine order, for the purpose of
    bringing forth my word to the children of men;

    5. For behold, verily I say unto you, this is the most expedient
    in me, that my word should go forth unto the children of men, for
    the purpose of subduing the hearts of the children of men for your
    good. Even so. Amen.

    6. And again, verily I say unto you, it is wisdom and expedient
    in me, that my servant Zombre (John Johnson) whose offering I
    have accepted, and whose prayers I have heard, unto whom I give a
    promise of eternal life inasmuch as he keepeth my commandments from
    henceforth--

    7. For he is a descendant of Seth (Joseph), and a partaker of the
    blessings of the promise made unto his fathers--

    8. Verily I say unto you, it is expedient in me that he should
    become a member of the order, that he may assist in bringing forth
    my word unto the children of men;

    9. Therefore ye shall ordain him unto this blessing, and he shall
    seek diligently to take away incumbrances that are upon the house
    named among you, that he may dwell therein. Even so. Amen.

[Sidenote: John Johnson Ordained a High Priest.]

Zombre [John Johnson] was ordained by the conference to the High Priesthood, and admitted according to the revelation.

[Sidenote: Ground Broken for Kirtland Temple.]

June 5.--George A. Smith hauled the first load of stone for the Temple, and Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon commenced digging the trench for the walls of the Lord's house, and finished the same with their own hands.

[Sidenote: Action of Conference with Reference to the Temple.]

June 6.--A conference of High Priests assembled, and chose Orson Hyde a clerk to the Presidency of the High Priesthood. This conference was more especially called to counsel the committee, who had been appointed to take the oversight of the building of the house of the Lord. The conference voted that the committee, (Reynolds Cahoon, Jared Carter, and Hyrum Smith), proceeded immediately to commence building the house; or to obtaining materials, stone, brick, lumber, etc., for the same.

[Sidenote: Hurlburt's Appeal.]

June 21.--"Doctor" Hurlburt being dissatisfied with the decision of the council on his case presented the following appeal:

    I, Doctor Philastus Hurlburt, having been tried before the Bishop's
    council of High Priests on a charge of unchristian-like conduct
    with the female sex, and myself being absent at the time, and
    considering that strict justice was not done me, I do, by these
    presents, most solemnly enter my appeal unto the President's
    council of High Priests for a re-hearing, according to the
    privilege guaranteed to me in the laws of the Church, which council
    is now assembled in the school room, in Kirtland, this 21st day of
    June, 1833.

It was voted by the council present, when this was received, that Brother Hurlburt be granted a re-hearing; and after prayer, (which was customary at the opening of all councils of the Church), the council proceeded to ordain two High Priests, to make out the number, (twelve) that the council, or Church court, might be organized. By the choice of the council Brothers John and William Smith were ordained under the hands of Elder Rigdon.

Brother Hurlburt's case was then laid before the court, and the testimony against him given by Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith, and duly investigated. The decision of the court was, that Brother Hurlburt should be forgiven, because of the liberal confession which he made. This court also decided that the Bishop's council decided correctly on the case, and that Brother Hurlburt's crime was sufficient to cut him off from the Church; but on his confession he was restored.

[Sidenote: Copley's Case.]

The President's court also took Brother Daniel Copley's Priest's license and membership from him, because he refused to fulfil his mission according to the council of the High Priesthood of the holy order of God.

[Sidenote: Excommunication of "Doctor" Hurlburt.]

June 23.--"Doctor" Philastus Hurlburt was again called in question, by a general council; and Brother Gee, of Thompson, testified that Brother Hurlburt said that he deceived Joseph Smith's God, or the spirit by which he is actuated. There was also corroborating testimony brought against him by Brother Hodges. The council cut him off from the Church. [3]

[Sidenote: Case of James Higby.]

A council of the Elders of the church was held at Westfield, New York, the same day. Elder Gladden Bishop was president, and Brother Chester
L. Heath clerk. Brother Paul entered a complaint against Brother
James Higby, an Elder, for circulating false and slanderous reports, and not observing the order of the Gospel, and presented evidence unimpeachable, to substantiate the same to the satisfaction of the council; upon which evidence--and from Brother Higby's own mouth, and the spirit he manifested--he was declared  guilty by the council, and he was cut off from the Church. The council then demanded his license and the Church record, which he utterly refused to give up; therefore, resolved that the proceedings of the council be sent to Kirtland, that it may be known among the different branches of the Church. [4]

Footnotes

1. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xcv.

2. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xcvi.

3. Owing to the subsequent prominence of this man, "Doctor" Philastus Hurlburt, as a bitter anti-Mormon, more should be said of him than is given in the Prophet's narrative. He was not a physician, as the title "Doctor" would seem to indicate; but being the seventh son in his father's family, according to the old folklore superstition that the seventh son would possess supernatural qualities that would make him a physician, he was called "Doc," or "Doctor," "This said 'Doctor,'" wrote Sidney Rigdon in 1839, to the Boston Journal, "was never a physician at any time, nor anything else but a base ruffian. He was the seventh son and his parents called him 'Doctor;' it was his name, and not the title of his profession. He once belonged to the Methodist church, and was excluded for immoralities. He afterwards imposed himself on the Church of Latter-day Saints, and was excluded for using obscene language to a young lady, a member of the said Church, who resented his insult with indignation which became both her character and profession." Joseph E. Johnson, in a communication to the Deseret Evening News, under date of December 28, 1880, says of "Doctor" Hurlburt: "In the year A. D. 1833, then living in Kirtland, Ohio, I became acquainted with a man subsequently known as Dr. Hurlburt, who came to investigate the truth of Mormonism. Claiming to be satisfied, he was baptized and became a member in full fellowship. He was a man of fine physique, very pompous, good looking, and very ambitious, with some energy, though of poor education. Soon after his arrival he came to my mother's house to board, where he remained for nearly a year, while he made an effort to get into a good practice of medicine, sought position in the Church and was ever striving to make marital connection with any of the first families. Finally * * * he was charged with illicit intercourse with the sex, was tried and cut off from the Church. He denied, expostulated, threatened, but to no use, the facts were too apparent, and he at once avowed himself the enemy of the Church."

4. The account of the council of Elders at Westfield was copied into the Kirtland Church record on the 29th of June, 1833.

CHAPTER XXVI.

The Plat of the City of Zion--Its Temples--Correspondence on Affairs in Zion and Eugene.

An explanation of the plot of the city of Zion, sent to the brethren in Zion, the 25th of June, 1833:

[Sidenote: The General Plan of the City of Zion.]

The plat contains one mile square; all the squares in the plat contain ten acres each, being forty rods square. You will observe that the lots are laid off alternately in the squares; in one square running from the south and north to the line through the center of the square; and in the next, the lots run from the east and west to the center line. Each lot is four perches in front and twenty back, making one half of an acre in each lot, so that no one street will be built on entirely through the street; but on one square the houses will stand on one street, and on the next one, another, except the middle range of squares, which runs north and south, in which range are the painted squares. The lots are laid off in the squares, north and south, all of them; because these squares are forty perches by sixty, being twenty perches longer than the others, their greatest length being east and west, and by running all these squares, north and south, it makes all the lots in the city of one size.

[Sidenote: The Blocks Set Aside for Temples.]

The painted squares in the middle are for public buildings. The one without any figures is for store-houses for the Bishop, and to be devoted to his use. Figure first is for temples for the use of the presidency; the circles inside of the squares, are the places for the temples. You will see it contains twelve figures, two are for the temples of the lesser Priesthood. It is also to contain twelve temples.

The whole plot is supposed to contain from fifteen to twenty thousand people: you will therefore see that it will require twenty-four buildings to supply them with houses of worship, schools, etc.; and none of these temples are to be smaller than the one of which we send you a draft. This temple is to be built in the square marked figure 1; and to be built where the circle is which has a cross on it on the north end.

[Sidenote: Location of Lands for the Agriculturist.]

South of the plot where the line is drawn, is to be laid off for farms, stables, etc., for the use of the city; so that no barns or stables will be in the city among the houses; the ground to be occupied for these must be laid off according to wisdom. On the north and south are to be laid off the farms for the agriculturist, and sufficient quantity of land to supply the whole plot; and if it cannot be laid off without going too great a distance from the city, there must also be some laid off on the east and west.

[Sidenote: Zion a Group of Cities.]

When this square is thus laid off and supplied, lay off another in the same way, and so fill up the world in these last days; and let every man live in the city for this is the city of Zion. All the streets are of one width, being eight perches wide. Also, the space round the outer edge of the painted squares, is to be eight perches between the temple and the street on every side. No one lot, in this city, is to contain more than one house, and that to be built twenty-five feet back from the street, leaving a small yard in front, to be planted in a grove, according to the taste of the builder; the rest  of the lot for gardens; all the houses are to be built of brick and stone. The scale of the plot is forty perches to the inch.

[Sidenote: Names of the Temples.]

The names of the temples to be built on the painted squares as represented on the plot of the city of Zion, which is now about to be forwarded thither:--numbers 10, 11, and 12, are to be called, House of the Lord, for the Presidency of the High and most Holy Priesthood, after the order of Melchisedek, which was after the order of the Son of God, upon Mount Zion, City of the New Jerusalem. Numbers 7, 8, and 9, the Sacred Apostolic Repository, for the use of the Bishop. Numbers 4, 5, and 6, the Holy Evangelical House, for the High Priesthood of the Holy Order of God. Numbers 1, 2, and 3, the House of the Lord, for the Elders of Zion, an Ensign to the Nations. Numbers 22, 23, and 24, House of the Lord for the Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the Order of Aaron, a Standard for the People. Numbers 19, 20, and 21, House of the Lord, the Law of the Kingdom of Heaven, and Messenger to the People; for the Highest Priesthood after the Order of Aaron. Numbers 16, 17, and 18, House of the Lord for the Teachers in Zion, Messenger to the Church. Numbers 13, 14, and 15, House of the Lord for the Deacons in Zion, Helps in Government. Underneath must be written on each house--

Holiness to the Lord.

A description of the House of the Lord, which is to be built first in Zion:

[Sidenote: The House of the Lord for the Presidency.]

The house of the Lord for the Presidency, is eighty-seven feet long and sixty-one feet wide, and ten feet taken off of the east end for the stairway, leaves the inner court, seventy-eight feet by sixty-one, which is calculated and divided for seats in the following manner, viz: the two aisles four  feet wide each; the middle block of pews are eleven feet ten inches long, and three feet wide each; and the two lines drawn through the middle are four inches apart; in which space a curtain is to drop at right angles, and divide the house into four parts if necessary. The pews of the side blocks are fourteen and a half feet long, and three feet wide. The five pews in each corner of the house, are twelve feet six inches long. The open spaces between the corner and side pews are for fireplaces; those in the west are nine feet wide, and the east ones are eight feet and eight inches wide, and the chimneys carried up in the wall where they are marked with a pencil.

[Sidenote: The Pulpits of the Temple.]

The pulpit in the west end of the house is to be occupied by the High Priesthood, as follows:--Number 1, is for the President and his council; number 2, for the Bishop and his council; number 3, for the High Priests; and number 4 for the Elders: each of these is eight feet long, containing three coves or stands for the respective speakers; and those seats opposite them are for visiting officers, who are to occupy seats according to their respective grades. The two spaces in the middle are stairs two feet wide. The middle pulpit is to be elevated; the first seats one foot, the second two feet, the third three feet, and the fourth four feet. And those upon each side are also to be elevated: the first one eight inches, the second sixteen, the third twenty-four, the fourth thirty-two. The corner seats are to be occupied by singers, and elevated--the first seat six inches, the second twelve, the third eighteen, the fourth twenty-four, and the fifth thirty-two inches. The pulpit in the east end of the house is to be occupied by the Lesser Priesthood. Number 1, is for the Presidency of the Lesser Priesthood; number 2, for the Priests; number 3, for the Teachers; and number 4, for the Deacons; and the seats by their sides, are also to be  occupied by visiting officers; each one opposite his respective grade. The pulpits are to be finished with panel work, in the best workmanlike manner; and the building to be constructed of stone and brick of the best quality. Observe particularly that as there are pulpits at each end of the house, the backs of the congregation must be to one of them, and they will want occasionally to change. In order for this the house must have pews instead of slips, and in the pews let the seats be loose, that they may slip from one side of the pew to the other, so as to face either pulpit, as occasion may require.

[Sidenote: The Windows.]

The side view represents five windows in each story. The windows are to have each forty-eight lights, of seven by nine glass, six one way and eight the other; the sides and lintels of the windows to be of hewn stone, and on the top of the lintel is to be a Gothic top, as you see, but the windows must have a lintel; and so with the outside doors, all with Gothic tops.

[Sidenote: General Dimensions.]

Make your house fourteen feet high between the floors. There will not be a gallery but a chamber; each story to be fourteen feet high, arched overhead with an elliptic arch. Let the foundation of the house be of stone; let it be raised sufficiently high to allow of banking up so high as to admit of a descent every way from the house, so far as to divide the distance between this house, and the one next to it. On the top of the foundation, above the embankment, let there be two rows of hewn stone, and then commence the brick-work on the hewn stone. The entire height of the house is to be twenty-eight feet, each story being fourteen feet; make the wall a sufficient thickness for a house of this size. The end view represents five windows of the same size as those at the side, the middle window excepted, which is to be the same, with the addition of side lights. This middle window is designed to light the rooms both above and below, as the upper floor is to be laid off in the same way as the lower one, and arched overhead; with the  same arrangement of curtains, or veils, as before mentioned.

The doors are to be five feet wide, and nine feet high, and to be in the east end of the house. The west end is to have no doors, but in other respects is to be like the east, except the windows are to be opposite the alleys which run east and west. The roof of the house is to have one-fourth pitch, the door to have Gothic top, the same as the windows. The shingles of the roof to be painted before they are put on. There is to be a fanlight, as you see. The windows and doors are all to have venetian blinds. A belfry is to be in the east end, and a bell of very large size.

[Sidenote: Arrangement of Curtains.]

You will be careful to have hooks and rings to suspend your veils on, so that they can be let down or raised at any time, at pleasure. Also, as you see, the pulpits are to have four seats, rising one above another; for instance, the Elder's seat is the lowest, next comes the High Priest's, next the Bishop's; so each of these must have a veil that is suspended from the upper floor, so as to be let down; which will at any time when necessary be let down, and shut off each stand or seat by itself.

[Sidenote: Important Letter to Brethren in Zion.]

The same day [June 25th], we wrote to Brother W. W. Phelps, and others in Zion, from Kirtland, as follows:

    Brethren;--We have received your last, containing a number of
    questions which you desire us to answer; this we do the more
    readily as we desire with all our hearts the prosperity of Zion,
    and the peace of her inhabitants; for we have as great an interest
    in the welfare of Zion, as you can have.

    First, as respects getting the Book of Commandments bound, we think
    it is not necessary. They will be sold well without binding, and
    there is no bookbinder to be had that we know of, nor are there
    materials to be had for binding, without keeping the books too long
    from circulation.

    With regard to the copies of the Book of Mormon, which are in the
    hands of Brother Burkett, we say to you, get them from Brother
     Burkett, and give him a receipt for them in the name of the
    Literary Firm. Let Brother Gilbert pay Brother Chapin his money.

    We have not found the Book of Jasher, nor any other of the lost
    books mentioned in the Bible as yet; nor will we obtain them at
    present. Respecting the Apocrypha, the Lord said to us that there
    were many things in it which were true, and there were many things
    in it which were not true, and to those who desire it, should be
    given by the Spirit to know the true from the false.

    We have received some revelations within a short time back, which
    you will obtain in due season. As soon as we can get time, we will
    review the manuscripts of the Book of Mormon, after which they will
    be forwarded to you.

    We commend the plan highly of your choosing a teacher to instruct
    the High Priests, that they may be able to silence gainsayers.
    Concerning Bishops, we recommend the following: Let Brother Isaac
    Morley be ordained second Bishop in Zion, and let Brother John
    Corrill be ordained third.

    Let Brother Edward Partridge choose as counselors in their place,
    Brother Parley P. Pratt and Brother Titus Billings, ordaining
    Brother Billings to the High Priesthood.

    Let Brother Morley choose for his counselors, Brother Christian
    Whitmer, whom ordain to the High Priesthood, and Brother Newel
    Knight. Let Brother Corrill choose Brother Daniel Stanton and
    Brother Hezekiah Peck, for his counselors; let Brother Hezekiah
    also, be ordained to the High Priesthood.

    Zombre [John Johnson] has been received as a member of the firm, by
    commandment, and has just come to Kirtland to live; as soon as we
    get a power of attorney signed agreeable to law, for Alam [Edward
    Partridge] we will forward it to him, and will immediately expect
    one from that part of the firm to Ahashdah [Newel K. Whitney],
    signed in the same manner. We would again say to Alam [Edward
    Partridge], be sure to get a form according to law for securing a
    gift. We have found by examining the law, that a gift cannot be
    retained without this.

    The truth triumphs gloriously in the east; multitudes are embracing
    it. I, Sidney, who write this letter in behalf of the Presidency,
    had the privilege of seeing my aged mother baptized into the
    faith of the Gospel, a few weeks since, at the advanced age of
    seventy-five. She now resides with me.

    We send by this mail, a draft of the city of Zion, with
    explanations, and a draft of the house to be built immediately in
    Zion, for the Presidency, as well as for the purpose of religion
    and instruction.

    Kirtland, the stake of Zion, is strengthening continually. When the
     enemies look at her they wag their heads and march along. We
    anticipate the day when the enemies will have fled away and be far
    from us.

    You will remember that the power of agency must be signed by the
    wives as well as the husbands, and the wives must be examined
    in the matter separate and apart from the husbands, the same as
    signing a deed, and a specification to that effect inserted at the
    bottom, by the justice before whom such acknowledgment is made,
    otherwise the power of attorney will be of none effect.

    Should you not understand the explanations sent with the drafts,
    you will inform us, so that you may have a proper understanding,
    for it is meet that all things should be done according to the
    pattern.

    We have found the following errors in the Commandments, as
    printed: fortieth chapter, tenth verse, third line, instead of
    "corruptable," put corrupted. Fourteenth verse of the same chapter,
    fifth line, instead of "respecter to persons," put respecter of
    persons. Twenty-first verse, second line of the same chapter,
    instead of "respecter to," put respecter of. Forty-fourth chapter,
    twelfth verse, last line, instead of "hands," put heads.

    Items of Instruction Concerning the Consecration of Property.

    Brother Edward Partridge:

    Sir:--I proceed to answer your questions, concerning the
    consecration of property:--First, it is not right to condescend to
    very great particulars in taking inventories. The fact is this,
    a man is bound by the law of the Church, to consecrate to the
    Bishop, before he can be considered a legal heir to the kingdom of
    Zion; and this, too, without constraint; and unless he does this,
    he cannot be acknowledged before the Lord on the Church Books:
    therefore, to condescend to particulars, I will tell you that every
    man must be his own judge how much he should receive and how much
    he should suffer to remain in the hands of the Bishop. I speak
    of those who consecrate more than they need for the support of
    themselves and their families.

    The matter of consecration must be done by the mutual consent of
    both parties; for to give the Bishop power to say how much every
    man shall have, and he be obliged to comply with the Bishop's
    judgment, is giving to the Bishop more power than a king has; and
    upon the other hand, to let every man say how much he needs, and
    the Bishop be obliged to comply with his judgment, is to throw Zion
    into confusion, and make a slave of the Bishop. The fact is, there
    must be a balance or equilibrium of power, between the Bishop and
    the people, and thus harmony and good will may be preserved among
    you.

    Therefore, those persons consecrating property to the Bishop in
    Zion,  and then receiving an inheritance back, must reasonably
    show to the Bishop that they need as much as they claim. But in
    case the two parties cannot come to a mutual agreement, the Bishop
    is to have nothing to do about receiving such consecrations; and
    the case must be laid before a council of twelve High Priests, the
    Bishop not being one of the council, but he is to lay the case
    before them. [1]

    Say to Brother Gilbert that we have no means in our power to assist
    him in a pecuniary way, as we know not the hour when we shall be
    sued for debts which we have contracted ourselves in New York. Say
    to him that he must exert himself to the utmost to obtain means
    himself, to replenish his store, for it must be replenished, and it
    is his duty to attend to it.

    We were not a little surprised to hear that some of our letters of
    a public nature, which we sent for the good of Zion, have been kept
    back from the Bishops. This is conduct which we highly disapprobate.

    Answers to Queries to Brother Phelps' Letter of June 4th.

    First, in relation to the poor: When the Bishops are appointed
    according to our recommendation, it will devolve upon them to see
    to the poor, according to the laws of the Church.

    In regard to the printing of the New Translation: It cannot be done
    until we can attend to it ourselves, and this we will do as soon as
    the Lord permits.

    As to Shederlaomach, [F. G. Williams], all members of the United
    Firm are considered one. The order of the Literary Firm is a matter
     of stewardship, which is of the greatest importance; and the
    mercantile establishment God commanded to be devoted to the support
    thereof, and God will bring every transgression unto judgment.

    Say to the brothers Hulet and to all others, that the Lord never
    authorized them to say that the devil, his angels or the sons of
    perdition, should ever be restored; for their fate of destiny was
    not revealed to man, is not revealed, nor ever shall be revealed,
    save to those who are made partakers thereof: consequently those
    who teach this doctrine, have not received it of the Spirit of
    the Lord. Truly Brother Oliver declared it to be the doctrine of
    devils. We therefore command that this doctrine be taught no more
    in Zion. We sanction the decision of the Bishop and his council, in
    relation to this doctrine being a bar to communion.

    The number of disciples in Kirtland is about one hundred and fifty.
    We have commenced building the house of the Lord, in this place,
    and it goes on rapidly. Good news from the east and south of the
    success of the laborers is often saluting our ears. It is a general
    time of  health among us; families all well, and day and night
    we pray for the salvation of Zion.

    We deliver Brother Ziba Peterson over to the buffetings of Satan,
    in the name of the Lord, that he may learn not to transgress
    the commandments of God. We conclude our letter by the usual
    salutation, in token of the new and everlasting covenant. We hasten
    to close, because the mail is just going.

    Joseph Smith, Jun.,

    Sidney Rigdon,

    F. G. Williams.

    P. S.--We feel gratified with the way in which Brother William W.
     Phelps is conducting the Star at present, we hope he will
    seek to render it more and more interesting. In relation to the
    size of Bishoprics: When Zion is once properly regulated there will
    be a Bishop to each square of the size of the one we send you with
    this; but at present it must be done according to wisdom. It is
    needful, brethren, that you should be all of one heart, and of one
    mind, in doing the will of the Lord.

    There should exist the greatest freedom and familiarity among the
    rulers in Zion.

    We were exceedingly sorry to hear the complaint that was made in
    Brother Edward Partridge's letter, that the letters attending the
    Olive Leaf had been kept from him, as it is meet that he should
    know all things in relation to Zion, as the Lord has appointed
    him to be a judge in Zion. We hope, dear brethren, that the like
    occurrence will not take place again. When we direct letters to
    Zion to any of the High Priests, which pertain to the regulation of
    her affairs, we always design that they should be laid before the
    Bishop, so as to enable him to perform his duty. We say so much,
    hoping it will be received in kindness, and our brethren will be
    careful of one another's feelings, and walk in love, honoring one
    another more than themselves, as is required by the Lord. Yours as
    ever,

    J. S.,

    S. R.,

    F. G. W.

A Second Communication to the Brethren in Zion.

    Kirtland, July 2nd, 1833.

    To the Brethren in Zion:

    We received your letters of June 7th: one from Brothers William
    W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery; one from Brother David Whitmer;
    and one from Brother Sidney Gilbert, for which we are thankful
    to our Heavenly Father, as also to hear of your welfare, and the
    prosperity of Zion. Having received your letters in the mail of
    today, we hasten to answer, in order that our reply may go with
    tomorrow's mail.

    We are exceedingly fatigued, owing to a great press of business.
    We this day finished the translating of the Scriptures, for which
    we returned gratitude to our Heavenly Father, and sat immediately
    down to answer your letters. We rejoiced greatly to hear of the
    safe arrival of Sister Vienna Jaques and Brother William Hobert,
    and thank our Heavenly Father that their lives have been spared
    them until their arrival. The health of the brethren and sisters
    in Kirtland is good at present; no case of sickness known to us.
    Brother Joseph C.  Kingsbury's wife is declining fast, and
    cannot continue much longer, but will soon be in the paradise of
    God.

    We are engaged in writing a letter to Eugene [2] respecting the two
    Smiths, as we have received two letters from them; one from John
    Smith, the other from the Elder of the Church. [3] As to the gift
    of tongues, all we can say is, that in this place, we have received
    it as the ancients did: we wish you, however, to be careful lest
    in this you be deceived. Guard against evils which may arise from
    any accounts given by women, or otherwise; be careful in all things
    lest any root of bitterness spring up among you, and thereby many
    be defiled. Satan will no doubt trouble you about the gift of
    tongues, unless you are careful; you cannot watch him too closely,
    nor pray too much. May the Lord give you wisdom in all things.
    In a letter mailed last week, you will doubtless, before you
    receive this, have obtained information about the New Translation.
    Consign the box of the Book of Commandments to N. K. Whitney &
    Co., Kirtland, Geauga county, Ohio, care of Kelly and Walworth,
    Cleveland, Cuyahoga county, Ohio.

    I, Sidney, write this in great haste, in answer to yours to Brother
    Joseph, as I am going off immediately, in company with Brother
    Frederick to proclaim the Gospel; we think of starting tomorrow.
    Having finished the translation of the Bible, a few hours since,
    and needing some recreation, we know of one way we can spend our
    time more to divine acceptance than in endeavoring to build up
    His Zion in these last days, as we are not willing to idle any
    time away which can be spent to useful purposes. Doors are opening
    continually for proclaiming the Gospel. The spirit of bitterness
    among the people is fast subsiding, and a spirit of inquiry is
    taking its place. I preached last Sunday at Chardon, our county
    seat; I had the court house; there was a general turn-out, good
    attention, and a pressing invitation for more meetings, which will
    be granted, if the Lord will, when we return from this tour.

    Brother Joseph is going to take a tour with Brother George James,
    of Brownhelm, as soon as Brother George comes to this place. We
    hope, our brethren, that the greatest freedom and frankness will
    exist between you and the Bishop, not withholding from one another
    any information from us, but communicating with the greatest
    freedom, lest you should produce evils of a serious character,
    and the Lord become offended: for know assuredly, if we, by our
    wickedness, bring evil on  our own heads, the Lord will let
    us bear it till we get weary and hate iniquity. Brother Frederick
    wants you to say to Brother Burke, that the man from whom he
    expected to get the mill stones, has run off, so he will not be
    able to get them; but Brother Burke can get them of the same man's
    make, in St. Louis.

    We conclude by giving our heartiest approbation to every measure
    calculated for the spread of the truth, in these last days; and
    our strongest desires, and sincerest prayers for the prosperity
    of Zion. Say to all the brethren and sisters in Zion, that they
    have our hearts, our best wishes, and the strongest desires of our
    spirits for their welfare, temporal, spiritual, and eternal. As
    ever, we salute you in the name of the Lord Jesus. Amen.

    Sidney Rigdon,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.,

    F. G. Williams.

Correspondence over Troubles in the Eugene Branch of the Church.

    Kirtland, July 2nd, 1833.

    Brother John Smith:

    We have just received your letter, of the 8th of June, which seems
    to have been written in a spirit of justification on your part.
    You will recollect that previous to your leaving this place, you
    were tried before the Bishop's court, which found you guilty of
    misdemeanor, and decided that you should no longer retain your
    authority in the Church; all of which we, as Presidents of the High
    Priesthood, sanction. You name something in your letter, that took
    place at Brother Olney's in Shalersville, on the 27th and 28th
    of August, which we perfectly recollect, and had you made such
    confession as you were required to, at Chippeway, all things would
    have worked together for your good, and as I told you; but you
    did not manifest that degree of humility to the brethren that was
    required, but remained obstinate; for that reason God withdrew His
    Spirit from you, and left you in darkness. In your letter you say
    many hard things against the brethren, especially against Father
    Joseph Smith, Brother Reynolds Cahoon, and Bishop Whitney, all
    of which we highly disapprove. It seems also that your son Eden
    is confederate with you, and needs to be reproved, together with
    yourself, in all humility before the Lord, or you must expect to be
    dealt with according to the laws of the Church. We say you are no
    more than a private member in the Church.

    [Sidenote: Presidents.]

    Joseph Smith, Jun.,

    F. G. Williams,

     Kirtland, July 2nd, 1833.

    To the Church at Eugene:

    Dear Brethren:--It is truly painful to be under the necessity of
    writing on a subject which engages our attention at this time,
    viz: the case of John Smith, and Eden Smith, his son. We have just
    received a letter from you concerning their standing in the Church.
    We do not hold them in fellowship. We would inform you that John
    Smith has been dealt with, and his authority taken from him; and
    you are required not to receive his teachings, but to treat him as
    a transgressor, until he repents and humbles himself before the
    Lord, to the entire satisfaction of the Church: and also, you have
    authority to call a conference, and sit in judgment on Eden's case,
    and deal with him as the law directs.

    We feel to rebuke the Elders of that branch of the Church
    of Christ, for not magnifying their office, and letting the
    transgressor go unpunished. We, therefore, enjoin upon you, to
    be watchful on your part, and search out iniquity, and put it
    down wherever it may be found. You will see by this, brethren,
    that you have authority to sit in council on the Smiths; and if
    found guilty, to deal with them accordingly. We have this day
    directed a letter to John Smith, thereby making known to him our
    disapprobation of the course he has pursued. We commend you to God
    and His grace, ever praying He will keep and preserve you blameless
    till He come.

    Joseph Smith, Jun.,

    Sidney Rigdon,

    F. G. Williams.

    Postscript by Bishop Whitney, same date:

    Dear Brethren:--Yours of the 3rd of June, came safe to hand the
    last mail, and John Smith's, which was directed to Brother Joseph.
    Now, my brethren, on this sheet you have Brother Joseph's sanction
    to my proceedings, and the letter I last wrote you, and you
    will govern yourselves accordingly, for you have full power and
    authority to call the two brothers Smith to an account for their
    conduct; and, unless they repent and make satisfaction, not only to
    your branch of the Church, but also to this branch, they must be
    cut off from the body; for under existing circumstances, we have
    no fellowship with them. Brother John Smith's authority, as an
    officer in the Church, was taken from him before he left, and he
    ought to have given up his license; but he went away without doing
    so, and it seems he has made use of it to impose upon you. As to
    the two sisters you spoke of in your last, if there is no testimony
    on either side, all you can do is to forbid them to partake of the
    Sacrament unworthily; and pray much, and God will bring all things
    to light.

    N. K. Whitney, Bishop.

Footnotes

1. The first of the following deed-forms was used in consecrating property to the Church; the second, in securing the stewardships to those entering into the law of consecration and stewardship, sometimes called the Order of Enoch, because it was the law under which the Patriarch Enoch and his people lived. These deed forms were found in the private papers of Bishop Edward Partridge.

I.

Be it known, that I, Titus Billings of Jackson county, and the state of Missouri, having become a member of the Church of Christ, organized according to law, and established by the revelations of the Lord, on the 6th day of April, 1830, do, of my own free will and accord, having first paid my just debts, grant and hereby give unto Edward Partridge of Jackson county, and state of Missouri, Bishop of said Church, the following described property, viz.:--sundry articles of furniture valued fifty-five dollars twenty-seven cents; also two beds, bedding and extra clothing valued seventy-three dollars twenty-five cents; also farming utensils valued forty-one dollars, also one horse, two wagons, two cows and two calves, valued one hundred forty-seven dollars.

For the purpose of purchasing lands in Jackson county, Mo., and building up the New Jerusalem, even Zion, and for relieving the wants of the poor and needy. For which I, the said Titus Billings, do covenant and bind myself and my heirs forever, to release all my right and interest to the above described property, unto him, the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church.

And I, the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church, having received the above described property, of the said Titus Billings, do bind myself, that I will cause the same to be expended for the above mentioned purposes of the said Titus Billings to the satisfaction of said Church; and in case I should be removed from the office of Bishop of said Church, by death or otherwise, I hereby bind myself and my heirs forever, to make over to my successor in office, for the benefit of said Church, all the above described property, which may then be in my possession.

In testimony whereof, we have hereunto set our hands and seals this........... day of......., in the year of our Lord, one thousand, eight hundred and thirty .....

In the presence of

Signed,

Titus Billings.

Edward Partridge

II.

Be it known, that I, Edward Partridge, of Jackson county, state of Missouri, Bishop of the Church of Christ, organized according to law, and established by the revelations of the Lord, on the 6th day of April, 1830, have leased and by these presents do lease unto Titus Billings, of Jackson county, and state of Missouri, a member of said Church the following described piece or parcel of land, being a part of section No. three, township No. forty-nine, range No. thirty-two, situated in Jackson county, and state of Missouri, and is bounded as follows, viz:--Beginning eighty rods E. from the S.W. corner of said section; thence N. one hundred and sixty rods; thence E. twenty-seven rods; twenty-five links; thence S. one hundred and sixty rods; thence W. seventy-seven rods; twenty-five links, to the place of beginning, containing twenty-seven and one-half acres, be the same more or less, subject to roads and highways. And also have loaned the following  described property, viz:--Sundry articles of furniture, valued fifty-five dollars twenty-five cents; also two beds, bedding and clothing, valued seventy-three dollars twenty-seven cents; also sundry farming utensils, valued forty-one dollars; also one horse, two cows, two calves, and two wagons, valued one hundred forty-seven dollars, to have and to hold the above described property, by him the said Titus Billings, to be used and occupied as to him shall seem meet and proper.

And as a consideration for the use of the above described property I, the said Titus Billings, do bind myself to pay the taxes, and also to pay yearly unto the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church, or his successor in office, for the benefit of said Church, all that I shall make or accumulate more than is needful for the support and comfort of myself and family. And it is agreed by the parties that this lease and loan shall be binding during the life of the said Titus Billings, unless he transgresses and is not deemed worthy by the authority of the Church, according to its laws, to belong to the Church. And in that case I, the said Titus Billings, do acknowledge that I forfeit all claim to the above described leased and loaned property, and hereby bind myself to give back the lease, and also pay an equivalent, for the loaned [articles] for the benefit of said Church, unto the said Edward Partridge, Bishop of said Church, or his successor in office. And further, in case of said Titus Billings' or family's inability in consequence of infirmity or old age to provide for themselves while members of this Church, I, the said Edward Partridge Bishop of said Church, do bind myself to administer to their necessities out of any fund in my hands appropriated for that purpose, not otherwise disposed of, to the satisfaction of the Church. And further, in case of the death of the said Titus Billings, his wife or widow, being at the time a member of said Church, has claim upon the above described leased and loaned property, upon precisely the same conditions that her said husband had them, as above described; and the children of the said Titus Billings, in case of the death of both their parents, also have claim upon the above described property, for their support, until they shall become of age, and no longer; subject to the same conditions yearly that their parents were; provided, however, should the parents not be members of said Church, and in possession of the above described property at the time of their deaths, the claim of the children as above described, is null and void.

In testimony whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals this.......... day of.......... in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and thirty.... In presence of

Signed,

Edward Partridge,

Titus Billings.

2. This was a settlement in Ohio where a branch of the Church had been organized.

3. This was Eden Smith, son of the John Smith previously named, and president of the branch of the Church at Eugene. He is mentioned in a revelation given in March, 1832.--(See p. 257), where he is appointed to travel as a missionary companion to Stephen Burnett.
