Important Correspondence on Jackson County Affairs, Chiefly between Leading Officials of the Church in Zion and State Officials of Missouri. [1]

    Algernon Sidney Gilbert's Letter to Governor Dunklin.

    Liberty, Clay County, Mo.,

    January 9, 1834.

    Dear Sir:--Since my communication of the 29th of November, and a
    petition dated 6th of December last, to which my name was attached,
    I am induced to trespass again upon your patience, with further
    particulars in relation to the unfortunate faction in Jackson
    county, on which subject I should be silent, were it not that I
    entertain a hope of suggesting some ideas that may ultimately prove
    useful in ameliorating the present suffering conditions of my
    brethren, and in some degree restoring peace to both parties.

    Being particularly acquainted with the situation of both parties
    at this day, my desire is to write impartially; notwithstanding
    I feel very sensibly the deep wound that has been inflicted upon
    the Church of which I am a member, by the citizens of Jackson
    county. The petition to your Excellency, dated the 6th of December
    last, was drawn up hastily by Mr. Phelps, and signed by several
    of us, just before the closing of the mail; and there is one item
    in particular in said petition, that needs some explanation; the
    request that "our men may be organized into companies of Jackson
    Guards, and furnished with arms by the state," was made at the
    instance of disinterested advisers; and also a communication from
    the Attorney General to Messrs. Doniphan and Atchison, dated the
    21st of November last, gives his views as to the propriety of
    organizing into regular companies, etc. The necessity of being
    compelled to resort to arms, to regain our possessions in Jackson
    county, is by no means agreeable to the feelings of the Church and
    would never be thought of but from pure necessity.

    In relation to a court of inquiry, serious difficulties continue
    to exist, well calculated to preclude the most important testimony
    of our Church;  and there appears to be no evil which man is
    capable of inflicting upon his fellow-man, but what our people are
    threatened with at this day by the citizens of Jackson county. This
    intimidates a great many, particularly women and children, and
    no military guard would diminish their fears so far as to induce
    them to attend the court in that county. This, with other serious
    difficulties, will give a decided advantage to the offenders, in a
    court of inquiry, while they triumph in power, numbers, etc.

    The citizens of Jackson county are well aware that they have this
    advantage, and the leaders of the faction, if they must submit to
    such a court, would gladly hasten it. The Church are anxious for a
    thorough investigation into the whole affair, if their testimony
    can be taken without so great peril as they have reason to fear.
    It is my opinion, from present appearances, that not one-fourth
    of the witnesses of our people can be prevailed upon to go into
    Jackson county to testify. The influence of the party that compose
    that faction is considerable, and this influence operates in some
    degree upon the drafted militia, so far as to lessen confidence in
    the loyalty of that body; and I am satisfied that the influence of
    the Jackson county faction will not be entirely put down while they
    have advocates among certain religious sects.

    Knowing that your Excellency must be aware of the unequal contest
    in which we are engaged, and that the little handful that compose
    our Church are not the only sufferers that feel the oppressive
    hand of priestly power; with these difficulties existing, and many
    others not enumerated, it would be my wish to adopt such measures
    as are best calculated to allay the rage of Jackson county, and
    restore the injured to their rightful possessions; and to this
    end, I would suggest the propriety of purchasing the possessions
    of the most violent leaders of the faction; and if they assent
    to this proposition, if the holdings of about twenty of the most
    influential in that county (which would embrace the very leaders of
    the faction), could be obtained, I think the majority would cease
    in their persecutions, at least, when a due exercise of executive
    counsel and authority was manifested. I suggest this measure
    because it is of a pacific nature, well knowing that no legal steps
    are calculated to subdue their obduracy, only when pushed with
    energy by the highest authorities of the state.

    In this proposal, I believe that I should have the concurrence
    of my brethren. I therefore give this early intimation of an
    intention, on the part of some of the leading men in the Church,
    to purchase out some of the principal leaders of the faction, if
    funds sufficient can be raised; hoping thereby to regain peaceful
    possession of their homes; and in making a trial of this measure
    at a future day, we would deem it important, and of great utility,
    if we could avail ourselves of counsel and directions  from
    your Excellency, believing there will be a day, in negotiations for
    peace, in which an executive interposition would produce a salutary
    effect upon both parties.

    In this communication, with honesty of heart, I have endeavored
    briefly to touch upon a few interesting points, in plain truth,
    believing that I have given no wrong bias on either side, and with
    earnest prayers to our great Benefactor, that the chief ruler of
    this state may come to a full knowledge of the gross outrages in
    Jackson county, I subscribe myself,

    Your obedient servant,

    Algernon S. Gilbert.

    To his Excellency, Daniel Dunklin, Jefferson City, Missouri.

    Letter of the First Presidency to the Scattered Saints.

    Greeting:

    We, your companions in tribulation, embrace the present opportunity
    of sending you this token of our love and good will, assuring you
    that our bowels are filled with compassion, and that our prayers
    are daily ascending to God in the name of Jesus Christ, in your
    behalf.

    We have just received intelligence from you, through the medium of
    Brother Elliot, of Chagrin, making inquiries concerning the course
    which you are to pursue. In addition to the knowledge contained in
    the above on this subject, we say, if it is not the duty of the
    Governor to call out and keep a standing force in Jackson county
    to protect you on your lands (which it appears must be done, as we
    understand the mob are determined to massacre you, if the Governor
    take you back upon your lands, and leave you unprotected), it will
    become your duty to petition the Governor to petition the President
    to send a force there to protect you, when you are reinstated.

    The Governor proposes to take you back to your lands whenever you
    are ready to go (if we understand correctly); but cannot keep up
    an army to guard you; and while the hostile feelings of the people
    of Jackson county remain unabated, probably you dare not go back
    to be left unguarded. Therefore, in your petition to the Governor,
    set all these things forth in their proper light, and pray him to
    notify the President, of your situation; and also petition the
    President yourselves, according to the direction of the Lord. We
    have petitioned Governor Dunklin in your behalf, and enclosed in it
    a printed revelation, the same as this which we now send you. The
    petition was signed by something like sixty brethren, and mailed
    for Jefferson city, one week ago: and he will probably receive it
    two weeks before you receive this.

    We also intend to send a petition and this revelation to the
    President forthwith, in your behalf, and then we will act the part
    of the poor widow to perfection, if possible, and let our rulers
    read their destiny  if they do not lend a helping hand. We
    exhort you to prosecute and try every lawful means to bring the
    mob to justice as fast as circumstances will permit. With regard
    to your tarrying in Clay county, we cannot advise, you must be
    governed by circumstances; perhaps you will have to hire out, and
    take farms to cultivate, to obtain bread until the Lord delivers
    you.

    We sent you a fifty dollar United States note some time ago; if you
    have received it, please acknowledge the receipt of it to us, that
    we may be satisfied you received it. We shall do all that is in our
    power to assist you in every way we can. We know your situation is
    a trying one, but be patient, and murmur not against the Lord, and
    you shall see that all these things shall turn to your greatest
    good.

    Inquire of Elder Marsh, and find out the entire secret of mixing
    and compounding lead and antimony, so as to make type metal, and
    write us concerning it. Joseph has sent you another fifty dollar
    note, making in all one hundred dollars; write us concerning
    it. There is a prospect of the eastern churches doing something
    handsome towards the deliverance of Zion, in the course of a year,
    if Zion is not delivered otherwise.

    Though the Lord said this affliction came upon you because of your
    sins, polluting your inheritances, etc., yet there is an exception
    of some, namely, the heads of Zion; for the Lord said, Your
    brethren in Zion begin to repent, and the angels rejoice over them.
    You will also see an exception at the top of the second column of
    this revelation; therefore, this affliction came upon the Church to
    chasten those in transgression, and prepare the hearts of those who
    had repented, for an endowment from the Lord.

    We shall not be able to send you any more money at present, unless
    the Lord puts it into our hands unexpectedly. There is not quite
    so much danger of a mob upon us as there has been. The hand of
    the Lord has thus far been stretched out to protect us. Doctor
    Philastus Hurlburt, an apostate Elder from this Church, has been
    to the state of New York, and gathered up all the ridiculous
    stories that could be invented, and some affidavits respecting
    the character of Joseph and the Smith family; and exhibited them
    to numerous congregations in Chagrin, Kirtland, Mentor, and
    Painsville; and he has fired the minds of the people with much
    indignation against Joseph and the Church.

    Hurlburt also made many harsh threats, that he would take the life
    of Joseph, if he could not destroy "Mormonism" without. Brother
    Joseph took him with a peace warrant, and after three days' trial,
    and investigating the merits of our religion, in the town of
    Painsville, by able attorneys on both sides, he was bound over to
    the county court. Thus his influence was pretty much destroyed, and
    since the trial, the  spirit of hostility seems to be broken
    down in a good degree; but how long it will continue so, we cannot
    say.

    You purchased your inheritances with money, therefore, behold you
    are blessed: you have not purchased your lands by the shedding
    of blood, consequently you do not come under the censure of this
    commandment which says, "If by blood, lo your enemies are upon
    you, and ye shall be driven from city to city;" give yourselves no
    uneasiness on this account.

    Farewell, in the bonds of the new covenant, and partakers in
    tribulation.

    (Signed) Orson Hyde,

    Clerk of the Presidency of the Church.

    Governor Dunklin to the Brethren in Missouri.

    City of Jefferson,

    February 4, 1834.

    Gentlemen:--Your communication of the 6th December, was regularly
    received, and duly considered; and had I not expected to have
    received the evidence brought out on the inquiry ordered into
    the military conduct of Colonel Pitcher, in a short time after I
    received your petition, I should have replied to it long since.

    Last evening I was informed that the further inquiry of the court
    was postponed until the 20th inst. Then, before I could hear
    anything from this court, the court of civil jurisdiction will
    hold its session in Jackson county; consequently, I cannot receive
    anything from one, preparatory to arrangements for the other.

    I am very sensible indeed of the injuries your people complain
    of, and should consider myself very remiss in the discharge of my
    duties were I not to do everything in my power consistent with
    the legal exercise of them, to afford your society the redress to
    which they seem entitled. One of your requests needs no evidence to
    support the right to have it granted; it is that your people be put
    in possession of their homes, from which they have been expelled.
    But what may be the duty of the Executive after that, will depend
    upon contingencies.

    If, upon inquiry, it is found that your people were wrongfully
    dispossessed of their arms by Colonel Pitcher, then an order will
    be issued to have them returned; and should your men organize
    according to law--which they have a right to do, indeed it is their
    duty to do so, unless exempted by religious scruples--and apply
    for public arms, the Executive could not distinguish between their
    right to have them, and the right of every other description of
    people similarly situated.

    As to the request for keeping up a military force to protect
    your people, and prevent the commission of crimes and injuries,
    were I to  comply, it would transcend the powers with which
    the Executive of this state is clothed. The Federal Constitution
    has given to Congress the power to provide for calling forth the
    militia to execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrection,
    or repel invasion; and for these purposes, the President of the
    United States is authorized to make the call upon the executive
    of the respective states; and the laws of this state empower the
    "commander-in-chief, in case of actual or threatened invasion,
    insurrection or war, or public danger, or other emergency, to call
    forth into actual service, such portion of the militia as he may
    deem expedient." These, together with the general provision of our
    state constitution that "the Governor shall take care that the laws
    are faithfully executed," are all upon this branch of executive
    powers. None of these, as I consider, embraces this part of your
    request. The words, "or other emergency," in our militia law, seem
    quite broad; but the emergency to come within the object of that
    provision, should be of a public nature. [2]

    Your case is certainly a very emergent one, and the consequences as
    important to your society, as if the war had been waged against
    the whole state, yet, the public has no other interest in it,
    than that the laws be faithfully executed; thus far I presume
    the whole community feel a deep interest; for that which is the
    case of the "Mormons" today, may be the case of the Catholics
    tomorrow, and after them, any other sect that may become obnoxious
    to a majority of the people of any section of the state. So far as
    a faithful execution of the laws is concerned, the Executive is
    disposed to do everything consistent with the means furnished him
    by the legislature, and I think I may safely say the same of the
    judiciary.

    As now advised, I am of the opinion that a military guard will
    be necessary to protect the state witnesses and officers of the
    court, and to assist in the execution of its orders, while sitting
    in Jackson county. By this mail I write to Mr. Reese, enclosing
    him an order on the captain of the "Liberty Blues," requiring the
    captain to comply with the requisition of the circuit attorney,
    in protecting the court and officers,  and executing their
    precepts and orders during the progress of these trials. Under the
    protection of this guard, your people can, if they think proper,
    return to their homes in Jackson county, and be protected in them
    during the progress of the trial in question, by which time, facts
    will be developed upon which I can act more definitely. [3] The
    Attorney-General will be required to assist the Circuit Attorney,
    if the latter deem necessary.

    On the subject of civil injuries, I must refer you to the courts;
    such questions rest with them exclusively. The laws are sufficient
    to afford a remedy for every injury of this kind; and, whenever you
    make out a case entitling you to damages, there can be no doubt
    entertained of their ample award. Justice is sometimes slow in its
    progress, but is not less sure on that account.

    Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

    (Signed) Daniel Dunklin.

    To Messrs. W. W. Phelps, Isaac Morley, John Whitmer, Edward
    Partridge, John Corrill and A. S. Gilbert.

    Letter of Algernon S. Gilbert to A. Leonard, Esq., Attorney.

    Liberty, Clay County, Missouri,

    February 13, 1834.

    A. Leonard, Esq.:

    Dear Sir:--I have received a line from William Pratt, who called on
    you a few weeks since, to inquire if your services could be secured
    in the prosecution of claims for damages by our Church against the
    citizens of Jackson county; and by his letter it appears that you
    are willing to engage in our case. So far as I have conversed with
    the principal leaders of our Church, they are desirous to secure
    your services, which also meets the approbation of our counsel in
    this county, viz., Messrs. Reese, Doniphan, Atchison, and Wood.

    I write this a few moments before closing the mail, and have not
    time to state particulars, as to the extent of the suits, but
    believe that four or five suits have been brought by Phelps & Co.,
    for the destruction of the printing office, etc., etc., and by
    Partridge and others for personal abuse. I understand that at the
    next Monday term of the circuit court, petition will be made for
    a change of venue in Jackson county, and I suppose no case can be
    tried before next June  or October term. If it is expedient,
    some one of our people will call on you in a few days, and during
    the interim, wish you to drop me a line if convenient.

    We have this day received a communication of the 4th instant, from
    the Governor, in which he states, that he is of opinion that a
    military guard will be necessary, to protect the state witnesses
    and officers of the court, and to assist in the execution of its
    orders, while sitting in Jackson county.

    By this mail I write to Mr. Reese, enclosing him an order on the
    captain of the "Liberty Blues," requiring the captain to comply
    with the requisition of the circuit attorney, in protecting the
    court and officers, and executing their precepts and orders during
    the progress of these trials.

    The foregoing relates to a court of inquiry into criminal matters,
    to be held in Jackson county, next Monday week.

    Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

    Algernon S. Gilbert.

    The Brethren in Clay County, Missouri, to Judge Ryland.

    Liberty, February 19, 1834.

    To the Hon. John F. Ryland, Judge of the Fifth Circuit Court,
    Missouri:

    Sir:--Learning that a court of inquiry is to be held in Jackson
    county, at the next regular term of the circuit court for that
    county, or that some kind of legal proceeding is to be commenced
    for the purpose of obtaining the facts, as far as can be, or
    bringing to punishment the guilty in that county,--We, therefore,
    pray your honor to avail yourself of every means in your power
    to execute the law and make it honorable; and believing that the
    testimony of some of the members of our Church will be important,
    and deeming it unsafe to risk our persons in that county without
    a guard, we request that the order from the Executive, already
    transmitted, may be put in force.

    Respectfully, etc.,

    Edward Partridge,

    A. S. Gilbert,

    W. W. Phelps,

    John Corrill,

    John Whitmer.

Another request similar to the above was sent, same date, to Amos Reese, Circuit Attorney.

    Letter of W. W. Phelps et al. to Judge Woodward.

    Liberty, February 19, 1834.

    George Woodward, Judge Advocate, in the case of the State of
    Missouri, versus Colonel Thomas Pitcher:

    Sir:--The undersigned request of you, if it be consistent with
     custom and law, an official copy of the proceedings recorded
    by you, in the above stated case, for the purpose of preservation,
    as an important link in the history of our unfortunate society.

    Respectfully,

    W. W. Phelps,

    Edward Partridge,

    Algernon S. Gilbert.

    Affidavit of Abigail Leonard.

    I, Abigail Leonard, depose and say, that on the night of the 20th
    of February, 1834, in the county of Jackson and State of Missouri,
    a company of men, about fifty or sixty in number, armed with whips
    and guns, came to the house of my husband: among them were John
    Young, Mr. Yocum, Mr. Cantrell, Mr. Patterson and Mr. Noland.
    Five of the number entered the house; among them was John Young.
    They ordered my husband to leave the house, threatening to shoot
    him if he did not. He not complying with their desires, one of
    the five took a chair and struck him upon the head, knocking him
    down, and then dragging him out of the house; I, in the meantime,
    begging of them to spare his life, when one of the number called
    to the others, telling them to take me into the house, for I would
    "overpower every devil of them." Three of the company then
    approached me, and, presenting their guns, declared with an oath,
    if I did not go in, they would blow me through. While this was
    happening Mr. Patterson jumped upon my husband with his heels;
    my husband then got up, they stripped all his clothes from him
    excepting his pantaloons, then five or six attacked him with whips
    and gun sticks, and whipped him till he could not stand, and he
    fell to the ground. I then went to them, and took their whips from
    them; I then called to Mr. Bruce, who lived in the same house with
    us, to come out and help me carry my husband into the house. When
    carried in he was very much lacerated and bruised, and unable to
    lie upon a bed, and also unable to work for a number of months.
    Also, at the same time and place, Mr. Josiah Sumner was taken from
    the house, and came in very bloody and bruised from whipping.

    (Signed) Abigail Leonard.

The following letter from W. W. Phelps reached the hand of the Prophet at Kirtland at a time when he had received some eastern papers deploring the success attending upon the preaching of "Mormonism" in the East. The Prophet introduces the letter of Elder Phelps in his history in the following language: "Thus, while the press was mourning the prosperity of the work, and the  Saints were rejoicing in the East, troubles changed and multiplied in the West, as may be seen by the following letter:"

    Letter of Wm. W. Phelps to the Brethren in Kirtland, Detailing the
    Farcical Effort of the Officers of Missouri to Enforce the Law.

    Clay County, Missouri, Feb. 27, 1834.

    Dear Brethren--The times are so big with events, and the anxiety
    of everybody so great to watch them, that I feel somewhat impressed
    to write oftener than I have done, in order to give you more of
    the "strange acts" of this region. I have just returned from
    Independence, the seat of war in the West. About a dozen of our
    brethren, among whom were Bishop Partridge, Elder Corrill and
    myself, were subpoenaed in behalf of the state; and on the 23rd of
    February, about 12 o'clock, we were on the bank opposite Everett's
    Ferry, where we found Captain Atchison's company of "Liberty
    Blues"--nearly fifty rank and file--ready to guard us into Jackson
    county. The soldiers were well armed with United States muskets,
    bayonets fixed, etc., and to me the scene was "passing strange,"
    and long to be remembered; the martial law in force to guard the
    civil! About twenty-five men crossed over to effect a landing
    in safety, and when they came near the warehouse they fired six
    or eight guns, though the enemy had not gathered to witness the
    landing.

    After we were all across, and waiting for the baggage wagon, it was
    thought most advisable to encamp in the woods, and the witnesses,
    with half the company, marched nearly a mile towards Independence,
    to build night fires, as we were without tents, and the weather
    cold enough to snow a little. While on the way, the quartermaster
    and others, that had gone on ahead to prepare quarters in town,
    sent an express back, which was not of the most pacific appearance.
    Captain Atchison continued the express to Colonel Allen for the two
    hundred drafted militia, and also to Liberty for more ammunition;
    and the night passed off in warlike style, with the sentinels
    marching silently at a proper distance from the watch fires.

    Early in the morning we marched, strongly guarded by the troops,
    to the seat of war, and quartered in the blockhouse, formerly the
    tavern stand of S. Flournoy; after breakfast we were visited by the
    District Attorney, Mr. Reese, and the Attorney-General, Mr. Wells.
    From them we learned that all hopes of criminal prosecutions were
    at an end. Mr. Wells had been sent by the governor to investigate,
    as far as possible, the Jackson outrage; but the bold front of
    the mob; bound even unto death (as I have heard), was not to be
    penetrated by civil law, or awed by executive influence. Shortly
    after, Captain  Atchison informed me that he had just received
    an order from the judge that his company's service was no longer
    wanted in Jackson county; and we were marched out of town to the
    tune of Yankee Doodle, in quick time, and soon returned to our camp
    without the loss of any lives. This order was issued by the court,
    apparently, on account of the speedy gathering of the old mob, or
    citizens of Jackson county, and their assuming such a boisterous
    and mobocratic appearance. Much credit is due to Captain Atchison
    for his gallantry and hospitality, and I think I can say of the
    officers and company, that their conduct as soldiers and men, is
    highly reputable; so much the more so, knowing as I do, the fatal
    results of the trial had the militia come or not come. I can add
    that the Captain's safe return refreshed my mind with Xenophon's
    safe retreat of the Ten Thousand! Thus ends all hope of "redress,"
    even with a guard ordered by the Governor for the protection of the
    court and witnesses. [4]

    Before a crop is harvested it becomes ripe of itself. The dreadful
    deeds now done in Jackson county, with impunity, must bring matters
    to a focus shortly. Within two or three weeks past some of the most
    savage acts ever witnessed have been committed by these bitter
    branches. Old Father Lindsey, whose locks have been whitened by
    the blasts of nearly seventy winters, had his house thrown down,
    after he was driven from it; his goods, corn, etc., piled together
    and fire put to it, but fortunately after the mob retired, his son
    extinguished it.

    The mob has quit whipping and now beats with clubs. Lyman Leonord,
    one of the number that returned from Van Buren county had two
    chairs broken to splinters upon him, and was then dragged out of
    doors and beat with clubs till he was supposed to be dead, but he
    is  yet alive. Josiah Sumner and Barnet Cole were severely
    beaten at the same time. The mob have commenced burning houses,
    stacks, etc.; and we shall not think it out of their power, by any
    means, to proceed to murder any of our people that shall try to
    live in that county, or perhaps, only go there.

    Such scenes as are happening around us are calculated to arouse
    feelings and passions in all, and to strengthen the faith and
    fortify the hearts of the Saints for great things. Our Savior laid
    down His life for our sakes, and shall we, who profess to live by
    every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God--shall we, the
    servants of the Lord of the vineyard, who are called and chosen
    to prune it for the last time--shall we, yea, verily we, who are
    enlightened by the wisdom of heaven--shall we fear to do at least
    this much for Jesus who has done so much for us? No; we will obey
    the voice of the Spirit, that God may overcome the world.

    I am a servant, etc.,

    W. W. Phelps.

    Second Petition to the President of the United States.

    Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, April 10, 1834.

    To the President of the United States of America:

    We, the undersigned, your petitioners, citizens of the United
    States of America, and residents of the county of Clay, in
    the state of Missouri, being members of the Church of Christ,
    reproachfully called "Mormons," beg leave to refer the President to
    our former petition, dated in October last; and also to lay before
    him the accompanying hand-bill, dated December 12th, 1833, with
    assurances that the said hand-bill exhibits but a faint sketch of
    the sufferings of your petitioners and their brethren, up to the
    period of its publication.

    The said hand-bill shows, that at the time of dispersion a number
    of our families fled into the new and unsettled county of Van
    Buren; but being unable to procure provisions in that county
    through the winter, many of them were compelled to return to their
    homes in Jackson county or perish of hunger. But they had no
    sooner set foot upon that soil--which a few months before they had
    purchased of the United States--than they were again met by the
    citizens of Jackson county, and a renewal of savage barbarities was
    inflicted upon these families by beating with clubs and sticks,
    presenting knives and fire arms, and threatenings of death if
    they did not flee from the county. These inhuman assaults upon a
    number of these families were repeated at two or three different
    times through the past winter, till they were compelled at last to
    abandon their possessions in Jackson county, and flee with their
    wounded bodies into this county, here to mingle their tears
    and unite their supplications, with hundreds of their brethren, to
    our Heavenly Father and the chief ruler of our nation.

    Between one and two thousand of the people called "Mormons" have
    been driven by force of arms from the county of Jackson in this
    state since the first of November last, being compelled to leave
    their highly cultivated fields--the greater part of their lands
    having been bought of the United States--and all this on account
    of our belief in direct revelation from God to the children of
    men according to the Holy Scriptures. We know that such illegal
    violence has not been inflicted upon any sect or community of
    people by the citizens of the United States since the Declaration
    of Independence.

    That this is a religious persecution is notorious throughout our
    country; for while the officers of the county, both civil and
    military, were accomplices in these unparalleled outrages, engaged
    in the destruction of the printing office, dwelling houses, etc.,
    yet the records of the judicial tribunals of that county are not
    stained by any record of crime committed by our people. Our numbers
    being greatly inferior to the enemy were unable to stand in self
    defense; and our lives, at this day, are continually threatened by
    that infuriated people, so that our personal safety forbids one of
    our number going into that county on business.

    We beg leave to state that no impartial investigation into this
    criminal matter can be made, because the offenders must be tried
    in the county where the offense was committed, and the inhabitants
    of the county, both magistrates and people, with the exception of
    a few, being combined, justice cannot be expected. At this day
    your petitioners do not know of a solitary family belonging to our
    Church in Jackson county but what has been violently expelled from
    that county by the inhabitants thereof.

    Your petitioners have not gone into detail with an account of their
    individual sufferings from death, and bruised bodies, and the
    universal distress which prevails at this day, in a greater or less
    degree throughout our community. Not only have those sacred rights
    guaranteed to every religious sect been publicly invaded in open
    hostility to the spirit and genius of our free government; but such
    of their houses as have not been burnt, and their lands and most of
    the products of the labor of their hands for the last year, have
    been wrested from them by a band of outlaws congregated in Jackson
    county, on the western frontiers of the United States, and this
    within about thirty miles of the United States military post at
    Fort Leavenworth, on the Missouri river.

    Your petitioners say that they do not enter into a minute detail
    of their sufferings in this petition lest they should weary the
    patience of their venerable chief, whose arduous duties they
    know are great, and daily accumulating. We only hope to show him
    that this is an  unprecedented emergency in the history of
    our country, that the magistracy thereof is set at defiance,
    and justice checked in open violation of its laws; and that we,
    your petitioners, who are almost wholly native born citizens of
    these United States, of whom we purchased our lands in Jackson
    county, Missouri, with intent to cultivate the same as peaceable
    citizens, are now forced from them, and are now dwelling in the
    counties of Clay, Ray and Lafayette, in the state of Missouri,
    without permanent homes, and suffering all the privations which
    must necessarily result from such inhuman treatment. Under these
    sufferings your petitioners petitioned the governor of this state
    in December last, in answer to which they received the following
    letter: [5]

* * * * * * * * *

    By the foregoing letter from the Governor, the President will
    perceive a disposition manifested by him to enforce the laws as far
    as means have been furnished him by the legislature of this state.
    But the powers vested in the executive of this state appear to be
    inadequate for relieving the distresses of your petitioners in
    their present emergency. He is willing to send a guard to conduct
    our families back to their possessions, but is not authorized to
    direct a military force to be stationed any length of time for
    the protection of your petitioners. This step would be laying the
    foundation for a more fatal tragedy than the first, as our numbers
    at present are too small to contend single handed with the mob of
    said county; and as the Federal Constitution has given to Congress
    the power to provide for calling forth the militia to execute the
    laws of the Union, suppress insurrections, or repel invasions: and
    for these purposes the President of the United States is authorized
    to make the call upon the executive of the respective states;
    therefore, we, your petitioners, in behalf of our society, which
    is so scattered and suffering, most humbly pray that we may be
    restored to our lands, houses, and property in Jackson county, and
    protected in them by an armed force, till peace can be restored.
    And as in duty bound, will ever pray.

Here followed one hundred and fourteen signatures, among whom were: Edward Partridge, John Corrill, John Whitmer, Isaac Morley, A. S. Gilbert, W. W. Phelps, etc., etc.

    Letter of Algernon S. Gilbert et al. to the President
    Accompanying Foregoing Petition.

    Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, April 10, 1834.

    To the President of the United States:

    We, the undersigned, some of the leading members of the Church
    of  Christ, whose names are subscribed to the accompanying
    petition, beg leave to refer the President to the petition and
    hand-bill herewith. We are not insensible to the multiplicity
    of business and numerous petitions, by which the cares and
    perplexities of our chief ruler are daily increased; and it is with
    diffidence that we venture to lay before the executive, at this
    emergent period, these two documents, wherein is briefly portrayed
    the most unparalleled persecution and flagrant outrage of law that
    has disgraced the country since the adoption of the Declaration of
    Independence, but knowing the independent fortitude, and vigorous
    energy for preserving the rights of the citizens of this republic,
    which has hitherto marked the course of our chief magistrate, we
    are encouraged to hope, that this communication will not pass
    unnoticed, but that the President will consider our location on
    the extreme western frontier of the United States, exposed to many
    ignorant and lawless ruffians, who are already congregated, and
    determined to nullify all law that will secure to your petitioners
    the peaceable possession of their lands in Jackson county. We again
    repeat, that our society are wandering in adjoining counties at
    this day, bereft of their houses and lands, and threatened with
    death by the aforesaid outlaws of Jackson county.

    And lest the President should have been deceived in regard to our
    true situation, by the misrepresentations of certain individuals,
    who from religious, political, and speculative motives, are
    disposed to cover the gross outrages of the mob, we beg leave to
    refer him to the Governor of this state, at the same time informing
    him that the number of men composing the mob of Jackson county, may
    be estimated at from three to five hundred, most of them equipped
    with fire-arms.

    After noting the statements here made, if it should be the
    disposition of the President to grant aid, we most humbly entreat
    that early relief may be extended to suffering families, who
    are now expelled from their possessions by force of arms. Our
    lands in Jackson county, are about thirty miles distant from Fort
    Leavenworth, on the Missouri river.

    With due respect, we are, sir, your obedient servants,

    A. S. Gilbert,

    W. W. Phelps,

    Edward Partridge.

    P. S.--In February last a number of our people were marched under
    a guard furnished by the governor of the state, into Jackson
    county, for the purpose of prosecuting the mob criminally; but the
    Attorney-General of the state, and the District Attorney, knowing
    the force and power of the mob, advised us to relinquish all hope
    of criminal prosecution to effect anything against that band of
    outlaws, and we returned under guard, without the least prospect of
    ever obtaining our rights and possessions in Jackson county, by any
    other means than a few  companies of the United States regular
    troops, to guard and assist us till we are safely settled.

    A. S. G.

    W. W. P.

    E. P.

The foregoing letter and petition were forwarded by mail the same day, April 10th; also the following:

    Letter of the Brethren to Governor Dunklin, Asking Him to Write the
    President in Connection with Their Petition.

    Liberty, Clay County Missouri,

    April 10, 1834.

    To His Excellency, Daniel Dunklin, Governor of Missouri:

    Dear Sir:--Notwithstanding you may have become somewhat tired of
    receiving communications from us, yet we beg of your Excellency to
    pardon us for this, as we have this day forwarded a petition to
    the President of the United States, setting forth our distressed
    condition, together with your Excellency's views of it, as well
    as the limited powers with which you are clothed, to afford that
    protection which we need, to enjoy our rights and lands in Jackson
    county. A few lines from the Governor of the state, in connection
    with our humble entreaties for our possessions and privileges, we
    think would be of considerable consequence towards bringing about
    the desired result, and would be gratefully acknowledged by us, and
    our society, and we may add, by all honorable men.

    We therefore, as humble petitioners, ask as a favor of your
    Excellency to write to the President of the United States, that he
    may assist us, or our society, in obtaining our rights in Jackson
    county, and help protect us when there, till we are safe. As in
    duty bound, we will ever pray.

    (Signed)

    W. W. Phelps,

    John Whitmer,

    A. S. Gilbert,

    Edward Partridge,

    John Corrill.

    Letter of W. W. Phelps to U.S. Senator Benton of Missouri on the
    Subject of the Petition to the President.

    Liberty, Clay County, Missouri.

    April 10, 1834.

    Dear Sir:--As our society has just sent a petition and hand-bill
    to  the President of the United States, setting forth their
    distressed condition since expelled from their homes by the Jackson
    county mob; and as you may remember that I was about to establish
    last summer, previous to the destruction of my office by the mob,
    a weekly newspaper, in favor of the present administration, I have
    thought best to address this communication to your honor, and
    refer you to said petition and hand-bill, and assure you, at the
    same time, that my determination is to publish a weekly paper, in
    Jackson county, in favor of the present administration as soon as
    our society is restored to its legal rights and possessions.

    As a people we are bound to support our republican government and
    its institutions; and more than all, my press, which was wrested
    from me, is now printing a mean opposition paper, by "Kelly and
    Davis." Any communication from you will be well received by

    Your obedient servant,

    W. W. Phelps.

    Hon. Thomas H. Benton.

    Letter from Governor Dunklin to the Brethren, Answering the One
    Inviting Him to Write the President on the Subject of the Saints'
    Petition.

    City of Jefferson,

    April 20, 1834.

    To Messrs. W. W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, John Corrill, John
    Whitmer, and A. S. Gilbert:

    Gentlemen:--Yours of the 10th inst., was received yesterday, in
    which you request me as executive of this state to join you in an
    appeal to the President of the United States for protection in
    the enjoyment of your rights in Jackson county. It will readily
    occur to you, no doubt, the possibility of your having asked
    of the President protection in a way that he, no more than the
    executive of this state, can render. If you ask for that which I
    may be of opinion he has power to grant, I should have no objection
    to join in urging it upon him; but I could no more ask the
    President--however willing I am to see your society restored and
    protected in their rights--to do that which I may believe he has no
    power to do, than I could do such an act myself. If you will send
    me a copy of your petition to the President, I will judge of his
    right to grant it; and if of opinion he possesses the power, I will
    write in favor of its exercise.

    I am now in correspondence with the federal government, on the
    subject of deposits of munitions of war on our northern and western
    borders, and have no doubt but I shall succeed in procuring one,
    which will be located, if left to me, (and the Secretary of War
    seems willing  to be governed by the opinion of the executive
    of this state), somewhere near the state line, either in Jackson
    or Clay county. The establishment will be an "arsenal," and will
    probably be placed under the command of a lieutenant of the army.
    This will afford you the best means of military protection, the
    nature of your case will admit. Although I can see no direct
    impropriety in making the subject of this paragraph public, yet I
    should prefer it not to be so considered for the present, as the
    erection of an arsenal is only in expectancy.

    Permit me to suggest to you, that as you now have greatly the
    advantage of your adversaries, in public estimation, there is a
    great propriety in retaining that advantage, which you can easily
    do by keeping your adversaries in the wrong. The laws, both civil
    and military, seem deficient in affording your society proper
    protection; nevertheless, public sentiment is a powerful corrector
    of error, and you should make it your policy to continue to deserve
    it.

    With much respect, and great regard,

    I am your obedient servant,

    Daniel Dunklin.

    The Brethren in Missouri to Governor Dunklin, Informing Him That
    They Expect the Arrival of Reinforcements from Their Brethren in
    the East.

    Liberty, Clay County, Mo.,

    April 24, 1834.

    Dear Sir:--In our last communication of the 10th instant, we
    omitted to make inquiry concerning the evidence brought up before
    the court of inquiry, in the case of Colonel Pitcher. The court met
    pursuant to adjournment, on the 20th of February last, and for some
    reason unknown to us, we have not been able to obtain information
    concerning the opinion or decision of that court; we hoped that the
    testimony would have been transmitted to your Excellency before
    this, that an order might be issued for the return of our arms,
    of which we have been wrongfully dispossessed, as we believe will
    clearly appear to the commander-in-chief, when the evidence is laid
    before him.

    As suggested in your communication of the 4th of February, we have
    concluded to organize according to law, and apply for public arms;
    but we feared that such a step, which must be attended with public
    ceremonies, might produce some excitement; and we have thus far
    delayed any movement of that nature, hoping to regain our arms
    from Jackson county, that we might independently equip ourselves,
    and be prepared to assist in the maintenance of our constitutional
    rights and liberties, as guaranteed to us by our country; and
    also to defend our persons and property from a lawless mob, when
    it shall  please the executive at some future day, to put us
    in possession of our homes, from which we have been most wickedly
    expelled. We are happy to make an expression of our thanks for the
    willingness manifested by the executive to enforce the laws, so
    far as he can consistently "with the means furnished him by the
    legislature;" and we are firmly persuaded that a future day will
    verify to him that whatever aid we may receive from the executive
    has not been lavished upon a band of traitors, but upon a people
    whose respect and veneration for the laws of our country, and
    its pure republican principles are as great as that of any other
    society in these United States.

    As our Jackson foes and their correspondents are busy in
    circulating slanderous and wicked reports concerning our people,
    their views, etc., we have deemed it expedient to inform your
    Excellency that we have received communications from our friends in
    the East, informing us that a number of our brethren, perhaps two
    or three hundred, would remove to Jackson county in the course of
    the ensuing summer; and we are satisfied that when the Jackson mob
    get the intelligence that a large number of our people are about
    to remove into that county, they will raise a great hue-and-cry,
    and circulate many bugbears through the medium of their favorite
    press; but we think your Excellency is well aware that our object
    is purely to defend ourselves and possessions against another
    outrageous attack from the mob, inasmuch as the executive of this
    state cannot keep up a military force "to protect our people in
    that county, without transcending his powers." We want, therefore,
    the privilege of defending ourselves and the constitution of
    our county, while God is willing we should have a being on His
    footstool.

    We do not know at what time our friends will arrive, but expect
    more certain intelligence in a few weeks. Whenever they do arrive,
    it would be the wish of our people in this county, to return to our
    homes, in company with our friends, under guard; and when once in
    legal possession of our homes in Jackson county, we shall endeavor
    to take care of them, without further wearying the patience of
    our worthy chief magistrate. We will write hereafter, or send an
    express. During the intermediate time, we would be glad to hear of
    the prospects of recovering our arms.

    With due respect, we are, sir, your obedient servants,

    (Signed)

    A. S. Gilbert,

    Edward Partridge,

    W. W. Phelps,

    John Corrill,

    John Whitmer.

    P. S. Many of the brethren who are expected here soon, had made
     arrangements to emigrate to this state before the outrages of
    the mob last fall. We hope the painful emergency of our case will
    plead an excuse for our frequent communications.

    Letter of Governor Dunklin Replying to the Communication of April
    24th from the Brethren in Clay County.

    City of Jefferson, May 2, 1834.

    To Messrs. W. W. Phelps and others:

    Gentlemen:--Yours of the 24th ultimo is before me, in reply to
    which I can inform you, that becoming impatient at the delay
    of the court of inquiry in making their report in the case of
    Lieutenant-Colonel Pitcher,--on the 11th ultimo I wrote to General
    Thompson for the reasons of such delay; last night I received his
    reply, and with it the report of the court of inquiry, from the
    tenor of which, I find no difficulty in deciding that the arms your
    people were required to surrender on the 5th of last November,
    should be returned; and have issued an order to Colonel Lucas to
    deliver them to you or your order, which order is here enclosed.

    Respectfully, your obedient servant,

    (Signed)

    Daniel Dunklin.

Following is the order referred to above:

    City of Jefferson, May 2, 1834.

    To Samuel D. Lucas, Col. 33rd Regiment:

    Sir:--The court ordered to inquire into the conduct of
    Lieutenant-Colonel Pitcher, in the movement he made on the 5th of
    November last, report it as their unanimous opinion that there
    was no insurrection on that day, and that Colonel Pitcher was not
    authorized to call out his troops on the 5th of November, 1833. It
    was then unnecessary to require the Mormons to give up their arms.
    Therefore, you will deliver to W. W. Phelps, Edward Partridge,
    John Corrill, John Whitmer, and A. S. Gilbert, or their order,
    the fifty-two guns and one pistol reported by Lieutenant-Colonel
    Pitcher to you on the 3rd December last, as having been received
    by him from the Mormons on the 5th of the preceding October,
    [November].

    Respectfully,

    Daniel Dunklin,

    Commander-in-Chief.

    Letter to Governor Dunklin Answering His of April the 20th Wherein
    He Cautioned the Saints to Keep Their Enemies in the Wrong.

    Liberty, Clay County, May 7, 1834.

    Dear Sir:--Your favor of the 20th ultimo, came to hand the 1st
     instant, which gives us a gleam of hope that the time will
    come when we may experience a partial mitigation of our sufferings.
    The salutary advice at the conclusion of your letter is received
    with great deference.

    Since our last of the 24th ultimo, the mob of Jackson county have
    burned our dwellings; as near as we can ascertain, between one
    hundred and one hundred and fifty were consumed by fire in about
    one week; our arms were also taken from the depository (the jail)
    about ten days since, and distributed among the mob. Great efforts
    are now making by said mob to stir up the citizens of this county
    (Clay) and Lafayette, to similar outrages against us; but we think
    they will fail of accomplishing their wicked designs in this
    county. We here annex a copy of the petition to the President,
    signed by about one hundred and twenty.

    With great respect, etc.,

    (Signed)

    A. S. Gilbert,

    W. W. Phelps.

    Daniel Dunklin, Governor of Missouri:

    Letter to Colonel S. D. Lucas Asking about Arms Surrendered at
    Independence.

    Liberty, Clay County, Missouri,

    May 15, 1834.

    Colonel S. D. Lucas:

    Sir:--We have this day received a communication from the Governor
    of this state, covering the order herewith, and we hasten to
    forward the said order to you by the bearer, Mr. Richardson, who
    is instructed to receive your reply. We would further remark that
    under existing circumstances, we hope to receive our arms on this
    side the river, and we would name a place near one of the ferries
    for your convenience: as the arms are few in number, we request
    that they may be delivered with as little delay as possible.

    Respectfully yours,

    (Signed)

    A. S. Gilbert,

    W. W. Phelps,

    John Corrill,

    Edward Partridge,

    John Whitmer.

    P. S.--We will thank you for a written communication, in answer to
    this letter, and the accompanying order. [6]

All hope for relief from the general government was destroyed on receipt of the following communication from the city of Washington:

    Reply of the General Government to the Petition of the Saints.

    War Department, May 2, 1834.

    Gentlemen:--The President has referred to this department the
    memorial and letter addressed to him by yourselves and other
    citizens of Missouri, requesting his interposition in order to
    protect your persons and property.

    In answer, I am instructed to inform you, that the offenses of
    which you complain, are violations of the laws of the state of
    Missouri, and not of the laws of the United States. The powers
    of the President under the constitution and laws, to direct the
    employment of a military force, in cases where the ordinary civil
    authority is found insufficient, extend only to proceedings under
    the laws of the United States.

    Where an insurrection in any state exists, against the government
    thereof, the President is required on the application of such
    state, or of the executive (when the legislature cannot be
    convened), to call forth such number of the militia, as he may
    judge sufficient to suppress such insurrection.

    But this state of things does not exist in Missouri, or if it does,
    the fact is not shown in the mode pointed out by law. The President
    cannot call out a militia force to aid in the execution of the
    state laws, until the proper requisition is made upon him by the
    constituted authorities.

    Very respectfully, your most obedient servant,

    (Signed)

    Lewis Cass.

    To Messrs. A. S. Gilbert, W. W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, and
    others Liberty, Clay County, Missouri.

End of Volume I.

Footnotes

1. In order to group the correspondence concerning the troubles in Jackson county as close to the recital of those events in the text of the Prophets narrative as may be, several of the communications in this chapter are taken from the place assigned them by previous editors and given in this concluding chapter of Volume I.

2. In my judgment, it does seem that under the powers conferred upon the executive by the provision of the fundamental law of the state--the constitution--and the militia law he quotes, the governor could have granted the request of the Saints to be protected in their homes, until peace was restored. Surely the clause, "or other emergency," in the section of the law just referred to, was broad enough to justify him in protecting, by the State militia, twelve hundred citizens of the United States in their homes until mob-violence had subsided--until respect for the civil law had been restored, and these citizens allowed to dwell in safety upon the lands they had purchased from the general government. Under these provisions he could have "curbed those cruel devils of their will," without "doing even a little wrong, in order to do a great right"--without "wresting the law to his authority."

3. It required no great wisdom, however, to forsee that for the Saints to return to their homes, and then be left there without protection--left to the mercy of human wretches, in whose veins ran none of the milk of human kindness--would not be far removed from suicide, as the mob greatly outnumbered the Saints. To return under these circumstances would only be laying the foundation for a greater tragedy than the one already enacted; and the brethren wisely concluded not to attempt to regain possession of their homes, until some measure was adopted to protect them when there--until "God or the President ruled out the mob."

4. Thus ended the only effort that was ever made by the officers of Missouri to bring to justice these violators of the law. One class of citizens had conspired against the liberties of another class, and being the stronger had, without the authority of the law, or shadow of justification, driven twelve hundred of them from their possessions, and there was not virtue enough in the executive of the state and his associates to punish the offenders. The determination of the mob to resist the law was stronger than the determination of the state officers to execute it and make it honorable. And yet the constitution of the state made it the imperative duty of the executive to "take care that the laws are faithfully executed;" and the laws of the state empowered the commander-in-chief of the militia (the governor) "in case of * * * insurrection, or war, or public danger, or other emergency, to call forth into actual service such portion of the militia as he might deem expedient." With this power placed in his hands by the laws of the state, Governor Dunklin permitted mobs to overawe the court of inquiry he himself had ordered, and allowed them to continue unchecked in their unhallowed deeds of devastation and violence. And while the mobocrats triumphed over law and order, the governor's letters to the leading Elders of the Church contained many pretty, patriotic sentiments, but he lacked the moral courage to execute the law of the state.

5. The letter here referred to will be found on pages 476-8.

6. The arms were never returned to their owners. Before Lucas received the Governor's order, forwarded to him by the brethren, he had left Jackson county, settled in Lexington, Missouri, and resigned his commission. Subsequently Governor Dunklin issued a second requisition for the arms, this time directing it to Colonel Pitcher; but between the issuing of the two orders, the first to Lucas and the second to Pitcher, the arms were distributed among the mob, and they insolently boasted that the arms should not be returned notwithstanding the order of the chief executive of the state.

End of Volume I.

INDEX TO VOLUME I.

A

Addresses,--Elders in Zion to churches abroad, 379, et seq.

Agreement,--memorandum of, between Jackson county mob and Saints, 394.

Allen, Elder Charles,--abused by mob, 391 and note.

Anthon, Prof. Charles,--acknowledges visit of Martin Harris with transcript of Nephite Characters, 20.

Apocrypha,--revelation concerning, 331.

Apostates,--Ezra Booth, 215; first, (note) 216; at Hiram, Ohio, 260.

B

Bainbridge, South, Chenango county, N. Y.,--Prophet married at, 17; Prophet arraigned in court at, 89.

Baptisms,--first in new Dispensation, 42; early at Fayette, 51; number of previous to organization of Church (note), 76, 77; efforts to prevent at Colesville, 86. Baptism of Prophet's parents, 79; of Martin Harris, 79; Orrin Porter Rockwell, 79; desire of some to join Church without (revelation), 79.

Barber, Andrew,--death of, 431, and (note), 431.

Bend, McIlwaine's,--revelation given at, 203.

Bennett, David,--attacked by mob, 429,

Bentley, Adamson,--(Baptist) (note), 121.

Benton,--swears out warrant against Prophet, 97.

Bishop, Gladden,--president of Church at Westfield, N. Y., 335.

Blue, Big, river in Jackson county,--meeting of Saints on banks of, 336, 337; gathering of mob at ferry of, 429; the battle of, 430, 431 and note.

Boggs, Lieutenant Governor Lilburn W.,--secretly aids Jackson county mob, 391, 392.

Book of Mormon,--existence of revealed to Joseph Smith, 13; plates of first seen by Joseph Smith, 16; delivered to the Prophet, 18: translation of began, 20; Oliver Cowdery assists in, 32, 33; several of the Witnesses ditto, 49: the Prophet's preface to, 56; copyright of (note), 58; "author and proprietor of," 58; title page by Moroni, 71; difficulties attending translation of (note), 75, 76; two copies of Ms. made (note), 75; counted as a strange thing, 84.

Booth, Ezra,--appointed on mission to Missouri, 178; arrives in Zion, 191; apostatizes at Kirtland, 215, 216, and note.

Boyington, Dr., 97.

Brazeale, Hugh D.,--boast of, 430; death of, 431.

Burch, Attorney,--assists to prosecute Prophet, 92.

C

Cahoon, William F.,--appointed on mission, 332.

Campbell, Alexander,--founder of  sect "The Disciples," relations with Sidney Rigdon (note), 120.

Canada, Upper,--Prophet's journey through, 421.

Charges,--false, against Saints refuted (note), 376, 377.

China,--earthquake in (note), 158.

Cholera,--in United States, 282; ravages of, 301.

Church,--the, reasons for writing history of, 1; time when written, 2; prophecy concerning rise of, 42; instructions how to organize, 61; government of (revelation), 64, et seq.; first Elder of, 40, 61; day of organization of, 77; commanded to move from New York to Ohio, 139; at Thompson, breaks covenant (note), 180; in Zion, divided into ten branches (note), 409.

Churches,--sectarian, all wrong, 6.

Circular,--on building Temple at Kirtland, 349, 350.

Coburn, Emily,--efforts to prevent her joining Church, 87; baptism of, 87.

Coe, Joseph,--accompanies Prophet to Zion, 188.

Cole, Squire,--attempts to anticipate publication of Book of Mormon, 76.

Colesville, Broome county, N. Y., 81; home of Knight family, 47; Prophet's ministry at, 81, 86; opposition to work at, 86, 87; efforts to prevent baptism at, 87, 88.

Colesville, branch,--removed to Ohio, 173; settled at Thompson (note), 180; removed to Missouri (note), 181; arrive in Zion, 191; number of (note), 196.

Colburn, Village, Canada,--Prophet preaches in, 421.

Color, Free People of, 373; article on, 377, et seq. and note.

Coltrin, Zebedee,--biography, (note), 322; speaks in tongues in Kirtland, 323.

Commandments, Book of, number of copies of first edition, 222; testimony of Elders to, 226 and note; dedicated by prayer, 234; how esteemed by Church 235, 236 and note; Joseph Smith et al. appointed stewards of, 236 and note; first edition ordered printed, 270.

Conference,--first of Church, 84; date of (note), 84; spiritual manifestations at, 85; second of Church, 115; results of, 118; third of Church, 140; fourth of Church, Kirtland, June 3rd, 175; date of, (note), 175; spiritual manifestations at (note), 176; at Hiram, 219; special at Kirland, 219 and note; at Hiram, 221, 222 and note; at Amherst, Lorain county, Ohio, 242, 243 and note; of High Priests and Elders at Kirtland, 322, 323; in Zion, first on 6th of April, 336; of High Priests in Kirtland, 342, 352, 354.

Confirmation,--of members, first, 78; Lydia Knight and Emma Smith, 106, 108.

Constitution, article from Mo., 374 and note; secret of mob, 374 and note.

Copley, Leman, Quaker,--embraces the Gospel, 167 and note; revelation to 167, et seq.

Copley, Daniel, Priest's license taken from, 354.

Corrill, John,--offers himself a ransom for Saints in Jackson county, 294.

Council, A,--appoints committee to purchase land in Kirtland, 335; in Zion to effect reconciliation with brethren in Kirtland, 335, to consider standing of Baldwin Welton et al., 343; doings of reviewed, 343; of High Priests in Zion, 407.

Counsel employed by Saints, 424, 425.

Covill, James, Baptist minister,--makes covenant, 143: revelation to, 143, et seq.; reasons for breaking covenant, revelation on, 145.

Cowdery, Oliver,--biography (note), 32; becomes acquainted  with Smith family, (note), 32; meets David Whitmer at Palmyra (note), 32; becomes scribe to the Prophet, 32; receives divine evidence of Prophet's inspiration (revelation), 33, 35; desires power to translate, granted, (revelation), 36; fails, reasons why, (revelation), 37, 38; receives Aaronic Priesthood, 39; baptized, 41; describes John, the Baptist's administration (note), 42, 43; desires to become one of the Three Witnesses, 53; obtains view of plates, 54; Second Elder in the Church, 41, 61; ordains Prophet Joseph the First Elder of the Church, 78; revelation to, 80; first public discourse preached by, 81; baptizes at Colesville, 88; falls into error in commanding Prophet, 105; accepts revelation of Hyrum Page, 110; revelation to, instructing him to be obedient, 110; appointed to Lamanite mission, (note), 118; departs on mission, 120; visits Catteraugus tribe, (note), 120; arrives at Kirtland, 120; public ministry at Kirtland, 124, 125; released as Church Historian (revelation), 166 and note; reports Lamanite mission by letter, (note), 182, 183; returns to Kirtland with Prophet, 206; appointed to carry manuscript of Book of Commandments to Zion, (note), 221, 222, and 229, 234, (note); special messenger of Saints in Zion to Kirtland, 385; appointed editor of Saints' Messenger and Advocate at Kirtland, also editor of re-printed Star, 409.

Cowin, Horace,--appointed to mission, 332.

Cumorah,--the Hill, 15; description of, (note), 15; Joseph Smith's first visit to, 16.

D

Davidson, James,--counsel for Prophet, 89; defends Prophet at second trial, 93.

Deeds, of consecration and stewardship,--forms of, (note), 365, et seq.

Dennison, Dr.,--member of Hiram mob, (note), 264.

Dibble, Philo, miraculously healed (note), 431.

Discourse,--first public in new dispensation, 81.

Dogberry Paper, periodical, attempt to publish Book of Mormon in, (note), 76.

E

Elders, in Zion,--address of to Church, 277 et seq.; of Church, address to, 280; address of Elders stationed in Zion to Churches abroad, 373 et seq.

Enemies, eyes of, blinded, 109.

Enoch,--prophecy of, 133 et seq. Epistles, see letters.

Ewing, Rev. Finis,--opposes Church, (note), 372, 392.

F

Family, The,--at Kirtland, (note), 146.

Farm, French,--purchase of, 335, 336.

Fayette, residence of Whitmers, 49; Prophet moves to, 49; Church organized at, 76, 77; first public meeting held at, 81; Prophet removes to, 109.

Fayette,--county seat of Howard county, Mo., (note), 395.

Feet,--ordinance of washing of, 323.

Firms,--Gilbert & Whitney, Ohio, (note), 145; United Zion and Kirtland, 270.

Fitzhugh, Rev. connected with Jackson county mob, 372, 392.

G

Gilbert, Algernon Sidney,--senior member of Gilbert & Whitney, Kirtland (note), 145; enquires of  the Lord concerning duty (revelation), 179; accompanies Prophet to Zion, 188; agrees with mob to close store in Zion, 391; offers himself as ransom for Saints in Jackson county, 394; committed to Jackson county prison, 432; assaulted by Thomas Wilson, 432.

Gilbert & Whitney, Messrs., Merchants.--store wrecked, 428.

Gilbert, J. H.,--principal compositor on Book of Mormon, (note), 75.

Gould, John,--accompanies Orson Hyde as special messenger to Zion (note), 407; dispatched from Zion with petition to governor of Missouri, 410.

Grandin, Egbert B.,--prints Book of Mormon, 71.

Green, John P.,--speaks in tongues, 296; appointed to preside over Parkman branch, 342.

H

Hale, Isaac,--of Harmony, Penn., Prophet boards with, 17; embittered against the Prophet, 108.

Hale, Emma,--time and place of birth, (note), 17; marries Prophet, 17; baptism of, 88.

Hale, Levi,--baptism of, 88.

Hancock Levi Ward,--biography of, 322.

Harding, Stephen S.,--statement respecting translation of Book of Mormon, (note), 75.

Harris,--Spy for mob (note), 427;

Harris, Martin.--biography (note), 19; aids Prophet, 19; presents transcript of Nephite characters to Dr. Mitchell and Prof. Anthon, 20; asks privilege of showing manuscript to friends, 21; loses manuscript, 21; desires witness that the Prophet has the plates of Book of Mormon, 28; desires to become one of Three Witnesses, 53; failure at first effort, 54; final success, 55; accompanies Prophet to Zion, 188.

Higbee, Isaac, Sen.,--father of Elias and Isaac Higbee, Jun., (note), 410.

Higbee, Sophia,--mother of Elias and of Isaac Higbee, Jun. (note), 410.

Higbee, Elias,--ordained a High Priest, biography (note), 410.

Higbee, Isaac, Jun.,--ordained High Priest, 410; biography (note), 410.

Higbee, James,--trial of in Kirtland, 355.

Hiram, Township, Portage county, Ohio,--home of Johnson family, 215; Prophet removes to, 215; mob at, 261.

History of Church,--Prophet's reason for writing, 1; time of writing, 2.

History,--Hayden's of Disciples (note), 158; (note) 215, 261.

Historian and Recorder,--Oliver Cowdery acts as (note), 166; John Whitmer appointed as (note), 166.

House, of the Lord in Zion, 359, et seq.; corner stone of laid in Kirtland, 400.

Howe, E. D.,--author, "Mormonism Unveiled" (note), 217.

Hubble,--false prophetess, 154, and note.

Hurlburt, "Doctor" Philastus,--ordained Elder, 334; trial of, 353; appeal of from decision, 354; excommunication, 355; character of (note), 355.

Hunter, Rev.,--connected with Jackson county mob, 392 and note.

Hyde, Orson,--biography (note), 217; clerk for Gilbert & Whitney, 217; revelation to, 218; chosen clerk, first presidency, 353; sent from Kirtland to Zion as special messenger, 407; dispatched from Zion with petition to governor of Missouri, 410.

J

Jaques, Vienna,--in Kirtland, 342; in Zion, 407, 408.

John, The Baptist,--confers Aaronic Priesthood on Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, 39; acts under direction of Peter, James, and John, 40.

John, the Apostle,--difference of opinion of Joseph and Oliver respecting, settled, 35, 36.

Johnson, Lyman E.,--biography (note), 322.

Johnson, Robert,--spy for mob, 427 and note.

Johnson, family (note), 26.

Johnson, Olmstead,--prophecy concerning, 260.

Jolley, William,--baptized, 81.

Jolley, Elizabeth,--baptized, 81.

Jolley, Vincent,--baptize, 81.

Jolley, Julia Ann,--baptism of, 86.

Jolley, Harriet,--baptism of, 86.

Journal,--Prophet's daily, (note) 416, and note, 422, 423.

K

Kavanaugh, Rev.,--connected with mob, 372, 392 and note.

Kennedy, J. H.,--author, "Early Days of Mormonism," (note), 158.

Kimball, Heber Chase,--biography (note), 296; visits Prophet in Kirtland, 296.

Kirtland, Ohio,--arrival of Lamanite mission at, 120; false spirits in Church at, 146.

Knight, Newel,--Prophet's labors with, 82; seized by evil spirit, 83; devil cast out of, 83; visions of, 85; witness of Prophet's trial, 92; perplexes Attorney Seymour, 93; appointed to go to Missouri, 181; appointed leader of Colesville branch in moving to Zion (note), 181.

Knight, Joseph Sen,.--early acquaintance with the Prophet (note), 47; goes in search of Prophet's assailants (note), 47; supplies provisions to the Prophet and Cowdery, 47; desires to know his duty in connection with new dispensation (revelation), 48; revelation to, 80; baptism of, 88; mob at house of, 88; employs lawyers to defend Prophet, 89.

Knight, Joseph, Jun.,--baptism of, 88.

Knight, Polly, Baptism of, 88; death of in Zion, 199 and note.

Knight, Lydia, wife of Newel,--dream of, 101.

L

Lake, Elder James,--attends council at Kirtland, 389; commanded to remain in Kirtland, 389.

Lake, a Priest,--license taken from, 333.

Lamanites,--mission to, 118; extent and importance of (note), 183, et seq.

Lands,--purchase of in Ohio, 166.

Letters,--Oliver Cowdery to, Joseph Smith and Church at Kirtland, 182; Booth's series of (note), 217; Asael Smith to Jacob Town, 286, 287; Joseph Smith the Prophet, to William W. Phelps, 297, et seq.; of Prophet to Mr. N. E. Seaton for publication, written by commandment (note), 312, et seq.; Joseph Smith to W. W. Phelps, warning for inhabitants of Zion, 316, 317; of Council of High Priests to Bishop and Saints in Zion, 317, et seq.; First Presidency, to branch in Thompson, 324; John Murdock, to Thompson branch, 325; Joseph Smith, Jun., to N. E. Seaton, 326: Joseph Smith, Jun., to ---- Carter, 338, 339; Joseph Smith, Jun., to brethren in Zion, 368-370; First Presidency, to John Smith at Eugene, 370; First Presidency, to church at Eugene, 371; N. K. Whitney, to church at Eugene, 371; extracts of, from Elders to editor of Star,  387, 388; Joseph Smith, Jun., to Vienna Jaques, 407; Frederick G. Williams, to Saints in Zion, 417-419; Wood, Reese, Doniphan, Atchinson, to Saints in Zion, 425; the Prophet Joseph, to Moses C. Nickerson, 444-445; R. W. Wells, attorney general of Missouri, to Messrs. Doniphan and Atchinson, 444; Judge Ryland, to Amos Reese, Esq., 445; A. S. Gilbert to Governor Dunklin, 446-7; Amos Reese to Governor Dunklin, 447; Prophet Joseph Smith to Bishop Partridge, 448, et seq.; Prophet Joseph Smith to Edward Partridge, et al., 453, et seq.; W. W. Phelps, to Joseph Smith, 457; A. S. Gilbert, to Governor Dunklin, 472, et seq.; First Presidency, to the scattered Saints, 475, et seq.; Governor Dunklin to brethren in Zion, 476, et seq.; A. S. Gilbert, to A. Leonard, Esq., 478; Edward Partridge, et al., to Judge Ryland, 479; W. W. Phelps, et al., to Judge Woodward, 479; W. W. Phelps, to the brethren in Kirtland, 481, et seq.; A. S. Gilbert, et al., to the President of the United States, accompanying second petition to the President, 485-6; W. W. Phelps, et al., to Governor Dunklin, 487; W. W. Phelps to U.S. Senator Benton, 487; Governor Dunklin, to brethren in Missouri, 488-9; A, S. Gilbert, et al., to Governor Dunklin, 489, 490; Governor Dunklin, to W. W. Phelps, et al., 491; Governor Dunklin to Samuel D. Lucas, 491; Gilbert and Phelps, to Governor Dunklin, 491-2; A. S. Gilbert et al., to Colonel S. D. Lucas, 492; Lewis Cass, Secretary of War Department to A. S. Gilbert, et al., 493.

Lewis, Joshua,--sent as messenger from Saints in Missouri to Judge Ryland, 429.

Likens, Rev.,--connected with Jackson county mob, 372 (note), and 382 and note.

Lodi, N. Y.,--Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon preach in, 421.

Lovelady, Rev.,--connected with Jackson county mob, 372, 392 and note.

Lyman, Amasa Mason,--biography (note), 332; appointed on mission, 332.

M

Mack, Lucy,--ancestry of (note), 2.

Marsh, Thomas Baldwin,--biography (note), 117; revelation to, 116, appointed to go to Missouri with Ezra Thayre, 178; enquires of the Lord, 186; revelation to, 186, 187.

Mason, Carnot,--member of Hiram mob, (note), 264.

McCarty, Richard, mobber,--breaks into Gilbert & Whitney's store, 428 and note; takes out warrant for Sidney Gilbert, et al., 431.

McCoy, Rev. Isaac,--opposes Church, 372, 392 and note.

M'Lellin, William E.,--biography (note), 220; revelation to, 220; tries to imitate language of revelations, 226.

McMasters, Cyrus, 97.

McWethy, Isaac,--ordained Elder, 327.

Meetings,--public, to be conducted by the Spirit, (note), 163; Elders instructed in ancient order of, 219.

Mentor, Ohio,--Gospel preached in, 124.

Messenger and Advocate,--Latter-day Saints, resolution to publish, 409.

Ministers, Sectarian,--opposition of, 372 and note; connection of with Jackson county mobbing, 392 and note.

Miracles,--first in new  dispensation, 82, 83; in Hiram (note), 215.

Misrepresentation,--published in newspapers, 158.

Mission,--Lamanite, 188; departure of, 120; visit of to Catteraungus tribe, 120; arrive at Kirtland, 120; arrived at Independence, 182; report of, 182-185, and notes.

Mitchell, Dr.,--Martin Harris calls upon, 20; visited second time by Martin Harris (note), 20.

Mob, A,--collects at Knight's residence, Colesville, 88; second collection of at Knight's, 97; brutality of at Hiram, 261, et seq.; composition of at Hiram, 264, 265 and note; first gathering of at Independence, 342; manifesto of, 374, et seq.; proceedings of on 20th of July, 1833, 390, et seq.; proceedings of July 23rd, 1833, 394; treaty between, and Saints, 394; action of in Jackson county, 426, et seq.

Monitor, Western,--on Mormon troubles in Jackson county, 392, et seq.

Mormonism,--Western, Monitor on, 395, et seq.

Morley, Isaac,--appointed on mission to Missouri, 178; arrives in Zion, 191; offers himself a ransom for Saints in Jackson county, 394.

Moroni, Nephite Prophet,--first, visit to Joseph Smith, 11; erroneously called Nephi (note), 11; description of, 11; second appearing to Joseph Smith, 13; third visit to Joseph Smith, 14; fourth visit to Joseph Smith, 14.

Moses,--word of God revealed to, revealed to Joseph Smith, 89, et seq.

Mt. Pleasant, Upper Canada,--ministry of Prophet and Sidney Rigdon in, 421, et seq.

Murdock, Joseph S.,--birth of, (note), 260; death of (note), 265.

Murdock, Julia,--birth of, 260.

N

Nephite, Record,--see Book of Mormon.

Nickerson, Freeman,--accompanies Prophet Joseph on mission to Canada, 416; biography (note), 416.

Nickerson, Freeman A, son of Freeman Nickerson, receives Prophet and Sidney Rigdon, 412; accepts the Gospel, 422; ordained an Elder, 423.

O

Ordination,--to Aaronic Priesthood, 38; to Melchisedek Priesthood (note), 40, et seq.; of first Elders of Church, 77, 78; to different offices of Priesthood, 79; regulated in Zion by council of Priesthood, 407.

P

Page, Hiram,--baptized, 81; received false revelations, 109; renounces "seer stone," 115; messenger from Saints in Zion to Judge Ryland, 429.

Page, Katharine,--baptized, 81.

Palmyra, Wayne county, N. Y.,--Prophet's family moves to, 2; Book of Mormon published at 71.

Partridge, Bishop Edward,--biography (note), 128, 129; visits Prophet at Fayette, 128; revelation to, 131; accompanies Prophet to Zion, 188; violence of mob toward, 390; his own narrative of mob treatment, 390, 391; offers himself as ransom for Saints in Jackson county, 394; acknowledged head of Church in Zion, 409.

Paul, ----,--enters complaint 355.

Peck, Hezekiah,--baptized, 88.

Perrysburg, N. Y.,--Prophet preaches at, 421.

Persecution, commencement of, against the Prophet, 6; extends to his family, 19; spirit of at Harmony, 44; reflections of Prophet on, 97; in Missouri (see mob).

Persecutors,--McMaster, 97; Boyington, Dr., 97;--Benton, 97.

Peterson, Richard B.,--baptized, 81.

Peterson, Ziba,--revelation to, 118; appointed to mission to Lamanites, 119; dropped from office, 195.

Petition,--of Missouri Saints to Governor Dunklin, 410, et seq.; second to Governor Dunklin, 451-2; of Saints to President of U.S., 483.

Phelps, William Wine,--arrival in Kirtland, 184; biography (note), 186; preaches over western boundary of U. S., 190; attacked by mob, 390; offers himself a ransom for Saints in Jackson county, 394; dispatched from Zion with petition to Governor of Missouri, 410.

Pitkin, George,--assists Prophet on Journey, 266.

Pixley, Rev.,--agent of missionary society in western Missouri, 372; opposes the Church, 372, 373 and note.

Poorman, John,--baptism of, 86; defends Prophet against mob, 263.

Pratt, Parley P.,--biography (note), 118, 119; appointed to Lamanite mission, 118; relations of, to Sidney Ridgon, 121; presents Book of Mormon to Ridgdon, 122; appointed a mission to Quakers (revelation), 167, (note) 169; reports his mission to Lamanites, 181 and note, 183, et seq.; ministry in Zion (note), 400, 401; assaulted by mob spies, 427 and note.

Pratt, Orson,--biography (note), 127; enquires of the Lord concerning his duty, 127.

Press,--Purchase of for Church, 217; opposition of, 273; Star taken by mob, 390 and note; resolutions to establish at Kirtland, 409.

Priesthood,--Aaronic, restored, 49; powers of, 39.

Priesthood, Melchisedek,--restored of (note), 40, 41; power of Melchisedek manifested, 175, 176; manner of manifestation (note,) 175.

Prophet, Joseph Smith, Jun. (see Joseph Smith, Jun.)

Prophets,--school of established (revelation), 310, 311; meeting of, 322; organization of, 334; in Zion (note), 400.

Prophecy,--of earthquake in China (note), 158; on head of Olmstead Johnson, 260; on war of rebellion.

Prophets, False,--article on, 373, and note.

Q

Quakers,--sect of, character of (note), 167.

R

Reid, John,--counsel for Prophet, 89; defends Prophet in second trial, 93; account of early prosecution of Prophet (note), 94, 95.

Reserve, Western,--history of Disciples on (note), 158.

Revelation,--manner of receiving (note), 173; to Joseph Smith on lost manuscript, 22; on changes in manuscript, 23; to Joseph Smith, Sen., 28; to Oliver Cowdery, making known secret thoughts, 33; to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery concerning John the Revelator, 36; to Oliver Cowdery granting power to translate 36; to Oliver Cowdery on the manner of translation, 37; to Hyrum Smith, making known his duty, 45; to Joseph Knight, Sen., making known his duty, 48; to David Whitmer, calling him to ministry, 49; to John Whitmer, calling him to ministry, 50; to Peter Whitmer, Jun., making known his calling, 51; to Three Witnesses, 53; making known calling of the Twelve Apostles, 62; on Church government, 64; to Martin Harris, atonement and "eternal punishment," 72, et seq.; to Church, appointing Prophet, Seer and Revelator to, 78; on re-baptism, 79; to Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Joseph Smith, Sen., Joseph Knight, Sen., on duties of, 80; to Joseph Smith, Jun., words of God to Moses, 98; to Joseph Smith, Jun. and Oliver Cowdery, instructions in duties, 101 et seq.; to Emma Smith, 103; to Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery, and John Whitmer, how time of to be spent, 104; on sacrament, 106, 107; to Oliver Cowdery, but one man at a time to receive revelations for Church, 110; in presence of six Elders, 111; to David Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jun., and John Whitmer, defining duties of, 116; to Thomas B. Marsh, calling him to ministry, 116; to Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson, appointing mission, 118; to Ezra Thayer and Northrop Sweet, call of to ministry, 126; to Orson Pratt explaining duty of, 128; to Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon making known calling of latter, 129, et seq.; to Edward Partridge, making known duty of, 131; making known prophecy of Enoch, 133; et seq.; to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon commanding Church to move to Ohio, 139; received at third conference, promising to give law in Ohio, 140, et seq.; to James Coville, making known duties of, 143; second concerning James Coville, why he broke covenant, 145; to Church at Kirland, instructions to leading Elders at, 147; to Church at Kirtland in presence of twelve Elders embracing the law of the Church, 148, et seq.; to Elders of Church repudiating revelations by a woman, 154, et seq.; to Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, calling Elders to conference, 157; to Church at Kirtland, Zion and her future, 159, et seq.; to Church at Kirtland on spiritual gifts, 163; to Joseph Smith, Jun., appointing John Whitmer historian, 166; on purchase of lands in Ohio, 166; to Sidney Rigdon and Leman Copley, appointing mission to Quakers, 167, et seq.; to Church explaining spirit manifestations, 170, et seq., and note, 170, and note, 173; to Edward Partridge, giving directions to settle N. Y. Saints at Kirtland, 173, 174; to Church appointing Elders to travel two and two to Missouri, 177, et seq.; to Algernon Sidney Gilbert concerning his calling, 179; to Newel Knight, directing him to move to Missouri, 181; to William W. Phelps calling him to ministry, 185; to Joseph Smith, Jun., designating the site of Zion, 189, 190; to Joseph Smith making known purpose for which Elders were called to Zion, 191, et seq.; to Saints in Zion commanding them to return east, 201; to prophet and companions concerning the dangers in traveling by water, 203; to Elders en route to Zion, commanding them to assemble in Zion, 206; to Saints in Kirtland, concerning Saints in Zion, 207, et seq.; prayer given by, 218; to William E. M'Lellin, 220, 221; Preface to Book of Commandments, 222, and note; on language of, 225; to Orson Hyde and others, explaining powers of Priesthood, 227. et seq.; called appendix, 229, et  seq.; to Joseph SMith and Sidney Ridgon, directing them to engage in public ministry, 238; to High Priests in Kirtland, explaining duties in Priesthood, 239, et seq.; to Joseph Smith, Jun., on duties of Elders, 241; explaining 7th chap. 14 v. I Cor., 242; at Amherst conference, appointing the Elders to ministry, 243; et seq.; on different degrees of glory, 245, et seq.; to Joseph Smith, Jun., explaining the Apocalypse, 253, et seq.; to Joseph Smith on Order of Enoch, 255, 256; to Jared Carter, appointing him to ministry, 257; to Stephen Burnett, appointing him to ministry, 257; to F. G. Williams, appointing him to ministry, 257; to Stephen Burnett, appointing him to ministry, 257; to F. G. Williams, appointing him counselor to Prophet, 257. 258; to Church in Zion on Order of Enoch, 267, et seq.; respecting orphans and their claims, 269; on Priesthood, 287, et seq.; explaining wheat and tares, 301; appointing School of Prophets, called Olive Leaf, 302, et seq.; the Word of Wisdom, 327, et seq.; to Joseph Smith, Jun., for encouragement to, 329, et seq.; on Apocrypha, 321; directing F. G. Williams to be received into the United Order, 333; explaining oneness of Father and Son, 343, et Seq.; directing the building of the House of the Lord at Kirtland, 346; directing Kirtland Temple to be built, 350, 351; establishing United Order at Kirtland, 352; defining Zion--The Pure in Heart, 400-402; defining duties of Saints respecting laws of the land, 402, 406; to Prophet while in Canada, 420.

Rigdon, Sidney,--biography (note), 120, et seq.; Book of Mormon presented to, 122; relations of to authorship of Book of Mormon (note) 122, et seq.; investigates Mormonism, 124; conversion of, 125; visits Prophet at Fayette, 128; revelation to, 129; appointed to a mission to Quakers, 167; fulfills mission (note), 169; accompanies Prophet to Missouri, 188; dedicates land of Zion, 196 and note; appointed to write description of the land of Zion, 197; removes to Hiram--scribe to Prophet, 219; assists the Prophet in public ministry in Kirtland and vicinity, 239, 241; accompanies Prophet on second visit to Missouri, 266; reconciled to Bishop Partridge, 267 and note; preaches at Independence, 270 and 271; departs from Zion with Prophet for Kirtland, 271; ordained Counselor in First Presidency, 334; presides at a council at Modina county, Ohio, 342; accompanies Prophet on mission to Canada, 416.

Rigdon, John W.,--son of Sidney, writes biography of father (note), 122, et seq.

Riggs, Burr,--trial and excommunication of, 327.

Riggs, Harpin,--ordained Elder, 327.

Rockwell, Orrin Porter,--baptism of, 79.

Rockwell, Peter,--baptism of, 86.

Rockwell, Caroline,--baptism of, 86.

Rockwell, Electa, baptism of, 86.

Rudd, Brother,--meeting at house of, 416.

Rumors,--spread by Jackson mob, 431.

Ryder, Simons,--converted by fulfillment of prophecy (note), 158; apostasy of, 260 and note.

S

Sacrament,--prayer of consecration of, 69; first administered in Church, 78; authorizing use of water in, 106.

Saints, New York,--commanded to assemble in Ohio (revelation), 139; from New York arrive in Ohio, 173; settling of (revelation), 173 and note; petition of,  to Governor of Missouri, 410; renewed activity of, 424 on Big Blue attacked, 426; on prairie attacked, 427; attack on, at Independence, 427.

Salisbury, Jenkins,--appointed on mission, 332.

School,--common, 276 and note.

Scott, Rev. Walter,--Reformed Baptist, relations with Sidney Rigdon, 121; opposes the Prophet Joseph, 188.

Scriptures,--lost books of, 132 and note; Prophet Joseph translates ancient, 170; translation renewed at Hiram, 215 and note; translation of New testament completed, 324 and note.

Scriptures,--passages of ancient, quoted by Moroni, 12; understanding of Prophet opened respecting, 43.

Seymour, Attorney,--prosecutes Prophet, 92; Newel Knight's answer to, 92, 93.

Shearer, Rev.,--opposition of, 87.

Silvers, Esq.,--refuses to issue process against mob, 429.

Simpson, Richard,--chairman of mob meeting, 395.

Smith, Joseph, Jun., the Prophet,--birth and ancestry of, 2; attracted by religious excitement, 2, 3; reflection of on divided Christendom, 3; becomes partial to Methodist, 3; instructed by James, 4; first prayer, 5; seized by evil power, 5; first vision, 5, 5; relates vision to sectarian priest, 6; sectarian persecution of, 7, 8; character of early youth, 9, 10; letter on personal character (note) 10; first visit of Moroni to, 11; angel's message and instruction, 12; name to be evil spoken of, 11; repetition of visits and instructions of angel 10, 13, 14; commanded to tell father his vision, 15; first visit to Cumorah, 16; four annual meetings with Moroni, 16; employed by Josiah Stoal, 17; story of being a money digger, 17; marriage to Emma Hale, 17; obtains plates of Book of Mormon, 18; charges concerning plates, 18; efforts of enemies to wrest plates of Book of Mormon from, 18; leaves Manchester for Harmony, Penn., 19; commences translation of Nephite records, 19; intrusts manuscript of Book of Mormon to Martin Harris, 21; visits father's family, 21; loses possession of plates and Urim and Thummim for season, 21; Moroni temporarily returns Urim and Thummim, 21; revelation to, concerning lost manuscript, 22; design of enemies in relation to manuscript revealed to, 23; sacred records and Urim and Thummim restored to, 23; purchases farm of Isaac Hale, 28; visited by his father and mother, 28; received revelation for Martin Harris--promise that Three special Witnesses shall see the plates, 28, et seq.; receives Aaronic Priesthood, 39; baptized, 42; assisted by Joseph Knight, Sen., 47; becomes acquainted with Whitmer family, 48; removes tot he Whitmer residence, Fayette, Seneca county, 51; with the Three Witnesses at time of angel's visitation, 54, 55; the first Elder of the Church, 41, 61; ordains Oliver Cowdery an Elder in the Church, 77; appointed Seer, Translator, and Prophet to the Church (revelation) 78; ministry at Colesville, 88; escapes from mob, 89; arraigned in court, 89; acquitted, 91; second arrest of, 91; abused by constable, 91; trial at Colesville, 92; acquittal of, 96; copies and arranges revelations, 104; corrects Cowdery and Whitmer as to doctrine, 104, 105; instructed on administering  sacrament (revelation), 106; removes from Harmony to Fayette, 109; accompanies Elders Rigdon and Partridge to Kirtland, 145; persuades Saints at Kirtland to give up common stock concern, 146; receives number of important revelations, 147-170: translates ancient Scripture, 170; leaves Kirtland for Missouri, 188; meeting with Rev. Walter Scott, Cincinnati, 188; arrives at Independence, Mo., 188; reflections on state of society in Missouri, 189; dedicates Temple site in Zion, 199; leaves Zion for Kirtland, 202; meets Elders en route for Zion, 205; arrives in Kirtland, 206; dedicates Book of Commandments by prayer, 234; appointed steward over commandments, etc. (revelation), 236; public ministry at Shalersville and Ravenna with Sidney Rigdon (revelation), 241; attends conference at Amherst, and is ordained president of the High Priesthood, 242, 243 and note; returns from Amherst conference, and receives vision of the Three glories, 245; mobbed at Hiram, 260, et seq.; second visit to Missouri, 265; arrives second time in Zion, 266; acknowledged in Zion President of High Priesthood, 267; organized Church with a view to independence, 269; visits Colesville branch on Big Blue, 269 and note; gives directions concerning literary affairs and stores in Zion, 270 and note; leaves Zion for Kirtland, 271; poison administered to, 271; instances of gift of seer-ship, 272 and note; arrival at Kirtland, 272; recommences translation of Scripture, 273; receives first copy Evening and Morning Star, 273; visits Albany, New York and Boston, 295; receives visit from Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, 295, 296; receives gift of tongues, 297, reviews state of world close of 1832, 301; writes for the press on same subject, 312; et seq.; introduces ordinance of washing feet, 323; completes translation of New Testament, 324; reflection on mob violence in Jackson county, 393, 400; mission to Canada, 416, et seq.; return to Kirtland from Canada mission, 422.

Smith, Jos., Sen.,--birth, place of residence, marriage to Lucy Mack, 2; encourages Prophet to follow instruction of Moroni, 15; visits his son Joseph at Harmony, 28; revelation to, 80.

Smith, Hyrum, brother of the Prophet,--birth (note) 44; visits the Prophet at Harmony and inquires respecting the work, 45; revelations to, 45, 80; breaks ground for Kirtland Temple, 352.

Smith, Samuel H., brother of the Prophet,--birth (note) 44; conversion and baptism of, 44; revelation to, 80.

Smith, William,--brother of the Prophet,--biography of (note), 322; baptism of, 86; speaks in tongues in Kirtland, 323.

Smith, Don C., brother of the Prophet--baptism of, 86.

Smith, Alvin, brother of the Prophet--death of, 2, 16.

Smith, George Albert,--birth and ancestry, 285 and note; baptism of, 285; arrives in Kirtland, 348; labors on Temple, 353.

Smith, Asael, grandfather of the Prophet,--letter from (note), 285, et seq.

Smith, John, uncle to the Prophet,--visit of Joseph Smith, Sen., to 285; arrives in Kirtland, 348.

Smith, Emma,--revelation to, 103; adopts Murdock twins, 260; removes to Hiram, 266.

Smith, Jerusha,--baptism of, 86.

Smith, Katherine,--baptism of, 86.

Snow, Zerubbabel,--appointed on mission, 332.

Star, Evening and Morning,--purchase of press for, 217; prospectus oc, 259 and note; first issue of, 273; purpose of publication of, 274; articles from, 273, 275, 276, 277, 280, 282, 283, 377; Extra, 378, 379 and note, 379, 387; press of demolished, 390; resolution to publish at Kirtland, 409; office of, 277.

Star, Ohio,--publishes Ezra Booth's letters, 241.

Stoal, Josiah,--employs the Prophet, 17; testifies at Prophet's trial, 89; daughters of, testify at Prophet's trial, 90.

Store, Wilson's,--gathering of mob at, 430.

Stringham, William and wife,--baptized, 88.

Stringham, Julia,--baptized, 88.

T

Tanner, John,--sends sons to Kirtland to learn will of the Lord, 410; biography (note), 410.

Tarbill, Squire,--Prophet and Emma Hale married at the house of, 17.

Temple, Kirtland,--corner stones laid, 400.

Temple,--side of in Zion (revelation), 189; dedication of site of, 199; at Kirtland, preparations to build, 349; circular on Kirtland, 349; in Zion, 359; first description of, in Zion, 359, et seq.

Thayre, Ezra,--appointed on mission to Missouri, 178; revelation to, 186.

Thompson,--church at, 180; difficulties in (note), 180, 181.

Times,--signs of the, 347.

Tongues,--first of first exercised (note), 297; Brigham Young speaks in, 297 and note; hymn sung in, 409; gift exercised in Canada, 422.

Township,--Kaw, Jackson county, Mo.--Colesville branch settled in, 196; conference held in, 199.

U

Urim and Thummim,--deposited with Nephite plates, 12 not to be shown except to chosen witnesses, 13; first seen by Joseph Smith, 16; delivered to the Prophet, 18.

W

Wait, Truman,--appointed on mission, 332.

Waste,--member of Hiram mob, 262 and note.

Waterford, village of Canada,--Prophet and Sidney Rigdon preach in, 422.

Westfield, Chautauqua county, N. Y.,--meetings at, 417, 419.

Weston, Samuel, Justice of the Peace,--connected with the mob, 376; liberates Richared McCarty, 428.

Whitmer, David,--birth of, (note), 32; goes to Harmony to take the Prophet to his father's house, 49; revelation to, 49; desires to become one of Three Witnesses, 52; behold Nephite records, 54.

Whitmer, John,--birth of, (note), 49; interest in the work, 49; revelation to, 50; assists Prophet to copy and arrange revelations, 104; appointed Historian of the Church, 166; appointed to accompany Oliver Cowdery to Zion, 234 and note, 235; offers himself a ransom for Saints in Jackson county, 394.

Whitmer, Peter, Jun.,--birth (note), 49; interest in work, 49; revelation to, 51.

Whitmer, Jacob,--baptized, 81.

Whitmer, Mary,--baptized, 81.

Whitmer, Elizabeth Ann,--baptized, 81.

Whitmer, Christian,--baptized, 81.

Whitmer, Annie,--baptized, 81.

Whitmer, Elizabeth,--baptized, 81.

Whitney, Bishop Newel Kimball,--biography (note), 145, 146; welcomes Prophet and wife to his home at Kirtland, 145; accompanies Prophet on Second visit to Zion, 265; returns to Kirtland with Prophet, 271; accident by the way, 271; renewal of journey to Kirtland, 272; accompanies Prophet to Albany, New York and Boston, 295.

Williams, Dr. Frederick G.,--biography (note), 125; joins Lamanite mission, 125; ordained counselor in First Presidency, 334.

Wisdom, Word of, 327.

Witnesses,--Three promised (revelation), 28, et seq.; referred to in Book of Mormon (note), 52; revelation to, 53; with the Prophet seek promise of testimony, 54; details connected with testimony of (note), 55; formal testimony of, 56, 57.

Witnesses,--eight testimony of, 57; time and place of receiving testimony (note), 57.

World,--state of, 281, 301, 388; Prophet's letter on, 312; in April, 1833, 337.

Y

Young, Brigham,--biography (note), 296; visits the Prophet, 295; speaks in tongues, 297 and note; returns to Kirtland from mission to Canada, 388.

Young, Joseph,--biography (note), 295; visits Prophet, 295.

Z

Zion,--site of revealed, 189; first Sabbath in, 190; first house in, 196; Prophet's description of the land of, 197, 198; first conference in, 199; first death in, 199 and note; city of and plat, 357 et seq.; reports concerning extensions of, 419.
