1.  Christmas was still a few weeks away, but Truman and his family had already put up the Christmas tree. He was excited as he thought about the presents he hoped to see under the tree on Christmas morning.

2.  A few days later Truman walked into the living room and saw there was one small box under the tree. It was wrapped in red paper and tied with a green bow.

    Our first present! Who sent it? Was it Grandma?

    No.

    Is it from one of my cousins?

    No.

3.  Truman was confused.

    Well, then who sent it?

    You’ll have to wait and see. All we can say is that it is a very special gift.

4.  As days passed, more presents appeared under the tree, but Truman kept wondering about that first red present with the green bow. Where did it come from?

5.  On Christmas morning, Truman raced to wake up his brothers and parents.

    Wake up! It’s Christmas!

6.  After arriving at the tree, Truman was excited to see the presents underneath it.

    Truman, you may open the small box with the red paper and green bow.

    Truman was excited to finally see what was inside.

7.  Truman removed the lid and found a few small items. He pulled them out one at a time—a picture of Jesus Christ, a poem about Jesus’s birth, and a star. Truman showed everyone the picture, and Dad read the poem.

    I put the box under the tree so we could remember the real reason we celebrate Christmas.

8.  Truman was happy to remember Jesus.

    Dad, you put the box under the tree, but now I know who really gave us this gift.

    Who?

    Heavenly Father.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="127152372" id="aside1_p1">You could find a box and place items inside that will help you and your family remember Jesus Christ’s birth. Consider including items such as poems, pictures, paper stars, a toy sheep, an angel ornament, or any other item you think will help remind your children of the Lord’s birth. Wrap the gift. Open it on Christmas.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
