The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the December 2009 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “I Will Remember Jesus Christ” on pages F12 and F13 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Jesus was born into a family. Work with the music leader to prepare a sing-a-story to teach about Jesus’s birth into a family (see “Music with Narratives,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 174–75). You might consider having children dress in simple costumes to represent the characters in the story, or use pictures from the Gospel Art Picture Kit.

    Example: Christmas is the season when we celebrate the joyful birth of Jesus Christ. Sing a song or hymn about the nativity. Heavenly Father promised to send His Son to be the Savior of the World (see John 3:16). Sing a song or hymn about the Savior. Prophets such as Samuel the Lamanite foretold the birth and mission of Jesus Christ (see Helaman 14:1–6). Sing a song or hymn about the Book of Mormon. An angel told Mary she would be the mother of Jesus (see Luke 1:26–35). Joseph was Mary’s husband. Heavenly Father chose them to help take care of Jesus (see Matthew 1:20–24). Mary and Joseph journeyed to Bethlehem to be counted in a census (see Luke 2:1–5). Sing a Christmas song or hymn. Jesus was born in Bethlehem in a stable because there was no room for His family at the inn (see Luke 2:6–7). Sing “Away in a Manger” (Children’s Songbook, 42–43). Angels and shepherds shared in the joy of the birth of Jesus (see Luke 2:8–16). Sing “Joy to the World” (Hymns, no. 201). Bear testimony of the divinity of Christ’s birth.

2.  Jesus will come again. Show Gospel Art Picture Kit 238 (The Second Coming). Tell the children that when Jesus comes again, He will come in power and glory and everyone will know who He is. Sing “When He Comes Again” (Children’s Songbook, 82–83). Have the children repeat the phrase “I wonder, when he comes again, will I be ready there.” Teach that when Jesus comes again, it will be a great day for those who are prepared. Jesus taught the importance of preparing for His Second Coming in a parable about 10 women and their lamps. Help the children dramatize the story found in Matthew 25:1–13. Explain that the Savior compared the wedding to His Second Coming. Emphasize that because the five wise women were prepared, they were allowed into the wedding. Likewise, if we are prepared when Jesus comes, we will be able to live with Him and Heavenly Father again.

    Have the children use clay or salt dough (for recipe, see Teaching, No Greater Call, 165) to mold a small bowl that fits inside a cupped hand. Explain that this would be similar in size and shape to the ancient lamps used by the 10 women. Emphasize that oil lamps cannot give light unless they have oil to burn. Give each class a copy of My Gospel Standards, and explain that living those standards is like adding oil to their lamps in preparation for Jesus’s Second Coming. Have the teachers read through the standards with their classes, and then help each child choose a standard to work on in the coming week. Provide beans or small pebbles to represent oil. Have the teachers put one in the children’s lamps when they make their choice. Encourage the children to tell their family the story of the 10 women and to share with them what their bean or pebble represents. Bear testimony that Jesus will come again.
