Two Temple Square missionaries sat in the well-worn pews of the Salt Lake Tabernacle, staring at a computer screen as I taught them how to upload their video footage to a video-editing program.

Then I had this moment hit me: here we were, using the internet and complex software, sitting inside a building that was built in the 1800s. So many amazing teachings have been shared in this building. Over the past 155 years, its audiences have heard from hundreds of notable speakers at its pulpit, including Brigham Young, 12 different presidents of the United States, Susan B. Anthony, and Helen Keller.

And now, in such a historic building, we were embarking on a new frontier in the Lord’s work, an innovation in missionary work: me, a YouTuber, helping missionaries learn how to create video content for social media.

President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985), in speaking about the future of missionary work, said: “With the Lord providing these miracles of communication, and with the increased efforts and devotion of our missionaries and all of us, … surely the divine injunction will come to pass: … ‘the gospel must be preached unto every creature’ [Doctrine and Covenants 58:64].”

President Kimball said that in 1974—almost 50 years ago!—and it’s never been truer than it is today. The work of the Lord is moving forward, especially with the COVID-19 pandemic necessitating the use of technology for missionaries around the world—the message of the gospel is spreading to “every nation, kindred, tongue, and people” (Alma 37:4).

Throughout my decade-long career of creating video content, I have seen the power of being able to connect online through various mediums. Since knocking on doors was no longer an option during the pandemic, many missionaries were given smartphones to connect with people whom they might not have had the chance to reach otherwise. And many missions also now have dedicated companionships who serve as the social media or tech specialists, helping run the mission’s Facebook page, creating social media content, making ComeuntoChrist.org ads, and controlling the budget used on ads.

Elder Elias Magallanes in the Argentina Córdoba Mission said that because of technology, he and his companions have been able to teach many more people: “I believe that a lot of people are being blessed thanks to this pandemic because they have learned about the gospel.”

Sister Colby Sinclair, one of the two social media specialists in the Temple Square Mission, added that her mission reaches so many more people with its videos. “We spend probably 15 hours on a video that we make, but we’re able to reach 15,000 people! Normally we’d have a lesson with each one of those 15,000 people, and it would take 15,000 hours.”

But even with the benefits of sharing the gospel online, there has been some trial and error to find the best ways to do it.

Elder Magallanes said: “When all of the missionaries left and only the Argentine missionaries were here, no one knew how to use smartphones. We had to learn through practice and discover how things worked for ourselves.”

Missionaries in the France Paris Mission learned that what works best for them is posting about topics that are relatable: peace, joy, faith, and gratitude. Sister Olivia Jackson said: “Missionary work holds no limits. There are so many different ways to invite and to share the Light of Christ.”

Sister Emily Webber in the Temple Square Mission didn’t feel qualified to create content for her mission, but she has learned if we rely on the Lord, He will help us use our abilities to fulfill His work. “I know that God helped magnify every ability that I’ve ever had to be able to do this. I’ve been able to see the Lord’s hand more as we create this content.”

Before Elder Ethan Glines left on his mission to Concepción, Chile, he thought his video-editing talents would have to be put on hold for two years. But when he was reassigned during the pandemic to Omaha, Nebraska, USA, his new mission president asked him to bring his camera gear to create social media content for the mission. When Elder Glines returned to Chile, he was able to continue using his video-editing talents through his assignment in the new role of social media specialist. Elder Glines saw this as another witness that God truly is in the details of our lives and “wants us to use our talents because He gave us our talents.” Missionaries around the world are using their skills to further the Lord’s work.

Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said, “As disciples our purpose should be to use social media channels as a means of projecting the light and truth of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ into a world that increasingly is dark and confused.”

This goes for all of us: whether you have served a mission or not, whether you’re a lifelong member or a convert, your testimony of the Savior can make an impact on someone. And yes, sharing the gospel on social media can be intimidating and scary, but your testimony, no matter how simple, is needed.

Sister Lucy Collins, who served at the Mormon Battalion Historic Site, said: “If you have a thought to share something on social media regarding the gospel or a message of hope or peace or strength, share it! How many times have you gone to a testimony meeting where you’re sitting there and someone shares their testimony and you’re like, ‘Wow, that was for me today’? The same goes for posting your thoughts about the gospel of Jesus Christ, because someone out there needs it. So just do it!”

Your testimony doesn’t have to be long or elaborate to impact others. You can follow the Spirit to share a simple, authentic testimony in normal and natural ways. Here are a few ideas to get you started:

- Repost or share content from Church accounts to your personal account.

- Invite others to join you at a ward or institute activity.

- Be creative! Use your gifts and talents to create gospel-centered content.

- Ask your local missionaries what resources they use and how you can be involved.

When members aren’t afraid to share their simple testimonies, it can touch so many hearts.

A few years ago, I created a video to go along with the Light the World Christmas campaign that received over 2.5 million views. I thought, “Should I put a scripture at the end? Or give people a challenge to be baptized? Is it my duty to dedicate my YouTube channel to missionary work?”

I really wrestled with that last question. I’m able to reach more people right now than the early missionaries and early pioneers could have even dreamed of! So I went to the temple with this question, ready and willing for whatever answer I would get.

And the answer that came was, “Do your ministering, and do your calling.”

I realized that Jesus Christ didn’t need me to baptize every one of my subscribers. He needed me to focus on serving the people around me.

Content creation is just one aspect of sharing the gospel of Jesus Christ. Some of the most effective uses of sharing the gospel through social media are reaching out to those you know, replying to the comments section, or sending direct messages.

It doesn’t matter how many views or likes a video receives. It doesn’t matter if you have 2.5 million followers or 25. The most important thing is connecting with the one, ministering to the one. Just as the Savior did.

Missionaries today are taking the work of salvation to every corner of the earth—or at least as far as the internet connection will take them—and we can do the same. We can share our simple testimony, we can create content that will uplift and inspire others, and we can reach out to the one.
