Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Preface

Watch and Be Ready

Perhaps no topic is as fascinating and at the same time so subject to speculation as that of the end of the world. Christianity associates this event with the second coming of Jesus Christ and the commencement of the thousand-year period of peace known as the Millennium. Other religions also look towards a time when the world as we now know it will no longer exist.

The time leading up to the Millennium is known as the last days, a time filled with cataclysmic events and marvelous heavenly manifestations. That we are already living in such a time seems validated by the daily diet of increasing calamities and catastrophes fed to us by the news media.

Ancient prophets and apostles recorded their prophecies not only of the disasters and distresses of the last days, but also of the marvelous blessings and wondrous events that would surely come. Sometimes there is such concern for and emphasis on the negative aspects of the last days that the positive prophecies regarding these times are ignored.

A modern-day apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, Elder Neal A. Maxwell, has reminded us to maintain a proper perspective: "Yes, there will be wrenching polarization on this planet, but also the remarkable reunion with our colleagues in Christ from the City of Enoch. Yes, nation after nation will become a house divided, but more and more unifying Houses of the Lord will grace this planet. Yes, Armageddon lies ahead. But so does Adam-ondi-Ahman!" (Ensign, November 1981, p. 10.)

Thus, while the righteous and the wicked may both suffer the natural consequences coming from calamities associated with the last days, to the righteous the coming of the Lord will be a "great day," while to the wicked it shall be a "dreadful day." (See Malachi 4:5.) The righteous watch for the events foreshadowing the end of the world and the second coming of the Savior, taking whatever precautions they feel are necessary, but they are not in constant disabling distress. Speaking of His return to the earth and the times that would precede it, the Savior said: "Watch therefore. . . . be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh." (Matthew 24:42, 44.)

The purpose of this book is to assist in one's efforts to watch and be ready by identifying the signs and events of the last days. In addition to focusing on the last days and the Second Coming, this book will discuss the revealed events of the Millennium and final destiny of this earth and its inhabitants. In this age there is much speculation regarding the last days. This work avoids the popular yet useless speculative tendency in favor of focusing on the revealed word of God through the scriptures and the teachings of those sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators. Two statements by men sustained in these sacred offices will suffice to set the spiritual tone for the rationale and contents of this book.

First, consider this declaration from the tenth prophet and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, President Joseph Fielding Smith:

Trouble in the earth will continue; there will be distress, calamity, and perplexity among the nations.

We need not look for peace in the immediate future because peace will not come. Nevertheless, we may look forward with rejoicing; we need not be downcast, but in the spirit of faith and hope, and in the fear of the Lord, we should look to the future with feelings of joy, of humility, and of worship, with the desire in our hearts, stronger if possible than ever, of serving the Lord and keeping his commandments, for the day of his coming draws near. (DS, 3:51-52.)

Now reflect on this recent testimony from Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles:

Living in these difficult times . . . requires each one of us to maintain a positive, hopeful perspective about the future. . . .

My message to you today, my brothers and sisters, is simply this: the Lord is in control. He knows the end from the beginning. He has given us adequate instruction that, if followed, will see us safely through any crisis. His purposes will be fulfilled, and someday we will understand the eternal reasons for all of these events. Therefore, today we must be careful to not overreact, nor should we be caught up in extreme preparations, but what we must do is keep the commandments of God and never lose hope!

But where do we find hope in the midst of such turmoil and catastrophe? Quite simply, our one hope for spiritual safety during these turbulent times is to turn our minds and our hearts to Jesus Christ. (Ensign, November 1992, pp. 31, 32.)

As you, the reader, study and ponder the teachings and warnings regarding the last days, do not lose hope. Focus on those things that matter most and recognize the overriding hand of the Lord in preparing the world for His secondcoming.
