Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Section 1

What Has Been Revealed about the Second Coming

Chapter 1

Alarmists and False Prophets

"For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect."

—Matthew 24:24

Tragedy in Texas

In the spring of 1993, the world was stunned to read the following shocking headline in newspapers: "Koresh Leads 85 Cultists, Including 24 Children, to Fiery Deaths in Waco Fortress." This tragic event was another episode in the ongoing fulfillment of prophecies warning of the many false prophets and false Christs that will arise before the end of the world.

In this particular tragedy, a Bible-quoting, gun-wielding fanatic named David Koresh, born Vernon Howell, proclaimed himself to be the latter-day Messiah. "If the Bible is true," he declared, "then I'm Christ." In Waco, Texas, Koresh established a cult known as the Branch Davidians and gathered them inside a compound that he named the Ranch Apocalypse. From this location, Koresh preached his brand of doomsday doctrine.

Because of his cache of firearms, Koresh and his one hundred or so followers were involved in a seven-week standoff with United States federal authorities. During the siege, Koresh said he had the power to open the seven seals described in the Bible's Book of Revelation. By opening them, he declared, he would trigger the end of the world. The siege—and not the world, needless to say—came to a tragic ending when this false prophet and his fanatical followers set fire to their compound and committed themselves, including children, to a fiery death.

False Expectations

While this tragedy was of a large scale in terms of the number of people who died, there have been many smaller tragedies associated with expectations of the Second Coming or the last days. In 1988, for example, in the small community of Marion, Utah, a fanatical self-proclaimed prophet by the name of Adam Swapp took the life of a Utah correctional officer.

Swapp's father-in-law, polygamist John Singer, had been killed in a confrontation with law enforcement officers in 1979. Almost a decade later, Swapp bombed a meetinghouse of the LDS church, setting in motion a confrontation that he believed would bring about the resurrection of Singer, whom Swapp revered as his prophet-leader.

From the day of the Ascension some two thousand years ago, when heavenly messengers proclaimed "this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven" (Acts 1:11), mankind has been anxiously awaiting the return of the resurrected Savior. The Second Coming, the end of the world, the onset of millennial peace on earth—all of these events have long been expected by the faithful, as well as by those whose wicked ways would give them cause to fear such events. Many other expectant people have sold their homes or forsaken their jobs, and even their families, to follow false prophets and teachers into the mountains, wilderness, or faraway places in anticipation of these long-awaited events. Religious organizations—cults, sects, and churches—have evolved around beliefs associated with the last days. For example, the Seventh-Day Adventist movement began as an end-of-the-world revivalist campaign that ended when Christ did not appear as expected. The movement then changed its focus and the church was established.

In our day the Second Coming and ushering in of the Millennium is generally associated with cataclysmic events. Most of these events are based on scriptural prophecy, but some are the result of fervid imaginations or of misinterpretation of the scriptures. Elder Neal A. Maxwell has observed: "Over the sweep of Christian history, some believers have, by focusing on a few prophecies while neglecting others, prematurely expected the Second Coming. Today, while we are obviously closer to that great moment, we are in the same danger." (Ensign, May 1988, p. 7.)

False Prophets

Because of unbelief, many false prophets, and crescending calamities that have become commonplace, many people no longer prepare or watch for the coming of the Lord. "He delayeth his coming," they charge, and like the foolish virgins, they fail to keep their lamps trimmed and ready for the coming of the Bridegroom. (See Matthew 24:48; 25:1-13.)

Without their spiritual lamps trimmed, people are apt to foolishly follow the flame of false prophets. Some of these false prophets are alarmists whose doomsday preachments prey upon the fears of the uninformed and the gullible. Whether deliberately or unwittingly, these false leaders become pawns in the adversary's efforts to discredit true servants of God and to lead astray even the elect of God. A former member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Delbert L. Stapley, warned: "Satan is stirring up the hearts of men to do iniquity continually; and to thwart, if possible, faith in the great event of Christ's second coming to earth, which I testify is sure to come to pass. Satan is alert and active. We must be more alert and perceptive of the false and insincere schemes of his agents among us." (CR, October 1961, p. 22.)

Admittedly, it may be considered harsh to refer to individuals as agents of Satan, particularly if they believe their efforts are accomplishing some good purpose. Ultimately, however, anyone or anything that puts us at variance with the Lord, His prophets and other anointed servants, or the doctrines and teachings of His gospel and Church, places us in spiritual jeopardy. No matter how well-intentioned or sincere another person may appear to be, we should always be careful about placing our temporal or spiritual welfare in his or her hands.

Beware of Priestcrafts

False prophets and teachers are usually motivated by the desire for either some tangible gain (usually monetary) or praise and popularity. The Book of Mormon describes this as priestcrafts: "Priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion." (2 Nephi 26:29.) The practice of priestcrafts is not confined to false prophets outside The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, for there are persons even within the Church who may be guilty of this sin. Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles observed that "a man or woman might serve in Church positions or in private acts of mercy in an effort to achieve prominence or cultivate contacts that would increase income or aid in acquiring wealth. Others might serve in order to obtain worldly honors." (CR, October 1984, p. 14.)

Among those who practice priestcrafts are those who preach for profit by appealing to people's fears. They pronounce doom and chaos. Many of them promote the panic buying of their "essential" products. This is not an indictment against all who seek to understand the signs of the times or who wish to be prepared for possible calamities. Leaders of the Church have always taught the principle of personal and family preparedness, and there are legitimate business ventures that help meet this need by marketing food storage and survival equipment. However, we must be wary of extremism and of those who teach without authority. When one without authority purports to speak for the Lord or His church in promoting products or philosophies for personal gain, we simply say, "Let the buyer beware!" Follow the Lord's true prophet rather than the profit seeker.

Among those who practice priestcrafts are those who preach for popularity. Oftentimes this approach will include the following implied lines of allurement: "I know something that even the Brethren don't know—I have some special insights!" or "The leaders of the Church know what I am doing, and they agree with me. They just haven't spoken out publicly." To any who make such claims, we refer to the warning issued by one of the Lord's recognized servants, Elder Boyd K. Packer of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: "Claims of special revelation or secret authority from the Lord or from the Brethren are false on the face of them and really utter nonsense!" (Ensign, May 1985, p. 34.) On another occasion, Elder Packer said: "There is safety in learning doctrine in gatherings which are sponsored by proper authority. Some members, even some who have made covenants in the temple, are associating with groups of one kind or another which have an element of secrecy about them and which pretend to have some higher source of inspiration concerning the fulfillment of prophecies than do ward or stake leaders or the General Authorities of the Church. Know this: There are counterfeit revelations which, we are warned, 'if possible . . . shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant.' (JS-M 1:22.)" (Ensign, November 1991, p. 21.)

We have been counseled and encouraged to be aware of the signs of the times. As we study and learn to recognize these signs, we must be ever wary of those who give information that is not official Church doctrine. For example, one who designates a specific time for the Second Coming or a time and place of gathering that have not been announced through proper priesthood channels is leading you astray.

Follow the Duly Designated Leaders

Revelation for the Church and, for that matter, the world will come through designated channels. Our fifth article of faith states: "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." Just because one has received the priesthood or even holds a highly visible position in the Church does not mean that he or she is authorized to speak in behalf of the Church. The Church is a kingdom of order. Stewardships have definite parameters. Elders quorum presidents or Relief Society presidents do not receive revelation for bishops. Bishops do not receive revelation for stake presidents. Stake presidents do not receive revelation for General Authorities.

Some years ago while serving as a bishop, I received a telephone call from the personal secretary to the President of the Church. He inquired about a member of my ward and asked what I knew about the individual. He then said, "Bishop, did you know this person has been trying to schedule a personal meeting with the prophet?" When I responded that I knew of no such efforts, I was asked to invite the individual to meet with me and discuss the matter. When the meeting took place, the individual told me of a personal experience with the Three Nephites, who had left a message to be taken to the President of the Church. (The Three Nephites are ancient disciples of Christ who lived in the Americas and were granted the same gift given to the Apostle John by the Savior: they would not taste of death until the Second Coming. [See 3 Nephi 28:1-10.]) I explained that if the Three Nephites had a message for the prophet, they would give it to him directly and not send it through another person. There is order in the Lord's kingdom; revelation and instruction come through proper channels.

I quoted the Prophet Joseph Smith, who declared: "It is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or any one, to receive instruction for those in authority, higher than themselves; therefore you will see the impropriety of giving heed to them; but if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction." (TPJS, p. 21.) I also cited the words of President Joseph F. Smith: "It would be absolutely inconsistent, unreasonable and absurd to suppose that after God had called one man and appointed him to this work, that He should pass him by and go to somebody else to accomplish the same purpose." (JD, 24:189.) I was not immediately successful in changing the individual's thinking, but with patience and prayer that understanding eventually did come.

There is a great spiritual danger in listening to the ideas of false teachers and leaders, even if we think we are only doing it out of curiosity. President Joseph F. Smith warned:

We can accept nothing as authoritative but that which comes directly through the appointed channel, the constituted organizations of the Priesthood, which is the channel that God has appointed through which to make known His mind and will to the world. . . .

And the moment that individuals look to any other source, that moment they throw themselves open to the seductive influences of Satan, and render themselves liable to become servants of the devil; they lose sight of the true order through which the blessings of the Priesthood are to be enjoyed; they step outside of the pale of the kingdom of God, and are on dangerous ground. Whenever you see a man rise up claiming to have received direct revelation from the Lord to the Church, independent of the order and channel of the Priesthood, you may set him down as an impostor. (JD, 24:188-90.)

Much trouble could be avoided if members of the Church would remember a very basic scripture. The Lord declared that "it shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church." (D&C 42:11.) Elder Boyd K. Packer provided the following commentary on this scripture, a fitting summary to this chapter on alarmists and false prophets:

There are some among us now who have not been regularly ordained by the heads of the Church who tell of impending political and economic chaos, the end of the world—something of the 'sky is falling, chicken licken' of the fables. They are misleading members to gather to colonies or cults.

Those deceivers say that the Brethren do not know what is going on in the world or that the Brethren approve of their teaching but do not wish to speak of it over the pulpit. Neither is true. The Brethren, by virtue of traveling constantly everywhere on earth, certainly know what is going on, and by virtue of prophetic insight are able to read the signs of the times.

Do not be deceived by them—those deceivers. If there is to be any gathering, it will be announced by those who have been regularly ordained and who are known to the Church to have authority.

Come away from any others. Follow your leaders who have been duly ordained and have been publicly sustained, and you will not be led astray. (Ensign, November 1992, p. 73.)
