Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 2

The Timing of the Second Coming

"I, the Lord God, have spoken it; but the hour and the day no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they know until he comes."

—D&C 49:7

The Restitution of All Things

In his role as the earthly leader of the ancient Christian church after the ascension of the Savior, the Apostle Peter preached these words to those who had just witnessed the power of his priesthood at work: "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ [the second time], which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21; italics added.)

Although the gospel originally taught to Adam and Eve and others of Old Testament times was reestablished during the earthly ministry of Jesus Christ, the Savior's chief apostle spoke of a yet future "restitution of all things." Implied in this prophetic pronouncement was the fact that Christ's gospel would be taken from the earth, thus necessitating a restitution, or restoration.

The Apostle Paul similarly taught that "the day of Christ" (His second coming) would not come until a "falling away," or an apostasy, had first occurred. (2 Thessalonians 2:1-3.)

The message of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to the world is that a universal apostasy did occur and the restitution spoken of by the Apostle Peter has taken place. In response to prayerful pleading, a young prophet named Joseph Smith was visited by Deity and divinely commissioned to set this restoration in place.

Following the receipt of priesthood authority under the hands of heavenly messengers sent from the presence of God, the Prophet Joseph Smith reestablished the Church of Jesus Christ upon the earth. (See D&C 13:1; 20:1; 27:8, 12; 115:4.)

Another Testament of Jesus Christ Is Revealed

Among the heavenly messengers sent to instruct the Prophet was an angel named Moroni. He first appeared to Joseph Smith on the night of September 21, 1823. At that time the angel revealed the existence of a sacred record of the ancient inhabitants of the Americas. The record contained an account of their history and, more important, the teachings of their prophets and their dealings with God. By the gift and power of God, the Prophet Joseph Smith later translated this record into what today is titled The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ. This inspired book is a companion volume of scripture to the Bible and includes a record of the visit of the resurrected Christ to these ancient people following his ascension.

The coming forth of this scripture with its revealed truths and especially its witness of Jesus Christ as the Son of God and Savior, or Messiah, was an important part of the "restitution of all things." The publication of the Book of Mormon was a prelude to the coming forth of other scripture, for the heavens were once more opened, and revelation was poured out to God's authorized servants on earth.

The Messenger to Precede the Messiah's Coming

A major part of the message that the Angel Moroni gave to Joseph Smith that September night in 1823 was a recitation of biblical prophecies. The angel first quoted from the third and fourth chapters of Malachi. (See JS-H 1:36-39.) This Old Testament prophet foretold of a messenger who would be sent to prepare the way before the Lord, who Himself "shall suddenly come to his temple." (Malachi 3:1.)

During his earthly ministry, Jesus identified John the Baptist as the messenger promised by Malachi. (See Matthew 11:7-10.) While it is true that John's mortal ministry prepared the way for the mortal ministry of the Messiah, even Jesus Christ, the Baptist also had a second mission to perform in preparing the way for the second coming of the Savior. On May 15, 1829, the resurrected John the Baptist bestowed the Aaronic Priesthood on Joseph Smith and his colleague in the work of the Restoration, Oliver Cowdery. (See JS-H 1:68-73; D&C 13:1; 27:8.) John's recorded words were: "Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." (D&C 13:1; see JS-H 1:69.)

Elijah the Prophet's Return

In reference to another event that would precede the Second Coming, Malachi also prophesied that "the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble." (Malachi 4:1.) In addition, this ancient seer spoke of the coming of "Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." (Malachi 4:5.)

In anticipation of the return of Elijah, the descendants of Judah annually set a place at the table for this great prophet. Unknown to most of the world is the fact that Elijah has already returned in fulfillment of Malachi's prophecy. On April 3, 1836, this great prophet appeared as a resurrected being to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the newly completed temple in Kirtland, Ohio. Of this great occasion, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said: Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors." (D&C 110:13-16; italics added.)

Joseph Smith identified the keys delivered by Elijah as the priesthood authority that would validate or allow "all the ordinances [to] be attended to in righteousness." (TPJS, p. 172.)

An Ensign to the Nations

Following his quotations from Malachi, Moroni next "quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled." (JS-H 1:40.) This chapter of Isaiah is filled with prophecies about the Millennium and events leading up to it. For example, the eleventh verse speaks of the Lord setting "his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people." Verse twelve tells of an "ensign for the nations" that shall be set up and to which the outcasts of Israel shall be gathered. This ensign is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is vigorously engaged in the work of gathering the dispersed of Israel to the fold of the True Shepherd in anticipation of his return to earth.

Those Who Will Be Cut Off

During his visit to the young man Joseph Smith, Moroni quoted from the New Testament as follows: "For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people." (Acts 3:22-23.)

Moroni declared "that prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when 'they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people,' but soon would come." (JS-H 1:40).

In a later revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1831, the Lord declared that "the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people." (D&C 1:14.)

Joel's Prophecy of the Last Days

The Angel Moroni quoted "many other passages of scripture" that the Prophet Joseph Smith did not identify, with the exception of the following:

And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit. And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call. (Joel 2:28-32.)

Moroni declared that Joel's prophecy "was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be" and "that the fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in." (JS-H 1:41.) Commenting on the part of Joel's prophecy dealing with the promised "wonders in heaven," President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

One wonders if we are not now seeing some of the signs in heaven? Not all, for undoubtedly some of them will be among the heavenly bodies, such as the moon and the sun, the meteors and comets, but in speaking of the heavens, reference is made to that part which surrounds the earth and which belongs to it. It is in the atmosphere where many of the signs are to be given. Do we not see airships of various kinds traveling through the heavens daily? Have we not had signs in the earth and through the earth with the radio, railroad trains, automobiles, submarines and satellites, and many other ways? There are yet to be great signs; the heavens are to be shaken, the sign of the Son of Man is to be given; and then shall the tribes of the earth mourn. (THY, pp. 428-29.)

Further reference will be made to this and other aspects of Joel's prophecy later in the book.

Nearness of the Second Coming

The point of referencing these prophecies cited by the Angel Moroni is to suggest that the theme of the last days and Second Coming has been very much a part of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Although many prophesied latter-day events are yet to occur, many others have already taken place since the beginning of the Restoration. That the doctrine of the Second Coming is integral to the restored gospel is underscored by the fact that twelve times between October 1830 (see D&C 33:18) and July 1837 (see D&C 112:34), the Lord declared, "I come quickly!" On other occasions he spoke of his coming as being "soon at hand." (D&C 29:9.)

Latter-day apostles have spoken of the time being short and of our days being the "Saturday night of time." Elder Orson F. Whitney, an apostle who served in the early 1900s, wrote:

According to received chronology—admittedly imperfect, yet approximately correct—four thousand years, or four of the seven great days given to this planet as the period of its "temporal existence," had passed before Christ was crucified; while nearly two thousand years have gone by since. Consequently, Earth's long week is now drawing to a close, and we stand at the present moment in the Saturday Evening of Time, at or near the end of the sixth day of human history. Is it not a time for thought, a season for solemn meditation? Morning will break upon the Millennium, the thousand years of peace, the Sabbath of the World! (Saturday Night Thoughts, Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1921, p. 12.)

An apostle who lived closer to the present day, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, wrote: "We are now living during the final years of the sixth seal, that thousand year period which began in 1000 A.D. and will continue through the Saturday night of time and until just before the Sabbatical era when Christ shall reign personally on earth, when all of the blessings of the Great Millennium shall be poured out upon this planet. This, accordingly, is the era when the signs of the times shall be shown forth, and they are in fact everywhere to be seen." (DNTC, 3:485-86.)

In His great sermon regarding the calamities preceding his second coming, the Savior spoke of the timing of this anticipated event: "But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only." (Matthew 24:36; see also Matthew 25:13; JS-M 1:48.) The Gospel of Mark records the words of the Savior as follows: "But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father." (Mark 13:32; italics added.)

It should be noted that this statement was made during the Savior's mortality. Perhaps at this time He did not have a perfect knowledge of all things, including the timing of the Second Coming. This knowledge would come to Him following His resurrection and when He had reclaimed His place at the right hand of His Father. In this respect it is of interest to see the difference in wording between a declaration delivered during His mortal ministry and one delivered following His resurrection. In Matthew 5:48, the Savior admonished, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." In 3 Nephi 12:48, the resurrected Lord admonished, "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (Italics added.)

It is possible that Mark or other early transcribers added the words "neither the Son" to the Savior's statement. The Joseph Smith Translation omits this exclusive statement. (See JST, Mark 13:47.) It is also possible that Joseph Smith omitted the statement based on his understanding that the resurrected Christ knew all things, including the timing of His second coming.

Latter-day revelation affirms that neither men nor angels know the timing of the Second Coming: "I, the Lord God, have spoken it; but the hour and the day no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they know until he comes." (D&C 49:7; see also 39:21; 133:11.) In 1844 Joseph Smith declared: "Jesus Christ never did reveal to any man the precise time that He would come. Go and read the Scriptures, and you cannot find anything that specifies the exact hour He would come; and all that say so are false teachers." (HC, 6:254.)

More recently, President Joseph Fielding Smith said: "The Lord has never revealed to us when the day will come, but he has given us knowledge enough by which we may know that that day is not far away. When I say 'not far away,' I am not setting any definite number of years. . . . People say all kinds of things but no man knows the day of his coming and no man is going to know and I don't think the Twelve will know it. I have my doubts that the Presidency of the Church will know, because the Lord says he will come when no one is expecting it, but he has given us signs and the world is full of them today, signs of his coming as he draws nigh." (THY, pp. 19-20.)

Prepared, We Need Not Fear

If the time of the Second Coming is not known and not to be revealed, why should we concern ourselves with this event? Elder Bruce R. McConkie has provided an answer: "Deliberately and advisedly the actual time of his coming has been left uncertain and unspecified, so that men of each succeeding age shall be led to prepare for it as though it would be in their mortal lives." (DNTC, 1:675.)

In a speech given to students at Brigham Young University while he was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Gordon B. Hinckley gave this admonition:

Certainly there is no point in speculating concerning the day and the hour. Let us rather live each day so that if the Lord does come while we are yet upon the earth we shall be worthy of that change which will occur as in the twinkling of an eye and under which we shall be changed from mortal to immortal beings. And if we should die before he comes, then—if our lives have conformed to his teachings—we shall arise in that resurrection morning and be partakers of the marvelous experiences designed for those who shall live and work with the Savior in that promised Millennium. We need not fear the day of his coming; the very purpose of the Church is to provide the incentive and the opportunity for us to conduct our lives in such a way that those who are members of the kingdom of God will become members of the kingdom of heaven when he establishes that kingdom on the earth. ("We Need Not Fear His Coming," 1979 Devotional Speeches of the Year, Provo: Brigham Young University Press, p. 83.)

There is a need for each of us as individuals and as members of other units—the family, Church, community—to be prepared for the Second Coming. To this end we familiarize ourselves with the signs and events of the last days.

In the parable of the ten virgins, the Savior taught the importance of preparedness, especially in anticipation of meeting Him (the Bridegroom) when He returns to earth. (See Matthew 25:1-13.) His admonition was that we should "watch!" President Spencer W. Kimball suggested that this parable had specific application to members of the Church:

I believe the Ten Virgins represent the people of the Church of Jesus Christ and not the rank and file of the world. All of the virgins, wise and foolish, had accepted the invitation to the wedding supper; they had knowledge of the program and had been warned of the important day to come. They were not the gentiles or the heathens or the pagans, nor were they necessarily corrupt and reprobate, but they were knowing people who were foolishly unprepared for the vital happenings that were to affect their eternal lives.

They had the saving, exalting gospel, but it had not been made the center of their lives. They knew the way but gave only a small measure of loyalty and devotion. . . .

Rushing for their lamps to light their way through the blackness, half of them found them empty. They had cheated themselves. They were fools, these five unprepared virgins. . . . They had heard of his coming for so long, so many times, that the statement seemingly became meaningless to them. (Faith Precedes the Miracle, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972, pp. 253-54.)

Although we must be prepared and watch for the signs of the times as if the Savior were coming today, there are extremes to avoid. Elder Neal A. Maxwell cautioned:

[We] need to keep our eyes on more than a few leaves of the fig tree in order to know when summer is nigh (see Matthew 24:32). By analogy, it is one thing to notice strong ocean breakers crashing against the shore, heralding another oncoming storm, and quite another to discern the powerful movements on the ocean's quake-jarred floor foretelling a terrible tidal wave.

In the context of such cautions, I have no hesitancy in saying that there are some signs—but certainly not all—suggesting that "summer is nigh" (Matthew 24:32). We would do well to notice and to ponder, but without either becoming preoccupied or ignoring any sprouting leaves because of being "overcharged" with the "cares of this life" (Luke 21:34). (Ensign, May 1988, p. 7.)

Speaking specifically to teenagers, who sometimes seem overwhelmed by the events of the world and feel the end of the world is so close at hand that there will not be an opportunity for them to make or fulfill any long-range plans and dreams, Elder Boyd K. Packer observed:

Teenagers also sometimes think, "What's the use? The world will soon be blown all apart and come to an end." That feeling comes from fear, not from faith. No one knows the hour or the day (see D&C 49:7), but the end cannot come until all of the purposes of the Lord are fulfilled. Everything that I have learned from the revelations and from life convinces me that there is time and to spare for you to carefully prepare for a long life.

One day you will cope with teenage children of your own. That will serve you right. Later, you will spoil your grandchildren, and they in turn spoil theirs. (Ensign, May 1989, p. 59.)

The timing of the end of the world and the Second Coming have long been set by the God of heaven and earth. Elder Bruce R. McConkie declared:

As to the Second Coming, the time is fixed, the hour is set, and, speaking after the manner of the Lord, the day is soon to be. The appointed day can be neither advanced nor delayed. It will come at the decreed moment, chosen before the foundations of the earth were laid, and it can be neither hastened by righteousness nor put off by wickedness. It will be with our Lord's return as it was with his birth to Mary: the time of each coming was fixed by the Father.

True, no man knows or shall know the day or the hour of our Lord's return; that knowledge is retained in the bosom of heaven, for good and sufficient reasons. But all men may read the signs of the times, and those whose souls are attuned to the things of the Spirit know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the door. But they also know there are many things yet to be done before earth's rightful King comes to change the kingdoms of this world into the kingdom of our God and of his Christ. (NWAF, p. 591.)

As noted by Elder McConkie, many things remain to be done before the end of the world. Among these are the following events that will be discussed later in the book:

Â The return to Jackson County, Missouri Â The building of a temple in Jackson County Â The building of a temple in Old Jerusalem Â The full return of Judah to Israel Â The gospel preached in all the world Â The return of the lost tribes Â The gathering of prophets at Adam-ondi-Ahman in Missouri Â The raising up of two great prophets to minister in Israel Â The Battle of Armageddon Â The sun darkened, moon turned to blood, stars fall from the heavens, and many other wonders and signs

And so we strive to fill our spiritual lamps with the oil of preparedness, of faith and hope, as we watch for the signs of the times and wait for the day that will be great for the righteous and dreadful for the wicked.
