Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Section 2

Commotion, Conspiracies, and Contention

Chapter 3

The Elements in Commotion

"For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes. . . . And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds. And all things shall be in commotion."

—D&C 88:89-91

Disasters of Nature

A clever advertising campaign some years ago featured a woman portraying Mother Nature. All was calm and peaceful around her until she discovered she had been deceived by the manufacturers of a product that appeared natural but which was really artificial. At this point she declared, "It's not nice to fool Mother Nature" and turned the peaceful setting into one of natural disaster.

Deity has often displayed displeasure through the forces of nature. These forces have been used to call the disobedient to repentance. Certainly the wicked in the days of Noah learned this lesson in a hard way. (See Genesis 6 and 7.) The forces of nature also destroyed the wicked in the ancient Nephite civilization at the time of the crucifixion of Christ. A "great storm" arose, accompanied by "a great and terrible tempest." There was "terrible thunder" and "sharp lightnings, such as never had been known in all the land." Some cities were destroyed by fire, and others sunk into the depths of the sea or covered by mountains of dirt and debris. "The whole face of the land was changed." (3 Nephi 8.)

Following this terrible destruction, the cry of the survivors was "O that we had repented before this great and terrible day." (3 Nephi 8:24.) Two thousand years later we face this same challenge: to repent before the "great and terrible day." Certainly the voices of nature are now being heard throughout the earth in calling the people to repentance.

Earthquakes in Divers Places

Among the predicted commotions of nature to take place in the last days is the upheaval and shaking of the earth. As Jesus taught his disciples on the Mount of Olives about the pending doom of Jerusalem and the future calamities preceding His second coming, he declared: "There shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places." (Matthew 24:7; see also Mark 13:8; Luke 21:11; JS-M 1:29.) This declaration is repeated in a revelation given in 1831 (see D&C 45:33) and was mentioned by the ancient prophet Moroni as one of the signs of the last days (see Mormon 8:30).

The writings of Isaiah as revealed in the Book of Mormon warn that the Lord would visit the wicked with earthquakes. (See 2 Nephi 27:1-2; compare Isaiah 29:6.) Latter-day revelation indicates that God chastises and calls people to repentance by the voice and testimony of earthquakes. (See D&C 43:25; 87:6; 88:89.) Elder Melvin J. Ballard, who served as an apostle from 1919 to 1939, said: "God is speaking through the elements. The earthquakes, the sea heaving itself beyond its bounds, bringing such dire destruction as we have seen are the voice of God crying repentance to this generation, a generation that only in part has heeded the warning voice of the servants of the Lord." (CR, October 1923, p. 31.)

It is well to add a caution here. The impact of natural disasters such as earthquakes generally affects an entire population of an area, and one must be careful about judging the victims of such disasters. While it is true that the wicked are often pinpointed for such destruction, as in the case of Sodom and Gomorrah (see Genesis 18 and 19), it is also true that the righteous must often suffer along with the wicked. Adversity is often the refining fire that strengthens faith.

Speaking at a general conference in Salt Lake City, President Ezra Taft Benson said the following to the Latter-day Saints: "Too often we bask in our comfortable complacency and rationalize that the ravages of war, economic disaster, famine, and earthquake cannot happen here. Those who believe this are either not acquainted with the revelations of the Lord, or they do not believe them. Those who smugly think these calamities will not happen, that they somehow will be set aside because of the righteousness of the Saints, are deceived and will rue the day they harbored such a delusion." (Ensign, November 1980, p. 34.)

The state of Utah, headquarters for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is shaken by about seven hundred earthquakes each year. Seismologists have estimated there is a 20 percent chance of an earthquake measuring at least 7.0 on the Richter Scale occurring along Utah's highly populated Wasatch Front before the year 2050. Such a quake would cause shaking of the ground ranging from 70 percent to 100 percent the force of gravity.

Earthquakes are increasingly affecting the people of this planet. President Joseph Fielding Smith researched the numbers of earthquakes and discovered that "'if all earthquakes down to zero magnitude could be detected, the number would be between one and ten million each year.'" Furthermore, he found that "there are about 2,000 earthquakes each year with the magnitude between 5 and 6 [on the Richter Scale] and about 20,000 between 4.0 and 5.0." President Smith thus concluded, "There are around 20,000 earthquakes a year that could be damaging if they occurred in populated areas." (THY, p. 430.)

More recently Elder M. Russell Ballard noted the following regarding the frequency of high-intensity earthquakes: "Statistics from the U.S. Geological Survey indicat[e] that earthquakes around the world are increasing in frequency and intensity. According to the article, only two major earthquakes, earthquakes measuring at least six on the Richter scale, occurred during the 1920s. In the 1930s the number increased to five, and then decreased to four during the 1940s. But in the 1950s, nine major earthquakes occurred, followed by fifteen during the 1960s, forty-six during the 1970s, and fifty-two during the 1980s. Already almost as many major earthquakes have occurred during the 1990s as during the entire decade of the 1980s." (Ensign, November 1992, p. 31.)

Earth Movements during the Millennium

The Doctrine and Covenants refers to a time when the "earth shall . . . reel to and fro" like a drunkard. (45:48; 49:23; 88:87.) These citations have reference to the Millennium, in that at least two great shakings of the earth will occur in this time period: one at the beginning of the thousand years and one at the conclusion.

The great earthquake ushering in the Millennium will be part of the events surrounding Christ's second coming. When the Savior stands on the Mount of Olives, it will be at a time when the Jewish people are about to be destroyed. At this moment, a great earthquake will cleave the mount in twain. (See Zechariah 14:4; Revelation 11:13; 16:17-20; D&C 45:48.) President Joseph Fielding Smith commented on this momentous occasion: "You can see what a terrible condition it is going to be; and the Jews besieged, not only in Jerusalem but, of course, throughout Palestine are in the siege; and when they are about to go under, then the Lord comes. There will be the great earthquake. The earthquake will not be only in Palestine. There will not be merely the separation of the Mount of Olives, to form a valley that the Jews may escape, but the whole earth is going to be shaken. There will be some dreadful things take place, and some great changes are going to take place." (ST, p. 170.)

At the conclusion of the Millennium, the "earth shall remove out of her place" (Isaiah 13:13) as a prelude to becoming a celestial sphere. While this may not include earthquakes, at least as we define them today, it certainly will involve a reeling to and fro of the earth as it hurtles through space to its new destination. More will be said of this later in the book.

Thunderings, Lightnings, and Tempests

Not long ago a terrible thunderstorm rolled through the Salt Lake Valley one night. The sound of thunder shook me from my sleep, and the lightning illuminated the bedroom. One particular clap of thunder put my heartbeat into a quick acceleration, and I anticipated being immediately struck by lightning. Fortunately my fears were not realized, although the strike was so close to the house and so charged with electricity that it turned the lights on in several rooms. This experience gave me a greater appreciation of this prophecy regarding the signs of the last days: "And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds. And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people." (D&C 88:90-91.)

One of the fearful things about storms and tempests is the sense of hopelessness and vulnerability that comes with them. While meteorologists have been helpful in predicting the coming of hurricanes and tidal waves, thereby alerting people to secure their property and take precautions for their personal safety, the predicted path and the exact timing of these tempests have not always been accurate. Any who have experienced these storms or watched the destruction secondhand as reported on television have some idea of how fear can come upon all people.

In 1860 President Brigham Young spoke of the intensity of such forthcoming calamities:

"Do you think there is calamity abroad now among the people?" Not much. All we have yet heard and all we have experienced is scarcely a preface to the sermon that is going to be preached. When the testimony of the Elders ceases to be given, and the Lord says to them, "Come home; I will now preach my own sermons to the nations of the earth," all you now know can scarcely be called a preface to the sermon that will be preached with fire and sword, tempests, earthquakes, hail, rain, thunders and lightnings, and fearful destruction. . . . You will hear of magnificent cities, now idolized by the people, sinking in the earth, entombing the inhabitants. The sea will heave itself beyond its bounds, engulphing [sic] mighty cities. . . . Yet the faithful of God's people will see days that will cause them to close their eyes because of the sorrow that will come upon the wicked nations. The hearts of the faithful will be filled with pain and anguish for them. (JD, 8:123.)

Destruction by Waters

The summer of 1993 will long be remembered by the citizens of the midwestern United States as the year when the flood of the century took place. The mighty Missouri and Mississippi Rivers heaved themselves beyond their banks, destroying lives and hundreds of millions of dollars in property. Many of the efforts to stay the floodwaters were futile. Man simply did not have the power or the wherewithal to withstand these destructive forces of nature.

Perhaps the force of the flood gave new understanding to Joseph Smith's metaphoric pronouncement in comparing the power of heaven to the power of the Missouri River: "What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints." (D&C 121:33.)

In 1831 the Lord gave warning that destruction by waters would occur in the last days. The Prophet Joseph and a small group of elders had spent several days traveling by canoe on the Missouri River. During the journey one of the travelers, W. W. Phelps, "in open vision by daylight, saw the destroyer in his most horrible power, ride upon the face of the waters; others heard the noise, but saw not the vision." (HC, 1:203.) The following morning, after Joseph Smith had prayed, he received this revelation: "For I, the Lord, have decreed in mine anger many destructions upon the waters. . . . Behold, I, the Lord, in the beginning blessed the waters; but in the last days, by the mouth of my servant John, I cursed the waters. Wherefore, the days will come that no flesh shall be safe upon the waters." (D&C 61:5, 14-15.)

There are several possibilities as to how the waters would be cursed in the last days. Certainly the effect of floods, hurricanes, and typhoons are a possibility as the prophesied storms and tempests increase. Those who have traveled by ship during times of war know of man-made dangers: mines, missiles, and submarines. Yet another possibility is contaminated water. John the Revelator prophesied that "the third part of the sea became blood; and the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed. . . . And there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; and the name of the star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter." (Revelation 8:8-11.)

Wormwood is a plant symbolic of bitterness, calamity, and sorrow. The introduction of wormwood into the waters would make them undrinkable, or at the very least bitter and distasteful. Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggested the possibility of the waters being contaminated by atomic fallout: "Could this be atomic fallout which shall poison a third of the drinking water of the earth?" (DNTC, 3:499.)

Volcanic Eruptions

Another force of nature that can wreak terrible destruction in a short period of time is the volcanic eruption. While it may be true that volcanoes have been erupting throughout the earth's history, such eruptions are associated with the signs of the last days. It is of interest to hear the meteorologists and climatologists explain the changing conditions of the earth's weather patterns in connection with recent volcanic eruptions. Ash and heat spewed in the atmosphere have altered the jet streams and have had significant impact on where and when moisture has fallen. Certainly these are signs in the heavens.

There is yet another interesting aspect of the potential impact of volcanic eruptions. Scientists have recently discovered a volcano under nearly a mile of solid ice near the South Pole. It is theorized that heat from this volcano may be the source of voluminous ice streams in western Antarctica and that this abundance of water is lubricating the slide of glaciers across the region's ice sheet. This condition could lead to the catastrophic collapse of an ice sheet that could release enough water into the Pacific Ocean to raise global sea levels by eighteen to twenty feet. Such a disaster would bury in the depths of the seas many of the low-lying areas of the planet where a good portion of the earth's population lives. (See "Chilling Thought: Antarctic Volcano Gives New Meaning to 'Meltdown,'" Salt Lake Tribune, 11 February 1993, p. A1.)

The Apostle John saw "a great mountain burning with fire [being] cast into the sea" in the last days. (Revelation 8:8.) The Savior spoke of one of the signs of His coming being "fire, and vapors of smoke." (D&C 45:41.) Such signs could be the result of bombs and missiles, but the language is also descriptive of volcanic eruptions. Furthermore, it seems highly probable that much of the destruction brought upon the ancient Nephite civilization at the time of Christ's crucifixion was volcanic in origin. For example, the "thick darkness" that came upon the land following the violent storms and upheavals of the earth might well have been volcanic cloud and ash. No light could penetrate those "mists of darkness." (3 Nephi 8:20-23.)

It is not inconceivable that a repeat of this destructive force of nature could precede Christ's second coming. Latter-day revelation reminds us that "before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened" (D&C 45:42), and that "the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light" (D&C 88:87). It is, of course, conceivable that such an occurrence could be brought about by the brightness emanating from the very presence of the Savior: "And so great shall be the glory of his presence that the sun shall hide his face in shame." (D&C 133:49.)

Great Hailstorms, Fire, and Brimstone

Modern revelation speaks of "a great hailstorm sent forth to destroy the crops of the earth." (D&C 29:16.) John the Revelator saw "a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent." (Revelation 16:21.) The immensity of this destruction is evident in the fact that a talent is 75.6 pounds. There are yet other references in the Old and New Testaments that add another dimension to the plague of hail. This could yet be another disaster, for it is spoken of in the context of the final battle of Armageddon. Speaking of Gog, the enemy of God, the prophet Ezekiel proclaims: "And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone." (Ezekiel 38:22.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie provided the following commentary on this scene of destruction: "It shall be, in the literal and full sense of the word, as it was with Sodom and Gomorrah. Fire and brimstone will fall upon the armies of the wicked in all nations. That which is going forward in Palestine is but a type and a shadow of that which shall be in all nations and among all peoples. . . . This is a worldwide conflict and . . . all nations are involved." (MM, p. 485.)

John the Revelator saw "hail and fire mingled with blood" being cast upon the wicked. (Revelation 8:7.) This calamity could be similar to what Pharaoh and the ancient Egyptians experienced when the Lord God Jehovah "sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground," smiting both man and beast. (See Exodus 9:22-26.)

Famine and Drought

From the days in ancient Egypt when Joseph, son of Jacob, was raised up to save the people from starvation, famine has been a challenge to human survival. (See Genesis 41.)

In the days of the prophet Elijah, the Lord tested the faith of a widow during a severe famine. She was asked to give first of her meager meal to God's prophet before she and her son partook of what was supposed to be their final morsels of food. Because of her faith and obedience, she and her son never wanted for sustenance while the drought and famine continued in the land. (See 1 Kings 17.)

Famine has been prophesied as one of the disasters of the last days. The Savior said "there shall be famines, and pestilences." (Matthew 24:7.) The Lord uses famine as one of the means whereby "the inhabitants of the earth [are] made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God." (D&C 87:6.) The "voice of famines and pestilences of every kind" calls to the nations of the earth to hear the words of God and his servants. (See D&C 43:23-25.)

The Book of Mormon provides a classic example of the Lord's prophet decreeing a drought and famine to bring the disobedient people of his day to repentance: "O Lord do not suffer that this people shall be destroyed by the sword; but O Lord, rather let there be a famine in the land, to stir them up in remembrance of the Lord their God, and perhaps they will repent and turn unto thee. And so it was done, according to the words of Nephi. And there was a great famine upon the land, among all the people of Nephi. And thus . . . the famine did continue, and the work of destruction did cease by the sword but became sore by famine. . . . And it came to pass that the people saw that they were about to perish by famine, and they began to remember the Lord their God." (Helaman 11:4-5, 7.) Fortunately, the people repented, and the prophet pleaded with the Lord to bring an end to the famine. During such troubled times, the righteous often suffer along with the unrighteous.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie made the following observation regarding the famine of Elijah's day and the desolation that will come in the last days:

When there was a famine in the land, at Elijah's word, a certain barrel of meal did not waste, and a certain cruse of oil did not fail, until the Lord sent again rain on the earth. And it is worthy of note, as Jesus said, that though there were many widows in Israel, unto one only was Elijah sent. (See 1 Kings 17:10-16.)

We do not say that all of the Saints [of the last days] will be spared and saved from the coming day of desolation. But we do say there is no promise of safety and no promise of security except for those who love the Lord and who are seeking to do all that he commands. (Ensign, May 1979,p. 93.)

During a drought in the '70s, President Spencer W. Kimball declared:

Early this year when drouth conditions seemed to be developing in the West, the cold and hardships in the East, with varying weather situations all over the world, we felt to ask the members of the Church to join in fasting and prayer, asking the Lord for moisture where it was so vital and for a cessation of the difficult conditions elsewhere.

Perhaps we may have been unworthy in asking for these greatest blessings, but we do not wish to frantically approach the matter but merely call it to the attention of our Lord and then spend our energy to put our lives in harmony.

One prophet said: "When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them: then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance." (1 Kings 8:35-36.)

The Lord uses the weather sometimes to discipline his people for the violation of his laws. He said to the children of Israel: "If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely. And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid: . . . neither shall the sword go through your land." (Lev. 26:3-6.)

With the great worry and suffering in the East and threats of drouth here in the West and elsewhere, we asked the people to join in a solemn prayer circle for moisture where needed. Quite immediately our prayers were answered, and we were grateful beyond expression. We are still in need and hope that the Lord may see fit to answer our continued prayers in this matter. . . .

Perhaps the day has come when we should take stock of ourselves and see if we are worthy to ask or if we have been breaking the commandments, making ourselves unworthy of receiving the blessings. (Ensign, May 1977, p. 4; italics added.)

The power of prayer in relieving famine and drought was quite evident in a visit Elder M. Russell Ballard and Bishop Glenn L. Pace made to Ethiopia in 1985. The country was in desperate need of rain. Elder Ballard reported the following:

The Spirit of the Lord was present. Because we had a deep yearning to help our Father's children who were suffering, we offered a special prayer that rain might come to that drought-stricken area. We felt a deep sense of the importance of our mission. I knew that if we called upon the Lord to bless the land, the elements would be tempered. We prayed, brethren, for rain. During the balance of the time we were in Ethiopia it rained every day wherever we traveled. We were grateful to our Heavenly Father because the rain was a special witness to us that he was aware that his sons, bearing his holy priesthood, were about his business in that part of the world. (Ensign, May 1985, p. 41.)

The Hurricane of Disobedience

Of all the disasters taking place during the last days, the hurricane of disobedience is ultimately the most deadly. Bishop Glenn L. Pace offered these insights: "The whole world seems to be in commotion. Today's news is filled with accounts of large-scale famine, civil unrest, and natural disasters. Even more devastating in the long run is the spiritually destructive hurricane of disobedience to God's commandments that is engulfing the world. This horrible storm is blowing the moral fiber out of the nations of the earth and leaving the land in moral desolation. Many people seem to be oblivious to this hurricane and have become so desensitized they don't even feel a breeze." (Ensign, November 1992, p. 12.)

Mankind can survive all forms of natural disaster: houses can be rebuilt, bones can be mended, supplies can be replenished. And even where death has occurred, there is the hope—even the absolute reality—of resurrection and of life beyond the grave. But to lose one's faith and turn from the ways of the Prince of Peace to the wickedness of the master of misery is a disaster of eternal consequences.

At the present time the forces of nature cannot be controlled, except through prayer and priesthood power. However, the plagues and moral pollutions that imperil the spirituality of people can be controlled. The next few chapters will deal specifically with the plagues of the last days that could be avoided if people simply followed a moral life and sought to do the will of God rather than to pursue their own carnal and selfish ways.
