Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 4

Plagues and Pollutions

"For I, the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for their wickedness. And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness."

—D&C 84:96-97

People in Peril

The nightly news regularly reminds us of the perilous times in which we live. The spreading cancer of moral decay is not only reported in the news but also often celebrated as a preferred lifestyle. The immorality of the rich and famous of the world is frequently portrayed as normal, while those who practice virtue are mocked. Well did the prophet Isaiah warn: "Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!" (Isaiah 5:20.)

Those who seek pleasure in wickedness will one day discover the eternal truth that "wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10.) The adversary promises a life of pleasure, but the reality is that his ways lead to misery, "for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27.)

The Savior warned that the days preceding his coming would be even "as the days of Noe [Noah] were" (Matthew 24:37; see also Luke 17:26). The days of Noah were filled with corruption and violence throughout the earth. (Genesis 6:11.) In comparing the wicked days of Noah to our day, Elder Neal A. Maxwell said:

We are told . . . that some of the conditions preceding the second coming of the Savior will be as in the days of Noah (see Matthew 24:37-39) and "also as it was in the days of Lot" (Luke 17:28). Noah's time was one of disobedience and wickedness. People were uncomprehending and "knew not until the flood came" (Matthew 24:39; see also Genesis 6:5; 1 Peter 3:20.) The choking cares and pleasures of this life led to the general rejection of Noah's prophetic message. Two especially interesting words are used in the Bible to describe Noah's time: violence and corruption. (Genesis 6:11). Violence and corruption, seldom strangers to the human scene, appear to be increasing today.

Some of the coarseness and cruelty present at the time of Noah will be replicated, for "the love of many shall wax cold" (Matthew 24:12). Also, peace will have been "taken from the earth" (D&C 1:35). (Ensign, May 1988, p. 7.)

That our days are similar to the days of Noah was also affirmed by President Joseph Fielding Smith, who declared:

Our Savior promised that the days preceding his second coming will be typical of the days of the flood. A glance at the sixth chapter of Genesis will reveal the conditions of the world in the days of Noah and the flood and the reason for the cleansing by water. This comparison is not to be taken figuratively, but literally as it is given. The world today is corrupt and filled with violence as it was at that earlier day, for now as then, 'All flesh has corrupted his way upon the earth.' [Gen. 6:12.] The Lord promised that he would never again destroy the entire world with a flood of water, but he did promise to cleanse it the second time with sword and with fire. [See Moses 7:50-51, 58-62.] (THY, p. 173.)

Without Natural Affection

When the Savior likened the days before His second coming to those of Noah, he also made reference to the wickedness "in the days of Lot." (See Luke 17:26-30.) Lot was warned to flee the gross perversion of Sodom and Gomorrah, where immorality, including homosexuality, was the accepted way of life. (See Genesis 19; see also JST, Genesis 19.) The Apostle Paul foresaw these same conditions in the last days: "In the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, . . . without natural affection, . . . lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God." (See 2 Timothy 3:1-4; italics added.)

Commenting on Paul's description of our day, Elder Russell M. Nelson said: "Paul's warnings describe apostasy and other dangers of our day. Some of those perils are contrary to God's purposes and are championed by persuasive people possessing more ability than morality, more knowledge than wisdom." (Ensign, November 1992, p. 8.)

A peril "championed by persuasive people possessing more ability than morality" is that of homosexuality. In order to give homosexuality a semblance of legitimacy, this violation of God's laws is depicted as an "alternative lifestyle" with no moral or legal consequences. Great effort has gone into portraying one's so-called sexual preference as a civil right, and those who oppose this lifestyle are branded as "homophobic" or "prejudiced."

In April 1993 an estimated crowd of three hundred thousand people marched on Washington, D.C., in a display of support for so-called gay and lesbian rights. Holding hands, men with men and women with women, the group demanded that the country recognize their civil rights. The march was seen by some as signaling "the coming of age of a political movement."

Many federal, state, and local government agencies, including educational institutions, have made it illegal for anyone receiving their services to discriminate against another because of his or her sexual preferences and practices. On some college campuses, student organizations founded on principles of morality have been threatened with being denied access to school facilities unless they sign a pledge requiring them not to deny membership in their organization to one whose sexual preference and lifestyle may be contrary to the standards and beliefs of the organization. In essence, the rights of moral people are trampled upon to accommodate the lifestyles of the immoral minority. Even the Boy Scouts of America, who have long required members to pledge that they will be "morally straight," have been denied funding, harassed, and sued because the organization has refused to alter its membership and oath requirements.

Political pressure, demonstrations, threats, and man-made legislation will not change what God and His prophets have unalterably declared to be immoral. One of those prophets, President Spencer W. Kimball, declared: "The fact that some governments and some churches and numerous corrupted individuals have tried to reduce such behavior from criminal offense to personal privilege does not change the nature nor the seriousness of the practice." (Ensign, November 1980, p. 97.)

Another of God's anointed servants, Elder Boyd K. Packer, sounded the following warning to those who have made covenants with God through the waters of baptism and through other sacred ordinances:

My message is to you who are tempted either to promote, to enter, or to remain in a life-style which violates your covenants and will one day bring sorrow to you and to those who love you.

Growing numbers of people now campaign to make spiritually dangerous life-styles legal and socially acceptable. Among them are abortion, the gay-lesbian movement, and drug addiction. They are debated in forums and seminars, in classes, in conversations, in conventions, and in courts all over the world. The social and political aspects of them are in the press every day.

The point I make is simply this: there is a MORAL and SPIRITUAL side to these issues which is universally ignored. For Latter-day Saints, morality is one component which must not be missing when these issues are considered—otherwise sacred covenants are at risk! Keep your covenants and you will be safe. Break them and you will not. . . .

Some challenge us to show where the scriptures specifically forbid abortion or a gay-lesbian or drug-centered life-style. "If they are so wrong," they ask, "why don't the scriptures tell us so in 'letter of the law' plainness?" These issues are not ignored in the revelations. [See, for example, Leviticus 18:22, 9; 20:13; Romans 1:24-27; 1 Corinthians 6:9.] The scriptures are generally positive rather than negative in their themes, and it is a mistake to assume that anything not specifically prohibited in the "letter of the law" is somehow approved of the Lord. All the Lord approves is not detailed in the scriptures, neither is all that is forbidden." (Ensign, November 1990, p. 84.)

The Plague of AIDS

One of the direct results of the practice of homosexuality in these last days is the plague of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome). It is preceded by the HIV infection (Human Immunosuppressive Virus). "AIDS is so deadly," said Dr. John L. Clowe, former president of the American Medical Association, "that by its very diagnosis the patient faces what literally is a death sentence." Dr. Clowe noted further that the "progression from HIV infection to AIDS takes an average of 10 years." During this time, the sexually promiscuous can unknowingly transmit the disease to many others, "keeping the epidemic invisibly alive." ("The Changing World of Aids," Vital Speeches of the Day, 15 December 1992, pp. 135, 136.)

Unfortunately, there also are innocent victims of this dread disease: those who are infected by contaminated blood, innocent spouses of promiscuous husbands and wives, or babies infected by their mothers. Elder Russell M. Nelson, who speaks the spiritual language of one called to the holy apostleship and who is an internationally recognized medical doctor, said this about the spread of AIDS: "An epidemic has been forecast—a plague fueled by a vocal few who exhibit greater concern for civil rights than for public health—a plague abetted by the immoral. Some live in lust as though God's commandment to be chaste was written with an asterisk, exempting them from obeying. And regrettably, as in previous plagues, many innocent victims are doomed to suffer." (Ensign, November 1992, p. 8.)

It seems reasonable to conclude that the spread of this terrible disease could be at least in partial fulfillment of the plagues that would be part of the last days. A revelation from the Lord in 1832 warned: "For I, the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for their wickedness. And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness." (D&C 84:96-97.)

In 1859 Charles W. Penrose, who became an apostle in 1904, published a sermon identifying many of the disasters and disturbances that would accompany the last days. He said "the passions of human nature will be put to the vilest uses [and] new diseases will silently eat their ghastly way through the ranks of the wicked." (Millennial Star, 21:582.) Perhaps this is part of what John the Revelator saw when he prophesied of the plagues to be poured out upon the wicked in the last days: "And there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image." (Revelation 16:2.)

President Gordon B. Hinckley, First Counselor in the First Presidency, provided the following commentary on the plague of AIDS:

There is a plague of fearsome dimensions moving across the world. Public health officials are greatly concerned, and everyone else should be. . . .

AIDS is a commonly fatal malady caused primarily from sexually transmitted disease and secondarily from drug abuse. Unfortunately, as in any epidemic, innocent people also become victims.

We, with others, hope that discoveries will make possible both prevention and healing from this dread affliction. But regardless of such discoveries, the observance of one clearly understandable and divinely given rule would do more than all else to check this epidemic. That is chastity before marriage and total fidelity after marriage.

Prophets of God have repeatedly taught through the ages that practices of homosexual relations, fornication, and adultery are grievous sins. Sexual relations outside the bonds of marriage are forbidden by the Lord. We reaffirm those teachings. Mankind has been given agency to choose between right and wrong. . . .

Each of us has a choice between right and wrong. But with that choice there inevitably will follow consequences. Those who choose to violate the commandments of God put themselves at great spiritual and physical jeopardy. (Ensign, May 1987, pp. 46-47.)

General Decline in Morality

The general decline in morality in the last days is very evident. Nudity, illicit sexual liaisons, pornography, perversion, and filthy language can all be found not only in movie theaters, but also on public television. Ears and eyes are constantly assaulted in public places by vulgarity in conversation, music, advertising, and the printed word.

Immorality is publicly promoted through the distribution of condoms in schools and the advocacy of immoral behavior. For example, a recommended book list for first graders in New York City public schools has included "Heather Has Two Mommies" and "Daddy's Roommate," both of which focus on accepting the gay-lesbian lifestyle. Such moral decay is further illustrated in a recent cartoon showing a man sitting in front of a television from which comes this announcement: "The following program may not be suitable for those of you who still have standards."

In writing about several world conditions that would prevail during the last days, the ancient prophet Moroni foresaw "a day when there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth; there shall be murders, and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and whoredoms, and all manner of abominations; when there shall be many who will say, Do this, or do that, and it mattereth not." (Mormon 8:31.) Commenting on the application of this scripture to these last days, Elder Dallin H. Oaks said: "For many in our day, the profane has become commonplace and the vulgar has become acceptable. Surely this is one fulfillment of the Book of Mormon prophecy that in the last days 'there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth.'" (Ensign, May 1986, p. 49; italics added.)

Elder Boyd K. Packer spoke of the moral pollution spreading its filthy cloud throughout the world today, causing the "pollution index" to spiral upward:

The Book of Mormon depicts humanity struggling through a "mist of darkness" and defines the darkness as the "temptations of the devil." (1 Ne. 8:23; 12:17.) So dense was that moral pollution that many followed "strange roads" and "fell away into forbidden paths and were lost." (See 1 Ne. 8:23-32.)

The deliberate pollution of the fountain of life now clouds our moral environment. The gift of mortal life and the capacity to kindle other lives is a supernal blessing. Its worth is incalculable!

The rapid, sweeping deterioration of values is characterized by a preoccupation—even an obsession—with the procreative act. Abstinence before marriage and fidelity within it are openly scoffed at—marriage and parenthood ridiculed as burdensome, unnecessary. Modesty, a virtue of a refined individual or society, is all but gone.

The adversary is jealous toward all who have the power to beget life. He cannot beget life; he is impotent. He and those who followed him were cast out and forfeited the right to a mortal body. His angels even begged to inhabit the bodies of swine. (See Matt. 8:31.) And the revelations tell us that "he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Ne. 2:27.)

With ever fewer exceptions, what we see and read and hear have the mating act as a central theme. Censorship is forced offstage as a violation of individual freedom.

That which should be absolutely private is disrobed and acted out center stage. In the shadows backstage are ad-diction, pornography, perversion, infidelity, abortion, and—the saddest of them all—incest and molestation. In company with them now is a plague of biblical proportion. And all of them are on the increase. (Ensign, May 1992, p. 66.)

The Loss and Lessening of Standards and Values

A national chain of retail stores emphasizes its products as having "true value!" Unfortunately, the people of the world in general have let their "true values" slip and slide as they pursue the path of sin. There is an ever-widening gap between the ways of the world and those true values and standards to which all people should adhere.

Recently an athlete with superstar status admitted to having contracted the HIV infection as a result of years of promiscuous living. Because of this athlete's public confession, one reporter suggested he should be "held up as a modern-day hero." The athlete promised to become a spokesman for AIDS awareness, stating, "I want young people to realize they can practice safe sex." There was no mention of moral abstinence or right and wrong by this "modern-day hero," simply the practice of so-called safe sex.

It is interesting to note the type of individuals held up as heroes by youth. In a recent survey, the top three categories of most admired people for youth were (1) TV/movie stars, (2) rock musicians, and (3) professional athletes. In another survey of most-admired people, the top ten chosen by young men included three movie stars, three professional athletes, a film director, and a rock star, while five of the top ten chosen by young women were movie stars.

As a whole the values of these admired people are not consistent with the standards taught in the scriptures by the prophets or embraced by other men and women of virtue and integrity. A survey of Hollywood's influential television writers and executives revealed that they are "far less religious than the general public and diverge sharply from traditional values on such issues as abortion, homosexual rights and extramarital sex:

While nearly all of the 104 Hollywood professionals interviewed had a religious background, 45 percent now say they have no religion, and of the other 55 percent only 7 percent say they attend a religious service as much as once a month.

This group has had a major role in shaping the shows whose themes and stars have become staples in our popular culture. . . .

Eighty percent of the respondents said they did not regard homosexual relations as wrong, and 51 percent did not deem adultery as wrong. Of the 49 percent who called extramarital affairs wrong, only 17 percent felt that way strongly, the study said. Nearly all—97 percent—favored the right of a woman to choose an abortion, 91 percent holding that view strongly. (John Dart, in Los Angeles Times, 19 February 1983, part 2, p. 5; as quoted in Gordon B. Hinckley, Ensign, November 1983, p. 45.)

President Gordon B. Hinckley offered the following observations regarding the difference between the ways of the world and the values upheld by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints:

Some time ago I read a letter to a newspaper editor which was highly critical of the Church. I have forgotten the exact language, but it included a question something like this: "When are the Mormons going to stop being different and become a part of the mainstream of America?"

About this same time there came to my desk a copy of an address given by Senator Dan Coats of Indiana. He spoke of a study made by "a commission of educational, political, medical and business leaders" dealing with the problems of American youth. The committee issued a report called Code Blue. That report, according to the Senator, concluded: "Never before has one generation of American teenagers been less healthy, less cared for, or less prepared for life than their parents were at the same age." He went on to say, "I have seen the parade of pathologies—they are unending and increasing:

"Suicide is now the second leading cause of death among adolescents, increasing 300 percent since 1950.

"Teen pregnancy has risen 621 percent since 1940. More than a million teenage girls get pregnant each year. Eighty-five percent of teenage boys who impregnate teenage girls eventually abandon them.

"The teen homicide rate has increased 232 percent since 1950. Homicide is now the leading cause of death among fifteen- to nineteen-year-old minority youth. . . .

"Every year substance abuse claims younger victims with harder drugs. A third of high school seniors get drunk once a week. The average age for first-time drug use is now thirteen years old."

The report reached a shocking conclusion. It said: "The challenges to the health and well-being of America's youth are not primarily rooted in illness or economics. Unlike the past, the problem is not childhood disease or unsanitary slums. The most basic cause of suffering . . . is profoundly self-destructive behavior. Drinking. Drugs. Violence. Promiscuity. A crisis of behavior and belief. A crisis of character." (Imprimis, Sept. 1991, p. 1.)

When I read those statements, I said to myself, if that is the mainstream of American youth, then I want to do all in my power to persuade and encourage our young people to stay away from it. (Ensign, May 1992, pp. 69-70.)

In prophesying about the last days, the Book of Mormon prophet Nephi, son of Lehi, proclaimed: "For the time speedily cometh that the Lord God shall cause a great division among the people, and the wicked will he destroy; and he will spare his people, yea, even if it so be that he must destroy the wicked by fire." (2 Nephi 30:10; see also D&C 63:53-54.)

Elder Neal A. Maxwell contrasted the ways of the world with the values embraced by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: "The Church is pulling away from the world at a rate that would be noticeable even if the world were standing still in its standards. But the world is pulling away even from standards it once held. Thus the Church and the world are parting company like two speeding cars going in opposite directions." (Deposition of a Disciple, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976, p. 63.) As people contemplate their own values and the impact that personal decisions will have on the rest of their mortal lives as well as the long hereafter, the words of Elder Dean L. Larsen of the Seventy are worth pondering:

The challenging conditions we find in the world today should be no surprise to us. As we approach the time of the Savior's return, wickedness will increase. There will be more temptations in our daily lives, and they will become more intense. It will become more acceptable in the world to break the laws of God or to disregard them altogether. The stigma attached to immoral, dishonest behavior will disappear.

In this difficult environment we will be expected to steer our own course in an upward direction. . . . It will neither be acceptable nor safe to remain on the plateaus where our present conduct has kept us. Abrupt downward forces, represented by increasing wickedness in the world, can only be offset by forces that move correspondingly upward. Our lives must be better than they have ever been before. This simply means that we will become increasingly different from those around us whose lives follow the world's way. It is not easy to be different. There are intense pressures that work against us. But we must clearly understand that it is not safe to move in the same direction the world is moving, even though we remain slightly behind the pace they set. Such a course will eventually lead us to the same problems and heartaches. It will not permit us to perform the work the Lord has chosen us to do. It would disqualify us from his blessing and his protecting care. . . .

But there are too many whose lives are being contaminated by the worldly trends. This is not a light matter. The judgments of God will not be withheld from those who willfully, knowing who they are and what is expected of them, allow themselves to be drawn along the precarious paths of worldly conduct. (Ensign, May 1983, pp. 34-35.)

Blasphemy and Mockery of Sacred Things

A major cause of the downfall of the ancient Nephite civilization was that they made "a mock of that which was sacred." (Helaman 4:12.) In our day the Lord has warned, "Trifle not with sacred things." (D&C 6:12.) Those persons who promote the values and wickedness of the world today often mock that which is held sacred by the righteous. Sacred covenants, ceremonies, clothing, words, books, buildings—none have escaped the finger of scorn nor the tongue of blasphemy of the wicked. From the beginning the adversary and his followers have sought to discredit Deity and to mock God's ways.

In the Book of Revelation, John describes a beast who, representing earthly kingdoms, is controlled by the devil: "And [the beast] opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven." (Revelation 13:6.) The beast is busy blaspheming all that is held sacred throughout the earth today. Of particular interest to the adversary is anything or anyone connected with God's kingdom on earth. Prophets are scorned, ordinances are ridiculed, and the righteous are belittled. The holy name of Deity is blasphemed when used in concert with gutter language and misused in everyday expressions. The sacred functions of procreation are spoken of in filth, and even a name that God holds most dear—that of "mother"—is defiled. Is it any wonder that our Father in Heaven has been so protective of the identity of our Mother in Heaven?

The Apostle Paul described the "perilous times" of the last days in warning us against "blasphemers." He then counseled, "from such turn away." (See 2 Timothy 3:1-5.) In addition to refusing to embrace or to use the words of blasphemers, there might be other implications for us in Paul's admonition. Perhaps the "turning away" also means that we should turn our eyes and ears away from movies, television, and music that mock and blaspheme God and anything that should be held sacred.

The prayer of us all should be like that of the ancient psalmist: "Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips. Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked works with men that work iniquity." (Psalm 141:3-4.) And one of the first of the Ten Commandments given anciently on Mount Sinai should still be among the first to be observed in our day: "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." (Exodus 20:7.)

An appropriate conclusion to this section on profanity and to this chapter on plagues and moral pollutions is found in the words of President Spencer W. Kimball: "It is not enough to refrain from profanity or blasphemy. We need to make important in our lives the name of the Lord. While we do not use the Lord's name lightly, we should not leave our friends or our neighbors or our children in any doubt as to where we stand. Let there be no doubt about our being followers of Jesus Christ." (Ensign, November 1978, p. 6.)
