Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 5

Satan's Assault on the Family

"And he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice."

—Moses 4:4

The Father of Lies

One of the most significant signs of the last days, and probably the most dangerous, is the all-out assault that Satan is making on the family. He has an intense hatred of anything associated with the family—marriage, mother, father, children—for he himself will never be a true father.

When the Father laid out His plans for the progression of His children, Satan opposed those plans and offered his own amendment to God's perfect plan, a counterproposal that included the denial of agency and his desire to displace our Father in Heaven. (See Moses 4:1-4; Abraham 3:27-28.) Satan's promise "that one soul shall not be lost" was a lie, for he could not have forced all of Father's children to follow him. And if under his plan an atonement were to be required, this selfish spirit son of God could not have accomplished it. He had neither the love nor the willpower to have borne up under the suffering that was later required of the Only Begotten in Gethsemane and on Calvary. Thus it is appropriate that he "who was a liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:25) should be dubbed "the father of all lies" (2 Nephi 2:18; Moses 4:4). His compulsion to lie and to deceive preceded his encounter with Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, and it continues in these days.

The scornful but accurate title of "father of all lies" is the only way Satan will ever have the title of father. Because he is eternally damned—denied the right to a body, to a wife, to fatherhood and children, and to extended posterity—he is intensely hateful of all that he cannot possess and is in constant rebellion against that holy Being who has asked us to address Him simply as "Father."

To the degree that he can experience satisfaction, the adversary takes pleasure (not genuine happiness, for he is incapable of that experience) in the destruction of the family. Marital discord, divorce, neglected and abused children, abortion, the misuse of procreative powers—all of these are consistent with the desires of that evil being who "seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27; see also verse 18.)

As the timing of the Second Coming draws closer, the adversary has intensified his campaign of hatred against the family. The potential destructiveness of this assault on the family is evidenced in these words of Bishop Victor L. Brown:

At the present time, there are wars and rumors of wars. Yet, may I suggest that there is another war currently going on in the world—a war more destructive than any armed conflict—yes, a war between good and evil, between freedom and slavery, between the Savior and Satan. Satan's legions are many. In their battle to enslave mankind, they use weapons such as selfishness; dishonesty; corruption; sexual impurity, be it adultery, fornication, or homosexuality; pornography; permissiveness; drugs; and many others. I believe Satan's ultimate goal is to destroy the family, because if he would destroy the family, he will not just have won the battle; he will have won the war. (Ensign, January 1974, p. 108.)

The Breakdown of the Family

The success of Satan's assault on the family is found in these words of Elder James E. Faust of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: "In recent times, society has been plagued with a cancer from which few families have escaped. I speak of the disintegration of our homes." (Ensign, May 1993, p. 35.) The spiraling numbers of divorces, spouse and child abuse, broken homes, absentee parents, and abortions all bear witness to the assault being made on the family. Even the titles and callings of "father" and "mother" have come under attack.

In a speech given to the Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights in Washington, D.C., in 1992, then United States Attorney General William P. Barr made these observations regarding the breakdown of the family:

The most significant feature of contemporary society has been the battering of the family, and its disintegration.

Today, in America, we have soaring illegitimacy rates. Today, almost 30 percent of children are born out of wedlock—about a quadrupling in 25 years.

In many inner-city areas, the illegitimacy rate is as high as 80 percent.

And America also now has among the highest divorce rates in the world—divorce is as common as marriage.

As a consequence of this, we now have the highest percentage of children living in single-parent households.

This breakdown of the family is particularly distressing because it is the family that is the principal institution by which we conduct moral education—by which we transmit moral values from generation to generation.

As the family is weakened, so is our ability to transmit values to the next generation.

And, it is the breakdown of the family that is at the root of most of our social problems today. ("The Judeo-Christian Tradition vs. Secularism," 6 October 1992.)

While divorce has always been a challenge to a stable society, it has become increasingly so in recent years. In 1960, 74 percent of all United States households were headed by a married couple; by 1990 this figure had declined to 56 percent.

The breakdown of the family has not been confined to the United States, but it is happening worldwide. In a speech delivered in the summer of 1993, Mr. John Banks, Minister of Police for New Zealand, stated:

It is within the family that children learn such values as love, responsibility, communication, respect for authority and faith in God. They learn about living up to one's potential, leaving the world a better place, doing the right thing and doing things right. . . .

When the traditional family unit is undermined, as it has been, self-reliance is lost and responsibility disappears. These have been replaced by a dependence, often long-term, on the Government and manipulation by social engineers. The destruction of the family unit provides the setting which leads young people to the treadmill of drug abuse and crime. Children need mothers and fathers. A welfare cheque is not a husband. The State is not a father. Where there are not mature, responsible parents around to teach boys how to be good citizens, gangs often serve in their place. ("Make Our Country Good and Great," Vital Speeches of the Day, 1 September 1993, p. 682.)

Absentee Parents

Among the most difficult social problems of our day is the rise in juvenile crime and violence. It is of interest to note that recent statistics show that "the most accurate predictor of violent crime and burglary in neighborhoods is not race or income but rather the percent of households without fathers." Furthermore, research has shown that "seventy percent of all juveniles in long-term correctional facilities did not live with their father while growing up." (Richard Witmire, "Life without Father Breaking Hearts, Homes across U.S.," Salt Lake Tribune, 19 June 1993, p. A1.)

The importance of fathers in the home was emphasized by Elder James E. Faust, who said: "Fathers are not optional family baggage. We need to honor the position of the father as the primary provider for physical and spiritual support." Elder Faust further noted the importance of both fathers and mothers: "It is useless to debate which parent is most important. No one would doubt that a mother's influence is paramount with newborns and in the first years of a child's life. The father's influence increases as the child grows older. However, each parent is necessary at various times in a child's development." (Ensign, May 1993, p. 35.)

The absence of mothers in the home has also had a destructive impact on the family. While serving as a counselor in the First Presidency, President Nathan Eldon Tanner said: "Satan and his cohorts are using scientific arguments and nefarious propaganda to lure women away from their primary responsibilities as wives, mothers, and homemakers. We hear so much about emancipation, independence, sexual liberation, birth control, abortion, and other insidious propaganda belittling the role of motherhood, all of which is Satan's way of destroying woman, the home and the family—the basic unit of society." (Ensign, January 1974, p. 7.)

It is recognized that out of economic necessity (not simply material desires), some mothers must work outside the home. However, the prophets and other servants of God have admonished mothers to carefully count the cost to the children and the family before making such a move. Bishop H. Burke Peterson, while serving as a counselor in the Presiding Bishopric of the Church, observed:

One of the great tragedies of our day is the confusion in the minds of some which would cause mothers to go to work in the marketplace. Satan, that master of deceit, would have us believe that when we have problems with our children, the answer may be a nicer home in a finer neighborhood, that they might have their own bedroom, or better quality clothes, and maybe their own car. Satan would have us believe that money or the things money can buy are more important in the home than mother.

Now there are some mothers with school-age children who are the breadwinners of their family and they must work; they are the exception. Fathers and mothers, before you decide you need a second income and that mother must go to work out of the home, may I plead with you: first go to the Lord in prayer and receive his divine approbation. Be sure he says yes. Mothers with children and teenagers at home, before you go out of your homes to work, please count the cost as carefully as you count the profit. Earning a few dollars more for luxuries cloaked in the masquerade of necessity—or a so-called opportunity for self-development of talents in the business world, a chance to get away from the mundane responsibilities of the home—these are all satanic substitutes for clear thinking. They are counterfeit thoughts that subvert the responsibilities of motherhood." (Ensign, May 1974, p. 32.)

Genocide of the Unborn

The most vile assault on the family is genocide of the unborn. Abortion is one of the devil's most widespread techniques in his ongoing war against the plan of salvation. The killing of innocent children through abortion is epidemic. Elder Russell M. Nelson has noted that this war on the unborn "annually claims more casualties than the total number of fatalities from all the wars of this nation." (Ensign, May 1985, p. 11.)

Could abortion be one of the things Paul had in mind when he spoke of there being those "without natural affection" as one of the signs of the last days? (2 Timothy 3:3.) What is more unnatural than for a mother to willingly submit to procedures that kill the child she has conceived and is carrying? Is the killing of the unborn a modern manifestation of what the Lord anciently referred to when he described people who, "without affection, . . . hate their own blood"? (Moses 7:33.) Could abortion be one of the things the Prophet Joseph Smith had in mind when he saw in vision "women killing their own daughters?" (HC, 3:391.)

In Old Testament times there was an abominable form of worship in which children were offered as fiery sacrifices to the fire god Molech. Elder Theodore M. Burton of the Seventy drew a comparison between this ancient abomination and modern-day abortion: "We shudder as we read in [the Old Testament] of the sacrifices of idol worshipers of that time who fed their children into the fiery maw of the iron god Molech. Is personal selfishness which results in abortion any less repulsive to God, as modern people through abortion offer the sacrifice of their children to their idol of selfish materialism?" (Ensign, May 1979, p. 73.)

Unfortunately, this very moral issue has been turned into a political issue, and efforts continue to establish abortion as a civil right rather than a damnable sin. Politicians have made the support of abortion a condition for one to be selected to serve in the judicial system. Anciently the prophet Isaiah cried out against such leaders: "O my people, they who lead thee cause thee to err and destroy the way of thy paths." (Isaiah 3:12; 2 Nephi 13:12.)

In commenting on Isaiah's scriptural pronouncement, Elder Ezra Taft Benson observed: "Consider these words [of Isaiah] seriously when you think of those political leaders who are promoting birth control and abortion." (Improvement Era, December 1970, p. 46.) Later he also observed: "Innocent-sounding phrases are now used to give approval to sinful practices. Thus, the term 'alternate life-style' is used to justify adultery and homosexuality, 'freedom of choice' to justify abortion, 'meaningful relationship' and 'self-fulfillment' to justify sex outside of marriage." (Ensign, November 1982, p. 59; italics added.)

In spite of the efforts of politicians to popularize and legalize sin, the position of the Church and its prophets is clear. President Spencer W. Kimball declared: "Abortion must be considered one of the most revolting and sinful practices in this day." (Ensign, May 1975, p. 7.) And Elder Ezra Taft Benson has likewise denounced abortion: "We oppose and abhor the damnable practice of wholesale abortion and every other unholy and impure act which strikes at the very foundation of the home and family, our most basic institutions." (Ensign, July 1973, p. 41.)

In an official declaration, the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints published this statement on the issue of abortion:

In view of the widespread public interest in the issue of abortion, we reaffirm that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has consistently opposed elective abortion. More than a century ago, the First Presidency of the church warned against this evil. We have repeatedly counseled people everywhere to turn from the devastating practice of abortion for personal or social convenience.

The church recognizes that there may be rare cases in which abortion may be justified—cases involving pregnancy by incest or rape; when the life or health of the woman is adjudged by competent medical authority to be in serious jeopardy; or when the fetus is known by competent medical authority to have severe defects that will not allow the baby to survive beyond birth. But these are not automatic reasons for abortion. Even in these cases, the couple should consider an abortion only after consulting with each other, and their bishop, and receiving divine confirmation through prayer." ("LDS Position on Abortion," Deseret News, 12 January 1991, p. B6.)

The Lord declared to the ancient Israelites that one who "hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, . . . he shall be surely punished." (Exodus 21:22.)

John Calvin, the sixteenth-century religious reformer, provided some thoughts worth pondering: "If it seems more horrible to kill a man in his own house than in a field, because a man's house is his place of most secure refuge, it ought surely to be deemed more atrocious to destroy a fetus in the womb before it has come to light." (As quoted by Russell M. Nelson in Ensign, May 1985, p. 12.) A twentieth-century apostle, Elder Neal A. Maxwell, expressed his feelings on abortion in connection with his gratitude for the Atonement: "I thank the Father that His Only Begotten Son did not say in defiant protest at Calvary, 'My body is my own!' I stand in admiration of women today who resist the fashion of abortion, by refusing to make the sacred womb a tomb!" (Ensign, May 1978, p. 10.)

An Eternal Perspective on Family

While it is recognized that some people, through no fault of their own, will be deprived of a partner or children in this life, the eternal perspective of the family must not be lost. God is fair! God is just! No blessing will be withheld from the righteous in the eternities, though there may be temporary deprivation in mortality. Lucifer, that master of deceit—that most miserable of all creatures, he who is without hope of ever having a family himself—would fain discourage and dishearten those whose righteous desires for a family have not yet been granted.

In response to the hopelessness that the adversary promotes, consider what has been said by several special witnesses of Jesus Christ whom we sustain as prophets, seers, and revelators:

Elder Boyd K. Packer declared: "Any soul who by nature or circumstance is not afforded the blessing of marriage and parenthood or who innocently must act alone in rearing children, working to support them, will not be denied in the eternities any blessing—provided they keep the commandments. [See D&C 137:7-9.] As President Lorenzo Snow promised: 'That is sure and positive.'" (Ensign, November 1993, p. 23.) A fellow apostle, Elder Dallin H. Oaks, stated:

We know that many worthy and wonderful Latter-day Saints currently lack the ideal opportunities and essential requirements for their progress. Singleness, childlessness, death, and divorce frustrate ideals and postpone the fulfillment of promised blessings. . . . But these frustrations are only temporary. The Lord has promised that in the eternities no blessing will be denied his sons and daughters who keep the commandments, are true to their covenants, and desire what is right.

Many of the most important deprivations of mortality will be set right in the Millennium, which is the time for fulfilling all that is incomplete in the great plan of happiness for all of our Father's worthy children. We know that will be true of temple ordinances. I believe it will also be true of family relationships and experiences.

I pray that we will not let the challenges and temporary diversions of mortality cause us to forget our covenants and lose sight of our eternal destiny. (Ensign, November 1993, p. 75.)
