Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 6

Conspiracies of the Last Days

"Behold, verily, thus saith the Lord unto you: In consequence of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days, I have warned you, and forewarn you."

—D&C 89:4

Conspiring Men

Tobacco and alcohol consumption are so much a part of everyday life that a question might be raised as to why they are referred to in a book on the last days. Is the common use of these products really a sign preceding the Second Coming? The answer lies in a revelation received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1833. In this revelation, known as the Word of Wisdom, the Lord warned against the "evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days." (D&C 89:4; italics added.)

Who are these "conspiring men?" One need only peruse a periodical or view television, particularly a sporting event, to note the advertising designed to entice one to consume products harmful to the body and the spirit. While the "Marlboro man" has ridden off into the sunset of television advertising (because of the government ban on tobacco advertising via radio and television), another tobacco company has conspired to create a cartoon character named "Joe Camel," who is designed to sell cigarettes from the slick pages of periodicals. A younger clientele is targeted, with the hope that a lifelong habit can be formed.

And what about the advertising for alcoholic beverages? A wide variety of alcoholic products is portrayed as fun and popular, the way to success, the "in" thing to do. Yet the promises are shallow and short-lived. The reality of alcohol's destructive power was described in a speech given by Neal A. Maxwell when he was vice president of the University of Utah. To a group of college students, he spoke of the "awful arithmetic" of alcohol: "If as many of your generation maintain, the ultimate obscenity is violence and needless death, then alcohol is obscene in terms of the people it kills and maims on our highways and the numerous child beatings it causes in homes and all the other tragedies that grow out of the misuse of alcohol." ("This Matter of Relevancy," 16 May 1969, pp. 2-3.)

Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles gives some indication of how different society might be if the resources now used in rectifying abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs were free to be used in other areas: "Imagine the results we would see if the total populace were to live this law of health and never abuse their bodies with alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and other harmful substances. What magnitude of decline would we see in automobile accidents, illness and premature death, fetal defects, crime, squandered dollars, broken homes, and wasted lives resulting from alcohol and other addictive drugs? How much would lung cancer, heart disease, and other ailments caused by cigarette smoking decrease?" (Ensign, November 1991, p. 16.) The cost to society in suffering, loss of lives, loss of income, destruction of families, and disruption of employment from the abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs is almost incalculable, the terrible cost rising each year. However, some idea of the annual cost is gleaned from the following figures of the late 1980s:

Â 10.6 million adults are alcoholics Â Alcohol is a factor in one-half of traffic deaths. Â More Americans have now been killed in alcohol-related auto accidents than in all the wars ever fought by Americans. Â 320,000 annual deaths can be attributed to tobacco. Â 125,000 annual deaths can be attributed to alcohol. Â An estimated one-half of Americans have tried drugs. Â An estimated one-half of crimes are drug related. Â The federal government has launched an $8 billion battle against illicit drugs (prisons, police, etc.). (See Ensign, November 1988, p. 7; November 1989, p. 49.)

The Terrible Toll of Drugs

One of the most insidious signs of the last days is the increase in the use of illicit drugs. Some of the criminal by-products of drug usage include prostitution, AIDS, robbery, assault, and murder. President Ezra Taft Benson commented on the conspiracy in the last days to spread the use of addictive substances, especially drugs:

The Lord foresaw the situation of today when motives for money would cause men to conspire to entice others to take noxious substances into their bodies. [See D&C 89:4.] Advertisements which promote beer, wine, liquors, coffee, tobacco, and other harmful substances are examples of what the Lord foresaw. But the most pernicious example of an evil conspiracy in our time is those who induce young people into the use of drugs. My young brothers and sisters, in all love, we give you warning that Satan and his emissaries will strive to entice you to use harmful substances, because they well know if you partake, your spiritual powers will be inhibited and you will be in their evil power. Stay away from those places or people which would influence you to break the commandments of God. Keep the commandments of God and you will have the wisdom to know and discern that which is evil." (Ensign, May 1983, pp. 54-55.)

As part of the scenario preceding the Second Coming, the Apostle John described the wicked who did not repent "of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts." (Revelation 9:21.) The word sorceries has its origin in the Greek pharmakeia, which means "pharmacy" or "drugs." Clearly the Revelator saw the rampant use of drugs in the last days.

One official of the United States government commented on the drain that drugs are having on worldwide resources: "I know from firsthand knowledge what a scourge illicit narcotics are to this country and others. The drain on the human and monetary resources of the world being caused by this dilemma is inestimable and threatens the very foundations of freedom." (As quoted by Gordon B. Hinckley in Ensign, November 1989, p. 49.)

Satan's Slavery

Satan uses the weakness of the flesh, the desire for unnatural stimulants and experiences, and the curiosity to taste forbidden fruits to enslave men, women, youth, and even children in his ongoing, relentless battle to destroy agency. The success of the adversary in this respect was noted by Elder Russell M. Nelson: "Through chemical means, one can literally become disconnected from his or her own will!" (Ensign, November 1988, p. 7.)

Satan was unsuccessful in his bid to convert us to his enslaving plan in the premortal world of spirits. However, he is having great success in enslaving physical bodies with substance addiction. There are few, if any, alcoholics or drug addicts who deliberately set out to become a slave to a habit. Many thought they would sample the forbidden fruit for a season or "just this once" before returning to abstinence and freedom's safe ground. In this respect, Elder Neal A. Maxwell offered the following warning: "Why do some of our youth risk engaging in ritual prodigalism, intending to spend a season rebelling and acting out in Babylon? . . . Though planning to return later, many such stragglers find that alcohol, drugs, and pornography will not let go easily. Babylon does not give exit permits gladly. It is an ironic implementation of that ancient boast: 'One soul shall not be lost.' (Moses 4:1.)" (Ensign, November 1988, p. 33.)

To enslave the body to an addictive habit is to give away control of the Spirit. Elder Stephen L Richards noted that "injury to the body [from substance abuse] may be comparatively trivial to the damage to the soul in the destruction of faith and the retardation of spiritual growth." (In CR, April 1949, p. 141.) The risk of addiction and the loss of one's spiritual moorings are far too great for anyone to risk trifling with forbidden fruits. Elder Russell M. Nelson observed: "From an initial experiment thought to be trivial, a vicious cycle may follow. From trial comes a habit. From habit comes dependence. From dependence comes addiction. Its grasp is so gradual. Enslaving shackles of habit are too small to be sensed until they are too strong to be broken. Indeed, drugs are the modern 'mess of pottage' for which souls are sold. No families are free from risk." (Ensign, November 1988, p. 6.)

Other Conspiring Men

There is another dimension of obedience to the Word of Wisdom that should not be overlooked. Elder Russell M. Nelson noted: "As you develop courage to say no to alcohol, tobacco, and other stimulants, you gain additional strength. You can then refuse conspiring men—those seditious solicitors of harmful substances or smut. You can reject their evil enticements to your body." (Ensign, November 1985, p. 31.)

Is there any doubt that the intention of the smut peddlers—those other conspiring men—is to seduce and enslave the weak willed and wayward, to addict them to pornography and perversion? Resistance to sin is built through obedience. Strength to stand spiritually strong in one area provides power to resist temptation in another. Those who resist the allurement of addictive substances reap the promise that the "destroying angel shall pass by them." (D&C 89:21.) They shall not be subject to the plagues, diseases, and misery caused by violations of the Lord's Word of Wisdom.

Secret Combinations

The Book of Mormon warns of secret combinations that will threaten civilization in the last days. There is no question that the worldwide drug cartels and crime syndicates that produce and peddle pornography are filled with evil and conspiring men. However, there are also wicked people who conspire to take away constitutional freedoms and to make serfs of free men, women, and children.

Secret combinations are formed to gain unrighteous power over others and have existed on this earth from the day that Cain entered into an evil alliance with Satan against his brother Abel. (See Moses 5:29-31.) These societies prospered during the days of the Gadianton robbers among the ancient Nephites and Lamanites and were a direct cause of the downfall of that civilization, as well as its predecessor, the Jaredite nation. "Had among all people" (Ether 8:20), secret combinations surely exist today as well. The prophet Moroni foresaw their rise in the last days and warned against allowing them to gain control:

And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold, they shall be destroyed. . . .

Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in God that these things should be shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of your sins, and suffer not that these murderous combinations shall get above you, which are built up to get power and gain. . . .

Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these things come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall be among you; or wo be unto it, because of the blood of them who have been slain; for they cry from the dust for vengeance upon it, and also upon those who built it up.

For it cometh to pass that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries; and it bringeth to pass the destruction of all people, for it is built up by the devil, who is the father of all lies. (Ether 8:22-25.)

President Ezra Taft Benson added his own insights regarding the secret combinations of the last days: "I testify that wickedness is rapidly expanding in every segment of our society. (See D&C 1:14-16; 84:49-53.) It is more highly organized, more cleverly disguised, and more powerfully promoted than ever before. Secret combinations lusting for power, gain, and glory are flourishing. A secret combination that seeks to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries is increasing its evil influence and control over America and the entire world. (See Ether 8:18-25.)" (Ensign, November 1988, p. 87.) Almost three decades earlier, while a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Benson had referred to these secret combinations as both conspiratorial communism and as a "gigantic criminal conspiracy which would seek to rule the world." (CR, October 1961, p. 71.)

The secret combinations of the last days are not confined to one group nor to worldwide organizations, but include any combination of people whose purpose is to get unrighteous gain and power over others. The far-reaching tentacles of secret combinations were described by President Benson in a talk given in 1978: "Yes, there is a conspiracy of evil. The source of it all is Satan and his hosts. He has a great power over men to 'lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken' to the voice of the Lord. (Moses 4:4.) His evil influence may be manifest through governments; through false educational, political, economic, religious, and social philosophies; through secret societies and organizations; and through myriads of other forms. His power and influence are so great that, if possible, he would deceive the very elect. As the second coming of the Lord approaches, Satan's work will intensify through numerous insidious deceptions." (Ensign, May 1978, p. 33.)

Enemies in Secret Chambers

In January 1831 the Lord revealed to the members of His fledgling church that "the enemy in the secret chambers seeketh your lives." (D&C 38:28.) Secret plottings against the Prophet Joseph Smith and his followers have led to many martyrdoms and much persecution since the time of the restoration of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. (See Hoyt W. Brewster, Jr., Martyrs of the Kingdom, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990.)

Dallin H. Oaks and Marvin S. Hill have written: "The murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith at Carthage, Illinois, was not a spontaneous, impulsive act by a few personal enemies of the Mormon leaders, but a deliberate political assassination, committed or condoned by some of the leading citizens in Hancock County." (Carthage Conspiracy: The Trial of the Accused Assassins of Joseph Smith, Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press, 1975, p. 6.)

Recent assassinations of missionaries serving in South America have been precipitated by secret conspiracies, mostly radical political groups seeking publicity. While these events are very visible, receiving wide publicity, there is perhaps an even more sinister type of enemy meeting in secret chambers, plotting the destruction of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and its leaders. (See D&C 38:13.) This type of enemy seeks to portray himself or herself as a friend of the Church, or even a loyal supporter thereof, but in reality is a wolf in sheep's clothing. (See Matthew 7:15.) The Apostle Paul warned of such individuals: "For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them." (Acts 20:29-30.)

Paul spoke further of those "in the latter times [that] shall depart from the faith, . . . speaking lies in hypocrisy." (1 Timothy 4:1-2.) While Paul was making direct reference to the apostasy that took place in the early Christian church, the application of his warning to the last days is very meaningful. For there are those of our day who have entered the flock in an effort "to draw away disciples after them."

The eleventh prophet of this last dispensation of times, President Harold B. Lee, commented on the wolves among us: "There are some as wolves among us. By that, I mean some who profess membership in this church who are not sparing the flock. And among our own membership, men are arising speaking perverse things. Now perverse means diverting from the right or correct, and being obstinate in the wrong, willfully, in order to draw the weak and unwary members of the Church away after them." (Ensign, January 1973, p. 105; second italics added.) One of the earmarks of the wolves is their obstinacy in the face of counsel, correction, or reproof: "I have my agency," they cry. "I have the right to freedom of thought and expression! I will not be silenced!"

According to the policy of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, apostasy includes "members who repeatedly act in clear, open and deliberate public opposition to the church or its leaders; (or) persist in teaching as Church doctrine information that is not church doctrine after being corrected by their bishops or higher authority." ("Church Isn't Conducting a 'Purge,' LDS Apostle Says," Deseret News, 2 October 1993, p. A5.)

Bishop Richard C. Edgley, counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, spoke of those who seek to displace or discredit the leaders whom God has chosen to lead His church: "There are the so-called 'learned' that have let their intellect undermine their spiritual moorings and who would also attempt to lead the faithful away from those who are appointed by the Lord to lead. There are those who feel that our leaders are out of touch with the realities of the day. They would attempt to lead members by substituting their own knowledge for the revelations from God to His prophets. And, unfortunately, there are those who would so follow. Christ warned, 'Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. (Matt. 7:15.)'" (Ensign, May 1993, p. 12.)

From the day that Joseph Smith was first called of God to be His earthly prophet, there have been individuals who have sought to counsel the Lord and His servants on matters that are clearly not within their stewardship. Counsel from these self-appointed critics usually turns to faultfinding, with a resultant loss of the Spirit. Unrepentant and unwilling to receive and follow proper counsel, these critics will be severed from the Church, either by formal action or their own withdrawal. (See D&C 1:14.)

While serving as a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Harold B. Lee warned about the loss of the Spirit by critics: "There are those among us who would set themselves up as critics of the Church, saying that the Church has gone out of the way. Some splintered apostate clans even from the beginning of this dispensation have made fictitious claims to authority. We should warn these, as well as those who are in danger of being led astray, of what the Prophet [Joseph Smith] predicted. He said, 'That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly that that man is [on the way] to apostasy; and if he does not repent, [he] will apostatize, as God lives.' [TPJS, pp. 156-57.]" (CR, October 1965, pp. 129-30.)

God's Work Will Not Fail

The critics and enemies of the Lord's work may find temporary success in causing the weak and the proud to stumble and fall, but they will not stop or greatly hinder the work. In a reprimanding revelation, Joseph Smith was reminded by the Lord "that it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but the work of men." (D&C 3:3.) Then follows this interesting warning: "For although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him." (Verse 4.)

The Old Testament prophet Daniel saw the establishment of God's kingdom upon the earth in the last days and proclaimed that it "shall never be destroyed . . . [but] shall stand for ever." (Daniel 2:44; see also D&C 65:2.) The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that kingdom! Regarding the Church's ability to withstand attacks and persecution, the Prophet Joseph Smith boldly proclaimed: "No unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done." (HC, 4:540.)

He who is the Head of the Church, even Jesus Christ, declared: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you—there is no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper." (D&C 71:9.)

More recently, Elder Neal A. Maxwell testified of the ultimate success of God's work:

Growing out of our faith in the Lord is our sustaining of His anointed leaders. . . . Faithful Church members have what Peter called an "unfeigned love of the brethren." (1 Pet. 1:22.) Collectively but not perfectly, those sustained do the work to which God has called them. As with Joseph Smith, so it is for his succeeding Brethren. The operative promise persists: namely, the people of the Church will never be turned away "by the testimony of traitors." (D&C 122:3.) But the faithful know something about divine determination. They know that the Lord's purposes will finally triumph, for "there is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it." (Abr. 3:17.) Of that divine determination and divine love I gladly and publicly testify in the holy name of Jesus Christ. (Ensign, May 1991, p. 91; italics added.)

Numerous other testimonies could be cited regarding the unfailing nature of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ as proclaimed by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Perhaps three will suffice to conclude this chapter on conspiracies in the last days:

While serving as a counselor in the First Presidency of the Church, President Hugh B. Brown testified: "I leave you my testimony of the restoration of the gospel, and I want you to know that the President and all of us have confidence in you, that you will not let us down nor be untrue to yourselves nor become traitors to the cause. Furthermore, you may be sure that ultimately righteousness will triumph. Truth will prevail. The Church has been organized and set up. It is the kingdom of God, and it will never be thrown down." (CR, October 1961, p. 87.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith, tenth prophet of this last dispensation, declared: "The time will never come when we will not be able to put confidence and exercise faith in the teachings and in the instruction of those who lead us." (DS, 1:243.)

Finally, consider this declaration from President Heber J. Grant: "Any Latter-day Saint who thinks for one minute that this Church is going to fail is not really a converted Latter-day Saint. There will be no failure in this Church. It has been established for the last time, never to be given to another people and never to be thrown down." ("Message of Inspiration," Church News, 27 October 1962, p. 2.)
