Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 7

The Constitution by a Thread

"Even this nation will be on the verge of crumbling to pieces and tumbling to the ground and when the Constitution is on the brink of ruin this people will be the staff upon which the nation shall lean and they shall bear the Constitution away from the very verge of destruction."

—JSP, 10 March 1844

An Inspired Document

Latter-day Saints have long loved and cherished the United States Constitution. This basic document of law received a divine stamp of approval in an 1833 revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in which the Lord declared, "I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose." (D&C 101:80.) In a revelation given several months earlier, the Lord had counseled his people to befriend "the constitutional law of the land" (D&C 98:6).

The Prophet Joseph Smith expressed his feelings for this inspired instrument of freedom in these words: "The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun. . . . The Constitution of the United States is true." (HC, 3:304.)

Other latter-day prophets have testified of the inspired nature of the Constitution. President George Albert Smith, eighth prophet of this dispensation, declared: "I am saying to you that to me the Constitution of the United States of America is just as much from my Heavenly Father as the Ten Commandments." (CR, April 1948, p. 182.)

President David O. McKay, who followed President George Albert Smith as the Lord's latter-day prophet, proclaimed: "Next to being one in worshiping God there is nothing in this world upon which this Church should be more united than in upholding and defending the Constitution of the United States." (In CR, October 1939, p. 105.) Finally, President Ezra Taft Benson, thirteenth prophet of the dispensation of the fullness of times, said: "I reverence the Constitution of the United States as a sacred document. To me its words are akin to the revelations of God." (Ensign, November 1987, p. 7.)

Although the Constitution is an inspired document, it should be noted that it is not perfect. Appropriate amendments have been added to it as times and circumstances have changed. President Brigham Young explained: "The signers of the Declaration of Independence and the framers of the Constitution were inspired from on high to do that work. But was that which was given to them perfect, not admitting of any addition whatever? No; for if men know anything, they must know that the Almighty has never yet found a man in mortality that was capable, at the first intimation, at the first impulse, to receive anything in a state of entire perfection. They laid the foundation, and it was for after generations to rear the superstructure upon it. It is a progressive—a gradual work." (JD, 7:14.)

President John Taylor added that "even this [Constitution], good as it was, was not a perfect instrument; it was one of those stepping stones to a future development in the progress of a man to the intelligence and light, the power and union that God alone can impart to the human family." (JD, 21:31.)

A Future Threat to the Constitution

It is said that on July 19, 1840, the Prophet Joseph declared that the United States "will be on the verge of crumbling to pieces and tumbling to the ground." At this critical point, "when the Constitution is on the brink of ruin," the Latter-day Saints apparently will reach out and "bear the Constitution away from the very verge of destruction." (JSP, 10 March 1844; italics added.)

While we are unable to specifically document Joseph Smith's having uttered these or similar words, several of his contemporaries claimed to have heard him make such statements. For example, in 1871 Eliza R. Snow said: "I heard the prophet say, 'The time will come when the government of these United States will be so nearly overthrown through its corruption, that the Constitution will hang as it were by a single hair, and the Latter-day Saints—the Elders of Israel—will step forward to its rescue and save it.'" (JH, 24 July 1871; italics added.)

Similar wording can be found in an utterance of Elder Parley P. Pratt, who is quoted as saying the following in 1841 regarding the United States government: "The government is fallen and needs redeeming. It is guilty of Blood and cannot stand as it now is but will come so near desolation as to hang as it were by a single hair!!!!!" (George A. Smith Papers, LDS Church Archives, 21 January 1841; second italics added.)

On Independence Day in 1854, President Brigham Young declared: "Will the Constitution be destroyed? No: it will be held inviolate by this people; and, as Joseph Smith said, 'The time will come when the destiny of the nation will hang upon a single thread. At that critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from the threatened destruction.' It will be so." (JD, 7:15; italics added.)

Less than one year later, President Young spoke again of a future threat to the constitutional government of the United States: "Brethren and sisters, our friends wish to know our feelings towards the Government. I answer, they are first-rate, and we will prove it too, as you will see if you only live long enough, for that we shall live to prove it is certain; and when the Constitution of the United States hangs, as it were, upon a single thread, they will have to call for the 'Mormon' Elders to save it from utter destruction; and they will step forth and do it." (JD, 2:182; italics added.)

Elder Orson Hyde recalled a slightly different wording of Joseph Smith's alleged statement regarding the Constitution than did some of his contemporaries:

It is said that brother Joseph in his lifetime declared that the Elders of this Church should step forth at a particular time when the Constitution should be in danger, and rescue it, and save it. This may be so; but I do not recollect that he said exactly so. I believe he said something like this—that the time would come when the Constitution and the country would be in danger of an overthrow; and said he, If the Constitution be saved at all, it will be by the Elders of this Church. I believe this is about the language, as nearly as I can recollect it.

The question is whether it will be saved at all, or not. I do not know that it matters to us whether it is or not: the Lord will provide for and take care of his people, if we do every duty, and fear and honour him, and keep his commandments; and he will not leave us without a Constitution. (JD, 6:152; italics added.)

It appears that President Brigham Young thought the predicted governmental and constitutional crisis would occur in his days. He spoke the following words in April 1868: "And I tell you further, Elders of Israel, that you do not know the day of your visitation, neither do you understand the signs of the times, for if you did you would be awake to these things. Every organization of our government, the best government in the world, is crumbling to pieces. Those who have it in their hands are the ones who are destroying it. How long will it be before the words of the prophet Joseph will be fulfilled? He said if the Constitution of the United States were saved at all it must be done by this people." (JD, 12:204; italics added.)

More than one hundred years later, President Ezra Taft Benson expressed his feelings regarding the fulfillment of the prediction attributed to Joseph Smith: "I have faith that the Constitution will be saved as prophesied by Joseph Smith. It will be saved by the righteous citizens of this nation who love and cherish freedom. It will be saved by enlightened members of this Church—among others—men and women who understand and abide the principles of the Constitution." (Ensign, November 1987, p. 7.) "We are fast approaching that moment prophesied by Joseph Smith." (Ibid, p. 6.)

People to Look to the Latter-day Saints for Protection

Perhaps the predicted governmental crisis will occur amid civil strife and widespread warfare. On August 31, 1879, President John Taylor uttered these words of warning:

We have got to establish a government upon the principle of righteousness, justice, truth and equality and not according to the many false notions that exist among men. And then the day is not far distant when this nation will be shaken from centre to circumference. And now, you may write it down, any of you, and I will prophesy it in the name of God. And then will be fulfilled that prediction to be found in one of the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. [See D&C 45:65-71.] Those who will not take up their sword to fight against their neighbor must needs flee to Zion for safety. And they will come, saying, we do not know anything of the principles of your religion, but we perceive that you are an honest community; you administer justice and righteousness, and we want to live with you and receive the protection of your laws, but as for your religion we will talk about that some other time. Will we protect such people? Yes, all honorable men. When the people shall have torn to shreds the Constitution of the United States the Elders of Israel will be found holding it up to the nations of the earth and proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men, and extending the hand of fellowship to the oppressed of all nations. This is part of the programme, and as long as we do what is right and fear God, he will help us and stand by us under all circumstances." (JD, 21:8; italics added.)

More will be said in Chapter 9 about the forthcoming strife and warfare that will engulf all nations, including the United States of America. It appears that just as "wise men [were] raised up" by the Lord to establish the Constitution (D&C 101:80), he will similarly raise up wise men in the last days to save it from destruction.
