Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 8

"The Love of Many Shall Wax Cold"

"And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold."

—Matthew 24:12

The Loss of Love

The prophecy that in the last days "the love of many shall wax cold" is found in three different scriptures. (See Matthew 24:12; D&C 45:27; JS-M 1:10.) To "wax cold" is to lose the warmth of love and to become increasingly self-centered, inconsiderate, and uncaring of others.

When asked to identify "the great commandment in the law," the Savior responded by citing two commandments: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:36-40.) In the last days many have lost their love of their neighbor and of God. They have turned from worshipping Deity to worshipping the things of this world: material possessions, power, prestige, and pleasures. The self-centered approach to life is epitomized in the selfish slogan "Look out for number one!"

Society is presently plagued with increasing evidences of love waxing cold: rudeness, divorce, lawsuits, abuse, rape, beatings, gang violence, murder, theft, vandalism, and freeway and drive-by shootings. In general, there has been a turning away from love, courtesy, and consideration for others. On all sides we see the fulfillment of the Apostle Paul's prophecy "that in the last days . . . men shall be lovers of their own selves, . . . lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God." (2 Timothy 3:1-2, 4.)

Grim Facts

In 1992 the Attorney General of the United States reported that violence had increased 500 percent in thirty years. The number of violent crime attempts increased 11 percent from 1990 to 1991. A 1993 survey indicated that 3.5 million people are killed by violent action each year in the United States.

Violence among young people is particularly distressing. The editors of Fortune magazine provided the following information: "Of the 65 million Americans under 18, [fully 20%] live in poverty, 22% live in single-parent homes, and almost 3% live with no parent at all. Violence among the young is . . . rampant. . . . Playground fights that used to end in bloody noses now end in [some fatalities]. Schools that once considered talking in class a capital offense are routinely [checking children] for weapons, questioning them about drugs. . . . A good public education, safe streets, and family dinners—with both father and mother present—seem like quaint memories of a far distant past." (Louis S. Richman, "Struggling to Save Our Kids," Fortune, 10 August 1992, p. 34.)

The evidence of increasing violence in the public schools is vividly seen in comparing two surveys: "Not long ago, in a California school system, the top seven problems were listed as: talking out of turn; chewing gum; making noise; running in the halls; cutting in line; dress code violations; and littering.

"By the 1980's, in the same school system, the top seven problems were drug abuse; alcohol abuse; pregnancy; suicide; rape; robbery; and assault." (William P. Barr, "The Judeo-Christian Tradition vs. Secularism," speech delivered to the Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights, Washington, D.C., 6 October 1992.)

Consider these recent examples of increasing violence and evidence of the loss of love among the young people in our society:

Â An eight-year-old boy walked into a school cafeteria and pointed a BB gun at the stomach of a pregnant teacher. Smiling, he pulled the trigger.

Â Following a concert in the downtown area of a metropolitan city, a seventeen-year-old boy was pulled from his car, senselessly beaten, and shot to death while hundreds of onlookers stood by.

Â Six children, ranging in age from eight to thirteen, terrorized an 87-year-old woman as she returned from the grocery store. She was physically and verbally abused, and her apartment was ransacked during the attack.

Â A seventeen-year-old spectator at a Little League baseball game was killed when he was hit with a bat that one player swung at another player. The umpire's home was later firebombed, and a threatening note left behind warned, "Testify and you're dead!"

Â A 1991 survey showed that 20 percent of high school students admitted to carrying weapons to school.

Â Children are now participating in ride-by shootings on bicycles.

Â Two girls, ages fourteen and fifteen, armed with 9mm semiautomatic pistols, hijacked a car from a man and went on a joyride.

Â A group of teenagers raped and stabbed a woman 132 times. The reason? "There was nothing to do, and so I guess we had the impression of going out to the field and kill somebody."

Â Two ten-year-old boys kidnapped a two-year-old child and viciously beat him to death with bricks and stones. They then disposed of the body on a train track.

The increasing violence by children and teenagers was summed up by professor Jack Levin, who teaches sociology and criminology at Northeastern University in Boston: "Hatred is hip. Killing is cool. . . . We're seeing a callous disregard for human life that we've never seen before." (As quoted in Deseret News, 29 September 1992, p. A1.)

Reaping the Winds of Violence

The loss of love and the resultant increase of violence in the world can be attributed in part to the increase of violence in television, videos, and movies. The Apostle Paul warned that "whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Galatians 6:7.) Society has "sown the wind," and it is "reap[ing] the whirlwind." (Hosea 8:7.)

In the middle 1960s, when the entertainment media was relatively mild compared with the media today, Elder Richard L. Evans of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles observed that "the evil that seems to fascinate men most today is violence." (Tom Wolfe, as quoted in CR, October 1965, p. 43.) President N. Eldon Tanner spoke of the consequences of this fascination with violence: "We are drowning our youngsters in violence, cynicism, and sadism piped into the living room and even the nursery. The grandchildren of the kids who used to weep because The Little Match Girl froze to death now feel cheated if she isn't slugged, raped, and thrown into a Bessemer converter." (Ensign, July 1973, p. 10.)

More recently, Elder M. Russell Ballard spoke out against the increasing violence that comes into the homes on the television screen and is portrayed on the larger screen in movie theaters:

Dr. [Victor] Cline said that the mental diet is as important as the nutritional diet. "The amount of violence a child sees at 7 predicts how violent he will be at 17, 27, and 37. Children's minds are like banks—whatever you put in, you get back 10 years later with interest." He said that violent television teaches children, step-by-step, "how to commit violent acts, and it desensitizes them to the horror of such behavior and to the feelings of victims." Dr. Cline said that America is suffering from "an explosion of interpersonal violence like we have never seen before. . . . The violence is because of violence in our entertainment." (See "Therapist says children who view TV violence tend to become violent," Deseret News, 24 Mar. 1989, p. B-2.) (Ensign, May 1989, p. 78; italics added.)

Another of the Lord's apostles, Elder Marvin J. Ashton, warned of the addictive behavior that comes from violence—a terrible form of obscenity as one assaults a fellow human being, a son or daughter of God—or from being involved in other types of obscenities, such as pornography: "A person who becomes involved in obscenity soon acquires distorted views of personal conduct. He becomes unable to relate to others in a normal, healthy way. Like most other habits, an addictive effect begins to take hold of him. A diet of violence or pornography dulls the senses, and future exposures need to be rougher and more extreme. Soon the person is desensitized and is unable to react in a sensitive, caring, responsible manner, especially to those in his own home and family. Good people can become infested with this material and it can have terrifying, destructive consequences." (Ensign, November 1977, p. 71.)

This increase in violence, often associated with filth, is not limited to the land of America. It is a worldwide cancer of the last days. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley reported: "The flood of pornographic filth, the inordinate emphasis on sex and violence are not peculiar to this land. The situation is as bad in Europe and in many other areas. News stories tell of the production in Denmark of a filthy, erotic, and blasphemous movie to be produced on the life of the Son of God. The whole dismal picture indicates a weakening rot seeping into the very fiber of society." (CR, October 1975, p. 56.)

The world has stooped to a vile level when he who represents the epitome of love, even the sinless Son of God, who selflessly sacrificed Himself to bring about the Atonement in our lives, is vilified in blasphemous ways.

The war against the Lord, His church, His ways, and His servants has intensified in these last days. Satan is as active as he has ever been since he lost his self-serving bid and the resultant battle for control of men's souls in the pre-earth life. He who is not capable of love has intensified his efforts to destroy love and replace it with contention, violence, hatred, and war.

The Downfall of Ancient Civilizations

Classic examples of Satan's tactics in destroying two civilizations can be found in the Book of Mormon. The first of these, the Jaredite civilization, flourished in the ancient Americas from shortly after the Tower of Babel (circa 2000 B.C.) until its destruction around 590 B.C.

The Jaredite society became characterized by secret combinations, violence, murder, and war: "Now there began to be a war upon all the face of the land, every man with his band fighting for that which he desired. And there were robbers, and in fine, all manner of wickedness upon all the face of the land. . . . And they did meet in great anger." (Ether 13:25-27.) Perhaps the most telling description of their state of mind is found in these fateful words: "They were drunken with anger, even as a man who is drunken with wine." (Ether 15:22; italics added.)

The second civilization whose destruction is recorded in the Book of Mormon was one that lasted from roughly B.C. 600 to about A.D. 421. Like the Jaredites before them, this second civilization succumbed to the sin of contention, allowing their love of God and man to wax cold. Their condition was described by the prophet Mormon: "Satan stirreth them up continually to anger one with another. . . . For so exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they have no fear of death; and they have lost their love, one towards another; and they thirst after blood and revenge continually." (Moroni 9:3, 5.)

A Prophet's Admonition

During the early years of his ministry as the Lord's prophet and spokesman on earth, President Ezra Taft Benson spoke frequently and fervently about the importance of studying the Book of Mormon. He noted that one of the reasons "why we must make the Book of Mormon a center focus of study is that it was written for our day. The Nephites never had the book; neither did the Lamanites of ancient times. It was meant for us." President Benson cited examples of where the prophets of Book of Mormon times had indicated they were writing to a future generation (see 2 Nephi 25:21; Jacob 1:3; Enos 1:15-16; Jarom 1:2; Mormon 7:1; 8:34-35) and then commented:

If they saw our day, and chose those things which would be of greatest worth to us, is not that how we should study the Book of Mormon? We should constantly ask ourselves, "Why did the Lord inspire Mormon (or Moroni or Alma) to include that in his record? What lesson can I learn from that to help me live in this day and age?"

And there is example after example of how that question will be answered. For example, in the Book of Mormon we find a pattern for preparing for the Second Coming. A major portion of the book centers on the few decades just prior to Christ's coming to America. By careful study of that time period, we can determine why some were destroyed in the terrible judgments that preceded His coming and what brought others to stand at the temple in the land of Bountiful and thrust their hands into the wounds of His hands and feet.

From the Book of Mormon we learn how disciples of Christ live in times of war. From the Book of Mormon we see the evils of secret combinations portrayed in graphic and chilling reality. In the Book of Mormon we find lessons for dealing with persecution and apostasy. We learn much about how to do missionary work. And more than anywhere else, we see in the Book of Mormon the dangers of materialism and setting our hearts on the things of the world. Can anyone doubt that this book was meant for us and that in it we find great power, great comfort, and great protection? (Ensign, November 1986, pp. 6-7.)

Thus, a study of the Book of Mormon will help humble people of the last days to avoid making the same mistakes that destroyed those of former days. However, prophecy will be fulfilled, and the love of many will continue to wax cold during these last days before the Second Coming.
