Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 9

Wars and Rumors of Wars

"And ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom."

—Matthew 24:6-7

Satan Rages in the Hearts of Men

John the Revelator, who saw both the past and the future, proclaimed: "And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon and his angels fought against Michael; And the dragon prevailed not. . . . Neither was there place found in heaven for the great dragon, who was cast out; that old serpent called the devil, and also called Satan, which deceiveth the whole world; he was cast out into the earth; and his angels were cast out with him." (JST, Revelation 12:6-8.) Although he was unsuccessful in his first war, Satan has continued to promote warfare here on earth. He rages in the hearts of men, fomenting anger and hatred, which lead to wars and bloodshed. (See Moses 6:15.)

The ancient Nephite prophet-general Mormon provided insights regarding how depraved warfare can become. He described the bloodthirsty depravity of the Nephite soldiers as the curtain was fast falling on their civilization: "They are without order and without mercy. . . . And they have become strong in their perversion; and they are alike brutal, sparing none, neither old nor young; and they delight in everything save that which is good. . . . They are without principle, and past feeling." (Moroni 9:18-20.)

Prophecies of Wars in the Last Days

Although warfare and bloodshed have essentially been a curse on this planet from the day that Cain slew Abel, the widespread presence of wars and rumors of wars throughout the earth is one of the prophesied signs of the last days. The Savior spoke of this coming bane on mankind during His final days on earth. (See Matthew 24:6-7; see also JS-M 1:28-29.) He repeated this prophetic utterance in a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1831. (See D&C 45:26.)

One need only glance through the daily newspaper or listen to news reports to get a glimpse of how this prophecy is being fulfilled. Almost daily the media feeds us a diet of disputes throughout the world that turn into skirmishes and finally into full-fledged fighting with declared and undeclared wars. Nearly as soon as a precarious truce is worked out in one area, another fight breaks out somewhere else. Each time a worldwide conflict ends, there is a surge of hope that war is at an end. And yet anger, fighting, bloodshed, and wars continue. And so it will be until the Second Coming.

Joseph Smith's Prophecy on War

In March 1831 the Lord revealed to the Prophet the imminency of wars, including in the United States: "Ye hear of wars in foreign lands; but, behold, I say unto you, they are nigh, even at your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own lands." (D&C 45:63.)

Almost two years later, on Christmas Day in 1832, the Prophet Joseph Smith uttered this remarkable prophecy regarding war:

Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls; and the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place. For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured out upon all nations. . . . And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn. (D&C 87:1-3, 6.)

This prophecy was given twenty-nine years before the first gun was fired on Fort Sumter by rebel forces from South Carolina. Handwritten copies of the revelation had been carried by some of the leading elders between the time of the prophecy in 1831 and the commencement of hostilities in 1861.

Elder Orson Pratt, one of those called to the original Quorum of Twelve Apostles in 1835, related his experience in teaching Joseph's prophecy:

When I was a [young man], I traveled extensively in the United States and the Canadas, preaching this restored Gospel. I had a manuscript copy of this revelation [D&C 87], which I carried in my pocket, and I was in the habit of reading it to the people among whom I traveled and preached. As a general thing the people regarded it as the height of nonsense, saying the Union was too strong to be broken; and I, they said, was led away, the victim of an impostor. I knew the prophecy was true, for the Lord had spoken to me and had given me revelation. I knew also concerning the divinity of this work. Year after year passed away, while every little while some of the acquaintances I had formerly made would say, "Well, what is going to become of that prediction? It's never going to be fulfilled." Said I, "Wait, the Lord has his set time." By and by it came along, and the first battle was fought at Charleston, South Carolina. This is another testimony that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the Most High God; he not only foretold the coming of a great civil war at a time when statesmen even never dreamed of such a thing, but he named the very place where it should commence." (JD, 18:224-25.)

Elder B. H. Roberts, who served as a General Authority from 1888 until his death in 1933, provided additional insights regarding the 1832 prophecy. Speaking of the proclamation that these forthcoming wars, including the Civil War, would "end in the death and misery of many souls," Elder Roberts said: "This, however, was contrary to the expectations both of the North and the South. The South claimed that in a short time they would be able to compel the North to acknowledge them as an independent nation. While Abraham Lincoln was equally confident in his ability to put his foot upon the neck of the Rebellion and crush out its life." (JD, 25:142.)

To date, only World War II has exceeded the Civil War in casualties for the United States. Almost 215,000 servicemen were killed in action during the war between the states.

Elder Roberts provided further insight into another aspect of the Prophet's remarkable prophecy:

The Southern States were to call on Great Britain to assist them. Did they do it? Yes. The Southern States Confederacy sent two men, Messrs. Mason and Slidell, to negotiate with the English government, with the view of getting assistance; but they were captured and brought back to the United States. This is a familiar matter of history. England, too, was to call upon other nations to protect themselves against other nations. Has this been done? To answer that question we have but to allude to the treaties now existing between Great Britain and other European nations. Thus you see this prophecy, so far as we have read it [D&C 87:1-3], has been minutely fulfilled—fulfilled in every particular, and the rest of it will be, so fast as the wheels of time shall bring the events due. (JD, 25:143.)

As prophesied, war will continue to spread to other nations until the coming of the Son of Man.

A Continuation of Warfare and Bloodshed

As the Civil War raged, Elder Wilford Woodruff, then of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, uttered the following state ment regarding those who reject the gospel and the ongoing nature of warfare and bloodshed: "Will there ever be any more peace among them? No, not until the earth is drenched with the blood of the inhabitants thereof. When the spirit of the Gospel leaves any people it leaves them in a worse condition than it found them, the spirit of ferocity, darkness and war will take hold of that people, and the time will come when every man that does not take his sword against his neighbor will have to go to Zion for safety." (JD, 10:15.)

In 1879 President John Taylor, who succeeded Brigham Young as the Lord's prophet on earth, spoke of the bloodshed of the Civil War and then declared: "I tell you today the end is not yet. You will see worse things than that, for God will lay his hand upon this nation, and they will feel it more terribly than ever they have done before; there will be more bloodshed, more ruin, more devastation than ever they have seen before. . . . There is yet to come a sound of war, trouble and distress, in which brother will be arrayed against brother, father against son, son against father, a scene of desolation and destruction that will permeate our land until it will be a vexation to hear the report thereof." (JD, 20:318.)

There has been much speculation on the nature of this prophesied bloodshed. The exact fulfillment remains to be seen. However, the rioting that has torn apart cities in the United States in the past few years, destroying property and lives, could well be a partial fulfillment of President Taylor's proclamation. So too could be the gang violence, murder, and crimes of aggression that have made so many of our metropolitan streets unsafe.

In a later speech, President Taylor indicated that bloodshed would not be limited to the United States but would be worldwide: "The world . . . is full of confusion, and there will be worse confusion by and by. We had a great war upon this continent some years ago; but there will yet be wars pass through these United States, and through other nations, until it will be mournful to hear the report of the bloodshed, the sorrow and the trouble that will be caused thereby." (JD, 24:200.)

The Lord decreed the universal nature of contention and warfare in a revelation received in 1831: "I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth. I have sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man; and the saints also shall hardly escape." (D&C 63:32-33.)

Thus, not only will the wicked suffer the effects of warfare but also the Saints. In this respect, Elder Bruce R. McConkie made an interesting observation: "We do not say that all of the Saints will be spared and saved from the coming day of desolation. But we do say there is no promise of safety and no promise of security except for those who love the Lord and who are seeking to do all that he commands.

"It may be, for instance, that nothing except the power of faith and the authority of the priesthood can save individuals and congregations from the atomic holocausts that surely shall be." (Ensign, May 1979, p. 93.)

And what if some Saints do suffer and die? With an eternal perspective in mind, they will not "charge God foolishly" but declare, as did Job, "blessed be the name of the Lord." (Job 1:21-22.)

Warfare Technology Fulfills Ancient Prophecy

Modern technology has increased the capability of mankind to spread war and destruction far and wide. Many years ago Elder Joseph Fielding Smith, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, observed: "Since the Civil War in the United States, warfare has undergone wonderful changes. The nations have been in a mad race to outdo each other. The steel battleship has made it necessary for the steel gun that will pierce the battleship's armor. Bigger guns mean thicker armor plate. Science has been at its wits end in each of the nations, devising ways and means for further and more terrible destruction. The World War increased this madness rather than being the means of bringing permanent peace." (The Progress of Man, Salt Lake City: The Genealogical Society of Utah, 1952, p. 401.)

The Revelator described weaponry and armament unknown to the ancients: "And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men. And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions. And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle. And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months." (Revelation 9:7-10.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie provided the following commentary on John's description: "In prophetic imagery John here seeks to describe a war fought with weapons and under circumstances entirely foreign to any experience of his own or of the people of that day. . . . [See also Joel 2:1-11.]

"It is not improbable that these ancient prophets were seeing such things as men wearing or protected by strong armor; as troops of cavalry and companies of tanks and flame throwers; as airplanes and airborne missiles which explode, fire shells and drop bombs; and even other weapons yet to be devised in an age when warfare is the desire and love of wicked men." (DNTC, 3:502-3; italics added.)

The Revelator further described locusts that could kill and torment men as scorpions but would "not hurt the grass . . . neither any green thing." The results of their sting would be that "men [would] seek death, and . . . not find it." (Revelation 9:3-6.) Elder McConkie suggested that "perhaps John is seeing such things as the effects of poisonous gas, or bacteriological warfare, or atomic fallout, which disable but do not kill." (DNTC, 3:502). Indeed, a revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants seems descriptive of nuclear and chemical warfare: "Wherefore, I the Lord God will send forth flies upon the face of the earth, which shall take hold of the inhabitants thereof, and shall eat their flesh, and shall cause maggots to come in upon them; and their tongues shall be stayed that they shall not utter against me; and their flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their sockets." (D&C 29:18-19; see also Zechariah 14:12.)

Anyone who has read a description of the physical condition of a person who has been exposed to nuclear, chemical, or bacteriological weaponry can surely envision a fulfillment of this prophecy. One commentary suggested that the plague of flies would include a "plague of microbes, or bacilli, new to the scientific world and with which they will not be able to cope." (Hyrum M. Smith, and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1954, p. 152.)

The Lord's Purposes Will Be Accomplished

In spite of Satan's seeming success in promoting war and contention, it is important to remember that in the end the Lord's purposes will be brought to pass. The adversary's greatest efforts will not prevail in stopping God's work.

In a revelation given in 1838 during the height of mobbings against the Saints in Missouri, the Lord provided a comforting reminder of who is really in charge: "Have I not made the earth? Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?" (D&C 117:6.)

Regarding the ultimate power and purposes of the Lord, President John Taylor said: "Whatever the opinions and ideas of men may be, it will be found at last that the Lord rules, manipulates and manages the affairs of men, of nations and of the world, and therefore, neither this nation nor any other nation can do anything more than God permits. He sets up one nation, and puts down another, according to the counsels of his own will. And he has done this from the beginning, whether men believe it or not." (JD, 23:333; italics added.)

One of the Lord's latter-day Apostles, Elder George Q. Morris, observed:

But bear in mind that the Lord is directing this world. We are frequently reminded that conditions have been so developed in the powers of warfare that an accident or a rash move could set in operation those powers which might destroy our civilization. But let us bear in mind that this world is in the hands of God. All these things will happen only so far as they are in accordance with his plans and his purposes. And let us not waste our time and our energy and get into a nervous condition about what is going to happen to the world. That is not our sphere of responsibility. The Lord will take care of that. It remains for us to be devoted to the upbuilding of his kingdom and facing whatever conditions may come to us. (CR, April 1959, p. 102; italics added.)

Elder Morris's admonition not to waste time and energy fretting about future world conditions is wise counsel.

More recently, President Spencer W. Kimball offered this advice at the opening session of a general conference of the Church: "Love one another, brothers and sisters! Have love in your homes and in your hearts! Be peacemakers even though we must live in a world filled with wars and rumors of wars! (See D&C 45:26.) Follow the counsel you will receive in this general conference. And I'll do my best to do likewise. Trust the Lord and His unfolding purposes even when His purposes are not always completely clear to us at the moment." (Ensign, May 1982, p. 5.)

And so, as we anticipate a continued increase of wars and rumors of wars prior to the Second Coming, culminating in the great battle of Armageddon, we put our trust in the Lord.
