Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 10

Armageddon

"The kings of the earth and of the whole world . . . gather . . . to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. . . . And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon."

—Revelation 16:14

Meaning of Armageddon

The name Armageddon is one that both intrigues and evokes great fear, yet its only mention in all of scripture is found in the apocalyptic writings of the Apostle John. Much has been written and spoken on the subject, some of it inspired and much of it mere speculation.

The following definitions from the LDS Bible Dictionary provide assistance in understanding the meaning of Armageddon:

Â "Armageddon. A Greek transliteration from the Hebrew Har Megiddon, or Mountain of Megiddo. The valley of Megiddo is in the western portion of the plain of Esdraelon 50 miles north of Jerusalem. Several times the valley of Megiddo was the scene of violent and crucial battles during [Old Testament] times (Judg. 5:19; 2 Kgs. 9:27; 23:29). A great and final conflict taking place at the second coming of the Lord is called the battle of Armageddon because it too will be fought in the same locale and will be decisive. See Zech. 11-14, especially 12:11; Rev. 16:14-21."

Â "Esdraelon. The Greek form of the Hebrew word Jezreel. The 'great plain of Esdraelon' is also known in the [Old Testament] as the 'valley of Megiddo'; it separates the hills of Samaria from those of Galilee, and is the most fertile part of Palestine. It was crossed by several important highways, and for that reason often provided a battleground (Judg. 4; 5; 7; 1 Sam. 31; 2 Chr. 35:20-27; cf. Rev. 16:16)."

At the southern entrance to the valley of Esdraelon is a city presently known as Tell el-Mutesellim but anciently known as Megiddo. This city stands as a sentinel to the twenty-by-fourteen-mile valley. The name in Hebrew means "the place of troops," a name most appropriate in terms of its standing in ancient battles and its future role in the final conflict before the Second Coming. Megiddo will serve as the command center for the armies of the evil alliance in this last battle of our telestial earth.

Just prior to the Savior's return to earth to reign during a millennium of peace, the most vicious war in history will be raging. Its major battleground will be from the valley of Megiddo to Jerusalem, where some two hundred million warriors ("two hundred thousand thousand" in Revelation 9:16) will be seeking to destroy Israel, but the war will be a worldwide conflict between good and evil. Elder Bruce R. McConkie said: "That which is going forward in Palestine is but a type and a shadow of that which shall be in all nations and among all peoples. We must remind ourselves that this is a worldwide conflict and that all nations are involved." (MM, p. 485.)

Identity of Gog and Magog

The leader of the two-hundred-million-man army is identified in the scriptures as Gog. The prophet Ezekiel identified him as having come from the land of Magog. (See Ezekiel 38:2.) Although the collective name of "Gog and Magog" has frequently been given to this evil warrior, he should correctly be referred to as "Gog of Magog."

The LDS Bible Dictionary provides the following description of Gog: "King of Magog, whose invasion of Israel was prophesied by Ezekiel (Ezek. 38; 39). The prophecy points to a time when the heathen nations of the north would set themselves against the people of God and would be defeated, and led to recognize Jehovah as King. All this appears to be at the second coming of the Lord. Another battle, called the battle of Gog and Magog, will occur at the end of the 1,000 years. This is described by John in Rev. 20:7-9; see also D&C 88:111-116."

The name Gog may have reference to one leader or to a combination of leaders who will make up the evil alliance. Elder Bruce R. McConkie states: "Gog and Magog are all the nations of the earth who take up the sword against Israel and Jerusalem in the day of Armageddon. Their identities remain to be revealed when the battle alliances are made." (MM, p. 481.)

There have been speculative efforts to identify the nations that will be on opposite sides of this final battle before the Millennium. As noted in the above commentary by Elder McConkie, "their identities remain to be revealed." One need only reflect on the quick demise of the once powerful Soviet Union to understand how foolish it is to assign specific identities to the future combatants of Armageddon. However, all nations will be involved in this conflict: "No nation in any land will be neutral. This coming conflict will be universal, and out of it will come the final day of destruction and burning. It will exceed in horror, intensity, and scope all prior wars. It is only in the last days that there are enough people on earth to field armies of the required size, and only now do we have the weapons to slay millions at a single blast." (MM, pp. 449-50.)

Events Preceding Armageddon

A commentary on the Old Testament published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints provides the following information regarding some important events that must occur before the battle of Armageddon commences:

To the above list we add two significant additions. First, many of the inhabitants of the land—the seed of Judah, believers in the old covenant—must accept the new and everlasting covenant: the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. In order for Judah to be considered truly gathered, this tribe of Israel must accept the true Messiah and receive the saving covenants and ordinances of his gospel under the hands of their brethren from the tribe of Ephraim. Elder McConkie provides the following insight to this aspect of gathering:

Judah will gather to old Jerusalem in due course; of this, there is no doubt. But this gathering will consist of accepting Christ, joining the Church, and receiving anew the Abrahamic covenant as it is administered in holy places. The present assembling of people of Jewish ancestry into the Palestinian nation of Israel is not the scriptural gathering of Israel or of Judah. It may be prelude thereto, and some of the people so assembled may in due course be gathered into the true church and kingdom of God on earth, and they may then assist in building the temple that is destined to grace Jerusalem's soil. But a political gathering is not a spiritual gathering, and the Lord's kingdom is not of this world. (NWAF, pp. 519-20.)

The second additional event that must occur before Armageddon is the building of a holy temple in old Jerusalem. This will be built and operated under the direction of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The presence of this temple—the mountain of the Lord's House—will be a major factor in the battle for Jerusalem in the days of Armageddon.

A Religious War

Biblical and ancient language scholar Dr. Richard D. Draper suggested that a major objective of the armies of Gog will be "the Mountain of the Lord's House, for . . . the battle is essentially religious: one ideology and theology against another. Therefore, the beast must eventually destroy the Mountain of the Lord's House, the seat of God's power on earth, if he is to reign supreme." (OSS, pp. 180-81.)

Elder McConkie also taught that Armageddon would be "a religious war. The forces of antichrist are seeking to destroy freedom and liberty and right; they seek to deny men the right to worship the Lord; they are the enemies of God. The one-third who remain in the land of Israel [see Zechariah 13:8-9] are the Lord's people. They believe in Christ and accept Joseph Smith as his prophet and revealer for the last days." (MM, pp. 465-66.)

"One host is for God and his cause; the other fights against him. Both hosts are comprised of wicked and worldly men, but one is defending freedom, and the other would destroy liberty and enslave men. One defends free institutions, freedom in government, freedom to worship the god of one's choice according to one's own conscience, and the other, Lucifer-like, seeks to overthrow liberty and freedom in all its forms." (Ibid, p. 457.)

Lucifer will resort to the use of every form of black magic and sophistry he can to build his armies of Armageddon. One of the original Apostles of this last dispensation, Elder Orson Pratt, taught:

[Lucifer] will gather up millions upon millions of people into the valleys around about Jerusalem in order to destroy the Jews after they have gathered. How will the Devil do this? He will perform miracles to do it. The Bible says the kings of the earth and the great ones will be deceived by these false miracles. It says there shall be three unclean spirits that shall go forth working miracles, and they are spirits of devils. Where do they go? To the kings of the earth; and what will they do? Gather them up to battle unto the great day of God Almighty. Where? Into the valley of Armageddon. And where is that? On the east side of Jerusalem.

When he gets them gathered together, they do not understand any of these things; but they are given up to that power that deceived them, by miracles that had been performed, to get them to go into that valley to be destroyed. (JD, 7:189.)

The Beast at Bay

Although they will wreak great destruction and destroy many lives, the armies of Gog will be prohibited in their objective of conquering Jerusalem for a period of time. Two latter-day prophets will successfully hold these armies at bay. (See Parley P. Pratt, A Voice of Warning and Instruction to All People, New York: W. Sandford, 1837, p. 80.)

John the Revelator described the ministry of these two prophets: "And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies; and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will." (Revelation 11:3-6.)

The specified time of their ministry is "a thousand two hundred and threescore days," or three and one-half years. This is the same time as the Savior's mortal ministry. However, it would be wise not to be too confined in placing parameters on this period. Elder McConkie noted "the detailed application of the 42 months to this period is yet to be revealed." (DNTC, 3:509.)

Latter-day revelation gives some understanding to the nature of these two witnesses: "They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers." (D&C 77:15.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie further identified these two prophets:

These two shall be followers of that humble man, Joseph Smith, through whom the Lord of Heaven restored the fulness of his everlasting gospel in this final dispensation of grace. No doubt they will be members of the Council of the Twelve or of the First Presidency of the Church. Their prophetic ministry to rebellious Jewry shall be the same in length as was our Lord's personal ministry among their rebellious forebears.

The two olive trees, and the two candlesticks [are] Symbols of the two witnesses; meaning, perhaps, that as olive trees, they shall provide oil for the lamps of those who go forth to meet the Bridegroom . . . and that as lamp stands they shall reflect to men that light which comes from Him who is the Light of the World. (DNTC 3:509-10.)

At the end of their designated ministry—"when they shall have finished their testimony," the Revelator tells us—"the beast . . . shall overcome them, and kill them." For three and one-half days, their dead bodies will lie in the streets of Jerusalem while the wicked of the world "shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth." (Revelation 11:7-10.) Jerusalem will then be overrun and ravished: "For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city." (Zechariah 14:2.) "Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword. Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished." (Isaiah 13:15-16.)

Just when it seems that the wicked have won this final battle, their victory celebration will be cut short with the resurrection of the two slain prophets: "And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; and the remnant were afrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven." (Revelation 11:11-13.)

The Great Earthquake

The number who are slain in the earthquake may not be limited to the seven thousand mentioned by John. Richard Draper has explained that "the number is probably not to be taken literally. Rather, it signifies, as in other places, fullness and completeness. Thus, the specific number doomed to death all died during this judgment." (OSS, p. 124.)

This great earthquake, of a magnitude never before recorded on the Richter Scale, will be "such as was not since men were upon the earth." (Revelation 16:18.) "The mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall." (Ezekiel 38:20.) "Every island [shall flee] away" (Revelation 16:20) as the earth's land masses join together (see D&C 133:23; Isaiah 62:4). "All nations shall be shaken." (Haggai 2:6-7.)

The Savior will make His appearance during this earthquake: "And then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount [of Olives], and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake." (D&C 45:48.) "And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south." (Zechariah 14:4.)

The besieged people of Judah will escape through the valley created by the earthquake and will recognize the resurrected Lord as their long-awaited Messiah, yet they will sorrow at seeing the wounds of the crucifixion in His body. (See Zechariah 14:5; 12:10; 13:6; D&C 45:51-53.)

Supper of the Great God

The Lord will pour out destruction upon the armies of Gog. Fire, brimstone, and great hailstones will rain on these wicked warriors. (See Ezekiel 38:22.) "It shall be, in the literal and full sense of the word, as it was with Sodom and Gomorrah. Fire and brimstone will fall upon the armies of the wicked in all nations," said Elder McConkie. (MM, p. 485.)

In their anger, wickedness, and panic, the warriors of Gog will even slay one another: "A great tumult from the Lord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise against the hand of his neighbour." (Zechariah 14:13; see also Ezekiel 38:21). Only one-sixth of this massive army will survive. (See Ezekiel 39:2.) So devastating will be their annihilation that it will take seven months to bury most of their dead. Following this, permanent employment will be had by burial teams that will continue to seek out the corpses left lying throughout the land. (See Ezekiel 39:11-16.)

While the bodies of these once-mighty warriors are lying exposed to nature, the beasts and the birds will feast upon their flesh in what the Apostle John calls "the supper of the great God." (See Revelation 19:17-18.) Thus will the prophetic words of Ezekiel be fulfilled: "Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured." (Ezekiel 39:4.)

The armaments, weapons of war, and supplies left by the armies of Gog will be so vast that they will serve as a source of fuel and other resources for the inhabitants of the land of Israel for the next seven years. (See Ezekiel 39:8-10.) The total dead throughout the world will be incalculable. "Who shall count the number of dead bodies?" queried Elder McConkie. "The slain will be a third of the inhabitants of the earth itself, however many billions of people that may turn out to be." (MM, p. 453.)

Before this great and dreadful day, however, much prophecy must still be fulfilled. The chapters that follow will continue to outline these prophesied events of the last days.
