Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Section 3

The Gatherings

Chapter 11

Gathering the Covenant People

"And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come."

—Matthew 24:14

The Abrahamic Covenant

An important dimension of understanding the last days is to grasp the significance of a covenant the Lord made to the ancient prophet Abraham:

My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations; and I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father; and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal. (Abraham 2:8-11.)

Consider the promise to Abraham that all who would "receive this gospel" down through the ages would "be accounted as thy seed." This covenant was understood by the Apostle Paul, who taught that all who accepted Christ, and were baptized, became "Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise [covenant]." (See Galatians 3:26-29.) The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that those who are not literal descendants of Abraham but who accept the gospel, are baptized, and receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost will have their blood purged and become "actually of the seed of Abraham." (HC, 3:380.)

Abraham was further promised the land of Canaan as an everlasting inheritance and a posterity as numerous as the sand upon the seashore or the stars in the heavens. Through his posterity, all nations of the earth would be blessed. (See Genesis 17:6-8; 22:17-18.) The blessings of the gospel of Jesus Christ, including the priesthood and all the saving ordinances and covenants, can only be administered through the rightful heirs of the Abrahamic covenant. In these the last days, it is Abraham's posterity of the tribe of Ephraim who have been given the responsibility to lead out in blessing the nations of the earth through the priesthood.

"It is Ephraim, today, who holds the priesthood," said President Joseph Fielding Smith. "It is with Ephraim that the Lord has made covenant and has revealed the fulness of the everlasting gospel. It is Ephraim who is building temples and performing the ordinances in them for both the living and for the dead." (DS, 3:252.)

In October 1852 the First Presidency issued an epistle that stated in part: "The invitation is to all, of every nation, kindred and tongue, who will believe, repent, be baptized, and receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of hands, Come home: come to the land of Joseph, to the Valleys of Ephraim." (JH, 13 October 1852.)

The Gospel Taken to All the World

The gathering of the seed of Abraham to the covenant in the last days actually began in the spring of 1820 in a secluded grove in upstate New York. (See JS-H 1:5-20.) When the young man Joseph Smith received a visitation from God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ and was called to do God's work, he became the first to be gathered in the last days, although it would still be several years before priesthood authority would be restored and saving ordinances administered. Millions have since been gathered as the covenant people have sought to fulfill the Lord's admonition to "teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Matthew 28:19.)

The Savior taught his ancient disciples that "this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matthew 24:14.) He repeated this promise in a latter-day revelation given through his Prophet: "For, verily, the sound must go forth from this place into all the world, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth—the gospel must be preached unto every creature, with signs following them that believe. And behold the Son of Man cometh." (D&C 58:64-65.)

The Old Testament prophet Daniel foresaw the establishment of God's kingdom in the last days and compared it to a "stone . . . cut out without hands" that "became a great mountain and filled the whole earth." (Daniel 2:34-35; see also verses 44-45.) This prophecy was reemphasized in 1831 when the Lord declared: "The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole earth." (D&C 65:2.)

The fulfillment of that prophecy continues as the physical and political barriers to nations continue to be broken down. The doors of more and more nations have been opened to the preaching of the restored gospel, and units of the covenant people are being established. However, a question remains in the minds of many: Given the circumstances of the world, can the gospel really be taken to all nations?

In response to this query of doubt, we quote the words of Elder Boyd K. Packer: "We accept the responsibility to preach the gospel to every person on earth. And if the question is asked, 'You mean you are out to convert the entire world?' the answer is 'Yes. We will try to reach every living soul.'

"Some who measure that challenge quickly say, 'Why, that's impossible! It cannot be done!'

"To that we simply say, 'Perhaps, but we shall do it anyway.'" (Ensign, November 1975, p. 97.)

Now consider two prophetic pronouncements of Elder Bruce R. McConkie. The first statement was given at a meeting of religious educators held at Brigham Young University in 1978, and the second, at a general conference of the Church:

Â Some day, in the providence of the Lord, we shall get into Red China and Russia and the Middle East, and so on, until eventually the gospel will have been preached everywhere, to all people; and this will occur before the second coming of the Son of Man. . . .

I have no hesitancy whatever in saying that before the Lord comes, in all those nations we will have congregations that are stable, secure, devoted, and sound. We will . . . have progressed in spiritual things to the point where they have received all of the blessings of the house of the Lord. That is the destiny. . . .

People from all nations will have the blessings of the house of the Lord before the Second Coming. ("All Are Alike unto God," 1978 Religious Educators' Symposium, Salt Lake City: The LDS Church Educational System, 1979,p. 3.)

Â Looking ahead, we see the gospel preached in all nations and to every people with success attending.

We see the Lord break down the barriers so that the world of Islam and the world of Communism can hear the message of the restoration; and we glory in the fact that Ishmael—as well as Isaac—and Esau—as well as Jacob—shall have an inheritance in the eternal kingdom.

We see congregations of the covenant people worshipping the Lord in Moscow and Peking and Saigon. We see Saints of the Most High raising their voices in Egypt and India and Africa.

We see stakes of Zion in all parts of the earth; and Israel, the chosen people, gathering into these cities of holiness, as it were, to await the coming of their King. (Ensign, May 1980, p. 72.)

President Ezra Taft Benson has added his testimony to the truthfulness of the above testimonies of his fellow Apostles: "With all my soul I testify that this work will go forward till every land and people have had opportunity to accept our message. Barriers will come down for us to accomplish this mission, and some of us will see this done. Our Heavenly Father will cause conditions in the world to change so that His gospel can penetrate every border." (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988, p. 174.)

It must be remembered that the Lord is ultimately in control and can change circumstances quickly to suit His divine purposes. In this respect another of His Apostles, Elder David B. Haight, recounted the fast-changing world events of 1990, which included the collapse of Communism in many nations:

During a brief period of weeks, we have witnessed some phenomenal changes in the world, particularly in the Eastern bloc countries, changes which God-fearing men attribute to the hand of the Almighty in bringing about His glorious purposes to fill the earth with the knowledge of the Lord. Walls have come down, gates have opened, and millions of voices have chorused the song of freedom! We rejoice in the dawning of a brighter day.

The news media have made the events in eastern Europe appear as a purely political revolution even though many of the oppressed have recognized it as a "religious renaissance" and have acknowledged the influence of divine intervention. . . .

The transformation of once-mighty man-made empires with such speed and determination has released new springs of faith and hope in the hearts of hundreds of millions of oppressed souls. Where there was despair, now the bright light of freedom shines forth. This only could have happened in such a miraculous way by the intervening hand of the Almighty! "Is anything too hard for the Lord?" (Gen. 18:14.) (Ensign, May 1990, p. 23.)

In spite of opposition, the Lord's timetable will be met. The Prophet Joseph Smith boldly proclaimed: "Persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done." (HC, 4:540.)

Gathered to Zion

Those who are gathered to the large sheepfold, or Church of the Good Shepherd, are also gathered into subunits of the Church, where undershepherds minister to and watch over them. The ancient prophet and record keeper Moroni evidently understood this principle when he wrote the following of new converts: "And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith." (Moroni 6:4.)

The prophet Isaiah taught the concept of gathering to Church units. (See Isaiah 54:2.) His words were later quoted by the resurrected Savior during His visit to the inhabitants of the ancient Americas: "Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations; spare not, lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes." (3 Nephi 22:2.)

In his dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple in 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith petitioned the Lord "to appoint unto Zion other stakes beside this one which thou hast appointed [in Kirtland, Ohio], that the gathering of thy people may roll on in great power and majesty." (D&C 109:59.) According to the Lord, the gathering to the stakes of Zion is "for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth." (D&C 115:6.)

Where there are not sufficient numbers of the covenant people to establish stakes, then smaller units are established to which they gather, for Christ declared, "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." (Matthew 18:20.)

The Place for Gathering

When The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was first established, its members gathered to central locations. It was expected of new converts to "gather to Zion," or the headquarters of the Church. Early gatherings took place in New York, Ohio, Missouri, Illinois, and finally in the Rocky Mountains as the leadership of the fledgling faith moved to new locations.

While there have been isolated attempts to encourage members to remain in their native areas in order to strengthen the Church in locations outside the central stakes of Zion, immigration to central locations of the Church, particularly in the Rocky Mountains, continued well into the twentieth century. During an area conference in Mexico City in 1972, Elder Bruce R. McConkie boldly proclaimed: "[The] revealed words speak of . . . there being congregations of . . . covenant people of the Lord in every nation, speaking every tongue, and among every people when the Lord comes again. . . .

"The place of gathering for the Mexican Saints is in Mexico; the place of gathering for the Guatemalan Saints is in Guatemala; the place of gathering for the Brazilian Saintsis in Brazil; and so it goes throughout the length and breadth of the whole earth. . . . Every nation is the gathering place for its own people." (Mexico and Central America Area Conference Report, 16 August 1972, p. 45.)

One year later President Harold B. Lee quoted Elder McConkie's words in general conference and, in effect, announced that the pioneering phase of gathering was over. The gathering was now to be out of the world into the Church in every nation. (See CR, April 1973, p. 7.)

And so the gathering of the covenant people continues in great earnestness. But instead of being gathered to the Rocky Mountains, the Saints of the last days are gathering to units of Zion within their own native areas.
