Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 12

The Gathering of the Dead

"And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob."

—Isaiah 2:2-3; see also Micah 4:1-2; 2 Nephi 12:2-3

The Mountain of the Lord

One of the glorious signs of the last days is the building of temples throughout the earth. Temples are different from ordinary church buildings or houses of worship. Temples are sacred sanctuaries in which the Saints of God, acting for themselves or as proxies for the dead, enter into covenants of salvation, receive inspired instruction, and seek to qualify to enter into the presence of the Lord. A temple is literally a house of the Lord.

In writing of the nature of ancient temple worship, the noted Latter-day Saint scholar Dr. Richard Cowan said that "ancient peoples thought of the temple as being the highest point in the human world, the best place to observe and learn the ways of the heavens. Consequently many ancient temples were built atop mountains." (Temples to Dot the Earth, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989, p. 2.) When an actual building dedicated as a temple was not available, the Lord frequently used moun taintops as sacred sanctuaries in which to instruct His prophets. Three experiences illustrate such occurrences.

Moses was summoned to climb the sacred slopes of Mount Sinai, where in the presence of Deity he was instructed, "Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground." (Exodus 3:5.) The Jaredite prophet Mahonri Moriancumer, who is referred to in scripture simply as "the brother of Jared," ascended the heights of mount Shelem, where he not only conversed with the Lord, but saw Him as well. (See Ether 3.) Nephi "was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceedingly high mountain" where he was instructed in sacred things by the Spirit of the Lord. (1 Nephi 11.)

Ancient prophets such as Isaiah, Micah, and Nephi all proclaimed that "in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains." (Isaiah 2:2-3; Micah 4:1- 2; 2 Nephi 12:2-3.) While serving as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Elder LeGrand Richards declared that the Salt Lake Temple "is that house of the God of Jacob." (CR, October 1975, p. 77.) A temple can appropriately be referred to as "the mountain of the Lord." (See DCE, p. 372.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie extended the application of this ancient prophecy: "This has specific reference to the Salt Lake Temple and to the other temples built in the top of the Rocky Mountains, and it has a general reference to the temple yet to be built in the New Jerusalem in Jackson County, Missouri. Those in all nations, be it noted, shall flow to the houses of the Lord in the tops of the mountains, there to make the covenants out of which eternal life comes." (NWAF, p. 539.)

Latter-day Temple Building

One of the prophecies cited by the Angel Moroni during his nocturnal visit with the Prophet Joseph Smith on September 21, 1823, was the promised return of Elijah "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." (JS-H 1:36-39; see also D&C 2; Malachi 4:5-6.)

This prophecy was fulfilled on April 3, 1836, when the prophet Elijah appeared in the newly dedicated Kirtland Temple and conferred the priesthood keys of the sealing powers to God's earthly prophet, Joseph Smith, and his associate in the work, Oliver Cowdery. (See D&C 110:13-16.) President Joseph Fielding Smith declared that without the restoration of these sealing powers, the temple work for the dead could not be accomplished. (See DS, 2:122).

The far-reaching impact of this restoration of priesthood power and authority was noted by Elder Boyd K. Packer: "This signal event went unheeded by the world, but it would influence the destiny of every soul who has ever lived or will live. Things began quietly to happen. The Church became a temple-building church." (The Holy Temple, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980, p. 141.) Within one year of the organization of the Church, the Lord revealed that a temple was to be built in Independence, Missouri. (See D&C 57:1-5.) While this temple is yet to be built, scores of other temples have since been built and dedicated to accomplish the work of salvation for the living and the dead.

Following a decade in which the First Presidency had announced the building of thirty-one new temples in twenty-two countries, President Gordon B. Hinckley observed: "These are important and vital days in the work of the Lord. . . . We are living in one of the most significant and important epochs in the history of the Church and in the history of God's work among His people. We are living in the greatest era of temple building ever witnessed." (Ensign, November 1985, p. 54.)

The significance of temples in the last days, and in the theology of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is summed up in a declaration that President Howard W. Hunter made at a regional representatives' seminar on April 5, 1991: "This must be the ultimate vision of every priesthood and auxiliary leader. The whole purpose of the Church operating smoothly at the local level is to qualify individuals to return to the presence of God. That can only be done by their accepting the covenants, receiving the ordinances, and then living in accordance with all they have covenanted to do in the temples of our Lord." (See Church News, 13 April 1991, p. 6.)

Temples will continue to cover the earth in the days ahead. Some have been announced, others are in the process of being built, and the sites of some are yet to be revealed to the Lord's servants. Two announced temples yet to be built occupy an important role in fulfilling premillennial prophecy:

"Before the Second Coming, gathered Judah, as directed by Ephraim, shall build up anew the Old Jerusalem and prepare therein a holy temple; and gathered Ephraim, aided by Manasseh, shall build a New Jersualem in an American Zion and prepare therein a holy temple. It is to these two temples in particular that the Lord shall come at his glorious return, and it is from these two cities—Zion in America and Jerusalem in Old Canaan—that the governance and worship of the world will be directed. . . .

"The building of these two world capitals will commence before the Second Coming and continue during the Millennium." (NWAF, pp. 586-87; italics added.)

The Temple at New Jerusalem

As earlier noted, an 1831 revelation announced the site of a temple at Independence, Missouri. (See D&C 57:1-5.) In a letter "sent to the brethren in Zion, the 25th of June, 1833," the Prophet Joseph Smith indicated that this temple to be built in Jackson County would actually be a complex of twelve temples, two of which would be for the lesser, or Aaronic, Priesthood. (See HC, 1:357-58.) Under this arrangement, President Joseph Fielding Smith suggested that "provision will be made for some ceremonies and ordinances which may be performed by the Aaronic Priesthood and a place provided where the sons of Levi may offer their offering in righteousness. This will have to be the case because all things are to be restored." (DS, 3:93.)

Elder Orson Pratt gave a further description of this temple complex:

There will be 24 different compartments in the Temple that will be built in Jackson County. The names of these compartments were given to us some . . . years ago; the names we still have, and when we build these 24 rooms, in a circular form and arched over the centre, we shall give the names to all these different compartments just as the Lord specified through Joseph Smith. . . . Perhaps you may ask for what purpose these 24 compartments are to be built. I answer not to assemble . . . the Saints all in one place, but these buildings will be built with a special view to the different orders, or in other words the different quorums or councils of the two Priesthoods that God has ordained on the earth. That is the object of having 24 rooms so that each of these different quorums, whether they be High Priests or Seventies, or Elders, or Bishops, or lesser Priesthood, or Teachers, or Deacons, or Patriarchs, or Apostles, or High Councils, or whatever may be the duties that are assigned to them, they will have rooms in the Temple of the Most High God, adapted, set apart, constructed, and dedicated for this special purpose. Now, I have not only told you that we shall have these rooms, but I have told you the object of these rooms in short, not in full. But will there be any other buildings excepting those 24 rooms that are all joined together in a circular form and arched over the center—are there any other rooms that will be built—detached from the Temple? Yes. There will be tabernacles, there will be meeting houses for the assembling of the people on the Sabbath day. There will be various places of meeting so that the people may gather together; but the Temple will be dedicated to the Priesthood of the Most High God, and for most sacred and holy purposes. (JD, 24:24-25.)

Elder Pratt noted that the Latter-day Saints would "build it after the pattern that the Lord gave to his servant Joseph, the Prophet, and also according to the pattern that he shall hereafter show, if the pattern is not already given in full." (JD, 21:330; italics added).

In a continuing description of this magnificent edifice, Elder Pratt said that "a cloud of glory [would] rest upon that temple by day. . . . [and] a flaming fire will rest upon the temple by night." There will be "no need of any artificial light," continued Elder Pratt, "for the Lord God will be the light thereof." (Ibid., 330-31.)

In 1878 Elder Wilford Woodruff, who was destined to become the fourth President of the Church, described a remarkable dream in which he saw the temple being built: "I saw myriads of angels . . . and above their heads there was a pillar-like cloud. . . . I saw people coming from the river and from distant places to help build the Temple. It seemed as though there were hosts of angels helping to bring material for the construction of that building. Some were in Temple robes, and the pillar-like cloud continued to hover over the spot." (WW, p. 505.)

The temple will, of course, be built under the direction of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. There have been occasional rumors that the temple might be built independent of that direction. Of one such rumor, Elder McConkie emphatically declared:

An occasional whiff of nonsense goes around the Church acclaiming that the Lamanites will build the temple in the New Jerusalem and that Ephraim and others will come to their assistance. This illusion is born of an inordinate love for Father Lehi's children and of a desire to see them all become now as Samuel the Lamanite once was. The Book of Mormon passages upon which it is thought to rest have reference not to the Lamanites but to the whole house of Israel. The temple in Jackson County will be built by Ephraim, meaning the Church as it is now constituted; this is where the keys of temple building are vested, and it will be to this Ephraim that all the other tribes will come in due course to receive their temple blessings. (NWAF, p. 519.)

Because of persecution, the Saints were prevented from building the temple in Jackson County during the days of Joseph Smith. The Lord acknowledged this temporary hindering in an 1838 revelation. (See D&C 124:49-51.) However, the temple must yet be built, for "there is none other place appointed." (D&C 101:20.) An 1834 revelation proclaimed that "this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built unto the Lord, and a cloud of glory shall rest upon it." (D&C 84:4-5.) How can we explain the fact that the temple is still not built?

Many explanations for this seeming paradox have been given, but the fact remains that to this date we do not have a complete understanding of its meaning. Of this we are assured: the Lord's purposes will not fail, and someday we will have a complete understanding of the matter. In the meantime, we wait patiently for its fulfillment, as President Joseph Fielding Smith has noted, "Over one hundred years have passed since the site of Zion was dedicated and the spot for the temple was chosen. . . . We have not been released from this responsibility, nor shall we be. The word of the Lord will not fail. . . . When the Lord is ready for it to be accomplished, he will command his people, and the work will be done." (WP, pp. 268-69.)

The Temple in Old Jerusalem

Just as we are certain that a temple will be built in the New Jerusalem before the Second Coming, we have a similar conviction of the reality of a yet-to-be-constructed temple in old Jerusalem:

Old Jerusalem, the ancient holy city, has been and will again be a temple city. On three occasions of which we know, the Lord's own earthly house, as a priceless gem in a heaven-set crown, has graced the ground that is now claimed by the Jews and trodden down of the Gentiles. Solomon built a majestic mansion for the Lord in the day of Israel's glory. Zerubbabel built it anew when the remnant returned from bondage in Babylon. And Herod—a wretched, evil man whose every act bore Satan's stamp—built it for the final time in the day our Lord made flesh his tabernacle. This is the temple—one of the architectural wonders of the world, whose marble blocks were covered with gold, and whose influence upon the people cannot be measured—this is the temple that was torn apart, stone by stone, by Titus and his minions. (MM, p. 277; italics added.)

The destruction of the temple of Herod was a fulfillment of the Savior's prophecy that "there shall not be left here upon this temple, one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down." (JST, Mark 13:1-5.) However, the promise of a new temple is sure:

And thus was it to be in Jerusalem until the promised day when a new temple should arise—perhaps on the very site of the old one—in which the gospel ordinances of the new kingdom shall be performed.

This new temple shall be the one of which Ezekiel spoke. "I will make a covenant of peace" with Jewish Israel when they return to the ancient fold, saith the Lord. "It shall be an everlasting covenant with them"—even the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which is the new and the everlasting covenant—"and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary [my temple] in the midst of them for evermore. My tabernacle also shall be with them; yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore." (Ezek. 37:26-28.) (MM, p. 278.)

This temple will have some unique features. Elder Orson Pratt stated:

The Temple at Jerusalem will undoubtedly be built, by those who believe in the true Messiah. Its construction will be, in some respects different from the Temples now being built. It will contain the throne of the Lord, upon which he will, at times, personally sit, and will reign over the house of Israel for ever. It may also contain twelve other thrones, on which the twelve ancient Apostles will sit, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. It will, very likely, have an apartment, with a table, on which food and drink will be prepared, such as are suitable to the taste and happiness of immortal resurrected beings, thus fulfilling the words of Jesus—"Ye that have followed me in the regeneration [resurrection] shall eat and drink at my table, and sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel." [Matthew 19:28.] (JD, 19:20; italics added.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith declared: "Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed . . . before the Son of Man will make His appearance." (HC, 5:337; italics added.) How will "the waters of the Dead Sea be healed?" It is possible that the great quake at the time of the Second Coming "will evidently create a huge spring in Jerusalem which will form a new river, flowing westward to the Mediterranean Sea and eastward to the Dead Sea (see Zechariah 14:8-9; Joel 3:18; Ezekiel 47:1-5). Because of this river, the Dead Sea will have its waters healed, that is, it will become a lake with verdant foliage surrounding its shores and fish teeming in its waters (see Ezekiel 47:6-12; Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 286)." (Old Testament Student Manual: 1 Kings-Malachi, Salt Lake City: LDS Church Educational System, 1981, p. 294.)

The Old Testament prophet Zechariah, who saw those who would build this future temple, declared, "And they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of the Lord." (Zechariah 6:15.) The identity of "they that are far off" was suggested by Elder McConkie:

Who are those "that are far off" who shall come to Jerusalem to build the house of the Lord? Surely they are the Jews who have been scattered afar. By what power and under whose authorization shall the work be done? There is only one place under the whole heavens where the keys of temple building are found. There is only one people who know how to build temples and what to do in them when they are completed. That people is the Latter-day Saints. The temple in Jerusalem will not be built by Jews who have assembled there for political purposes as at present. It will not be built by a people who know nothing whatever about the sealing ordinances and their application to the living and the dead. It will not be built by those who know nothing about Christ and his laws and the mysteries reserved for the saints. But it will be built by Jews who have come unto Christ, who once again are in the true fold of their ancient Shepherd, and who have learned anew about temples because they know that Elijah did come, not to sit in a vacant chair at some Jewish feast of the Passover, but to the Kirtland Temple on April 3, 1836, to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. The temple in Jerusalem will be built by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (MM, pp. 279-80.)

And so the role of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints continues in accomplishing the work of gathering the dead that constitutes part of the signs preceding the Second Coming. As will be shown later, this work will not be completed at that "great day" but will continue with intensity throughout the Millennium.
