Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 13

The Gathering of Judah

"And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father."

—3 Nephi 20:29

The Scattering of Judah

The tribe of Judah has been the victim of captivity and dispersion on several occasions. In 701 B.C., more than two hundred thousand Jews were carried into Assyrian captivity. (See 2 Kings 18:13.) The Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar deported many Jews from the land of Judaea in 597 B.C. and again in 586 B.C. (See 2 Kings 24:14; 25:11; 2 Chronicles 36:6-10; Jeremiah 52.)

In 536 B.C. the Persian king Cyrus overthrew Babylon and decreed that the Jews should return to their homeland and rebuild their temple. (See Ezra 1). Some Jews who had become comfortable in their transplanted surroundings chose to remain away from the land of their forefathers and became known as the "diaspora." The Jewish nation remained essentially intact in Palestine until about 70 A.D., when the Roman legions under Titus destroyed Jerusalem, slaughtering many of the Jewish people and scattering the rest.

The extent of their suffering during the past centuries was described by the prophet Zenos and reported by Nephi: "And as for those who are at Jerusalem, saith the prophet, they shall be scourged by all people, because they crucify the God of Israel, and turn their hearts aside, rejecting signs and wonders, and the power and glory of the God of Israel. And because they turn their hearts aside, saith the prophet, and have despised the Holy One of Israel, they shall wander in the flesh, and perish, and become a hiss and a by-word, and be hated among all nations." (1 Nephi 19:13-14; see also 3 Nephi 16:9.)

The Promise to Gather Judah a Second Time

As one of the signs of the last days, "the Messiah will set himself again the second time to recover [the dispersed]." (2 Nephi 6:14.) "I will bring you out from the people, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered," proclaimed the Lord through his prophet. (Ezekiel 20:34.)

When the resurrected Redeemer visited the inhabitants of ancient America, He declared: "And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again the land of their fathers for their inheritance, which is the land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever, saith the Father." (3 Nephi 20:29.)

While serving as a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Wilford Woodruff spoke of the destiny of the Jewish people:

The Lord has decreed that the Jews should be gathered from all the Gentile nations where they have been driven, into their own land, in fulfillment of the words of Moses their law-giver. And this is the will of your great Eloheim, O house of Judah, and whenever you shall be called upon to perform this work, the God of Israel will help you. You have a great future and destiny before you and you cannot avoid fulfilling it; you are the royal chosen seed, and the God of your father's house has kept you distinct as a nation for eighteen hundred years, under all oppression of the whole Gentile world. You may not wait until you believe on Jesus of Nazareth, but when you meet with Shiloh your king, you will know him; your destiny is marked out, you cannot avoid it." (WW, p. 509; italics added.)

The Dedication of the Holy Land to the Return of the Jews

In order to facilitate the return of Judah to its homeland, the Prophet Joseph Smith appointed two members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles to travel to the Holy Land and dedicate it for that purpose. Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page received this divine commission in April 1840. Elder Page was not faithful to his calling, but Elder Hyde, who was of Jewish descent, exercised the faith necessary to fulfill his mission.

Nearly ten years prior to his call to the Holy Land, Orson Hyde had received an inspired blessing that included this promise: "In due time thou shalt go to Jerusalem, the land of thy fathers, and be a watchman unto the house of Israel; and by thy hands shall the Most High do a great work, which shall prepare the way and greatly facilitate the gathering of that people." (As quoted in HC, 4:375.)

On the morning of October 24, 1841, Orson Hyde climbed the slopes of Mount Olivet and dedicated the land. In part, his prayerful petition included these words:

Grant, therefore, O Lord, in the name of thy well-beloved Son, Jesus Christ, to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land, and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty soil. Let the vine and olive produce in their strength, and the fig tree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly fruitful when possessed by its rightful heirs; let it again flow with plenty to feed the returning prodigals who come home with a spirit of grace and supplication; upon it let the clouds distil virtue and richness, and let the fields smile with plenty. Let the flocks and the herds greatly increase and multiply upon the mountains and the hills; and let Thy great kindness conquer and subdue the unbelief of Thy people. Do Thou take from them their stony heart, and give them a heart of flesh; and may the sun of Thy favor dispel the cold mists of darkness which have beclouded their atmosphere. Incline them to . . . come like clouds and like doves to their windows. Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eye. . . .

Thou, O Lord, . . . inspire the hearts of kings and the powers of the earth to look with a friendly eye towards this place, and with a desire to see Thy righteous purposes executed in relation thereto. Let them know that it is Thy good pleasure to restore the kingdom unto Israel—raise up Jerusalem as its capital, and constitute her people a distinct nation and government. . . .

Let not their enemies prevail against them, neither let pestilence or famine overcome them, but let the glory of Israel overshadow them, and the power of the Highest protect them. (As quoted in HC, 4:457.)

To further emphasize the importance of the Jews returning to their homeland, President George A. Smith, first counselor to President Brigham Young in the First Presidency, was assigned to rededicate the Holy Land to the return of the Jews. In a letter dated October 15, 1872, President Young and President Daniel H. Wells, second counselor in the First Presidency, said to President Smith, "When you get to the land of Palestine, we wish you to dedicate and consecrate that land to the Lord, that it may be blessed with fruitfulness, preparatory to the return of the Jews, in fulfilment of prophecy and the accomplishment of the purposes of our heavenly Father." (As quoted in Eliza R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, Salt Lake City: Deseret News Co., 1884, p. 496.)

The April 1873 issue of the Millennial Star, the official Church publication in England, gave this account of the rededication: "On the 2nd [of April 1873] President George A. Smith, Elders Lorenzo Snow and Albert Carrington of the Twelve Apostles, Elders Feramorz Little, Paul A. Schettler and Thomas W. Jennings, and sister Eliza R. Snow, went to Mount Olivet and engaged in Divine worship; in the course of the service dedicating and consecrating the land to the Lord, invoking Him in his own due time to restore the 'early and latter rains,' to restore fruitfulness to the soil, and to hasten the gathering of the Jews and the rebuilding of Jerusalem. All engaged felt greatly blessed of the Lord." (35:200-201.) Elder B. H. Roberts also identified a Miss Clara A. Little as being part of this small group of pilgrims. (See A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Century One, 6 vols., Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930, 5:474.)

Fulfillment of Prophecy

In March 1842 Elder Orson Hyde wrote the offices of the Millennial Star and offered these insights regarding the gathering of the Jews: "It was by political power and influence that the Jewish nation was broken down, and her subjects dispersed abroad; and I will here hazard the opinion, that by political power and influence they will be gathered and built up; and further, that England is destined in the wisdom and economy of heaven to stretch forth the arm of political power, and advance in the front ranks of this glorious enterprize." (2:168-69.)

Elder Hyde's statement was an elaboration on scriptural prophecy regarding the gathering of Judah as recorded in both the Bible and the Book of Mormon: "And it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from their long dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the four parts of the earth; and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance. Yea, the kings of the Gentiles shall be nursing fathers unto them, and their queens shall become nursing mothers; wherefore, the promises of the Lord are great unto the Gentiles, for he hath spoken it, and who can dispute?" (2 Nephi 10:8-9; see also 2 Nephi 6:6-7; Isaiah 49:22-23.)

The literal fulfillment of these prophetic pronouncements took place when England took control of the Holy Land, displacing the previous overlords, the Turks. Shortly after the British army marched into Jerusalem on December 11, 1917, the following declaration was issued by Lord Balfour, England's Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs: "His Majesty's Govern-ment views with favor the establishment in Palestine of a National Home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavors to facilitate the achievement of this object." (As quoted in ST, p. 66.)

As a show of good faith, Great Britain appointed a Jew as governor of the land. President Joseph Fielding Smith made the following observation of this appointment:

When Viscount Herbert Samuel, a Jew, was sent to govern Palestine in 1920, it was a significant event for this was the first time that a Jew had ruled in Palestine since the destruction of Jerusalem. According to the word of our Savior they were not to do so until the time of the Gentiles was fulfilled. We have reached, it appears, that fulfillment. This is a sign that the day of the return is here and Judah is to be redeemed from all his rebellion and will once more occupy the lands of his inheritance. Nations may oppose it; Arabs may fight it; but every opposition in the due time of the Lord will melt away and Israel will again possess the land 'northward and southward, and eastward and westward,' for all this land was given to Abraham and Israel by the Lord, for an everlasting possession. (ST, p. 234.)

Opposition to Jewish Immigration

Initially, Great Britain gave great support to the Balfour Declaration. Millions of English pounds were spent in making the land inhabitable for the new immigrants. The United States and wealthy Jews throughout the world also gave financial assistance. However, after some initial enthusiasm there came some backsliding, as noted by President Joseph Fielding Smith:

Then came a change of heart by the British Government. On the Balfour Declaration was placed modified interpretations, a backing away from the broader interpretations in relation to making Palestine a "Jewish Home." British statesmen (or were they politicians?) declared that it was never intended that Palestine should become a Jewish nation—a National Home, where they might have self-government. The English ardor for the Jews had cooled. Two reasons seem apparent. One is oil in the Arabic country. The other, they did not wish to offend the Arabs of Palestine and drive the Arabic world into the camp of England's enemies. In 1922, Winston Churchill issued a White Paper which was considered by the Jews as "a serious whittling down of the Balfour Declaration." (ST, p. 216.)

The British government began restricting the immigration of Jews. Shiploads of Jewish refugees were turned away by British gunboats. On the other hand, immigration by Arabs to Palestine was encouraged. Arabs were commanded by their leaders not to sell any land to the Jews on penalty of death.

When another White Paper was issued in 1939, it was seen as a complete rejection of the Balfour Declaration. The paper included this statement: "His Majesty's Government believe that the framers of the Mandate in which the Balfour Declaration was embodied could not have intended that Palestine should be converted into a Jewish State against the will of the Arab population of the country." (As quoted in ST, pp. 219-20.)

Establishment of the State of Israel

The United States continued to stand behind the concept of a Jewish homeland. On October 22, 1938, President Franklin D. Roosevelt said the United States was "for the maintenance of Palestine as a Jewish national home without limitation." He further stated that "everything within the power of the United States Government would be done to prevent the curtailment of Jewish immigration into Palestine." (Current History, December 1938, p. 26; as quoted in W. Cleon Skousen, Prophecy and Modern Times, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1948,p. 80.)

In May 1947 the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP) was formed to consider permanent gov ernment for Palestine. The report was completed on August 31, 1947. The Majority Report called for a partitioning of Palestine into an Arab state, a Jewish state, and the City of Jerusalem. The General Assembly of the United Nations voted on November 29, 1947, to partition Palestine by October 1, 1948, in accordance with the Majority Report. The plan called for Great Britain to withdraw by August 1, 1948, but British leaders requested that withdrawal take place by May 14, 1948. On May 15, 1948, the British government terminated its supervisory government of Palestine. The Jewish people immediately declared the independence of their newly formed sovereign state. The first country to recognize its existence was the United States.

Although in Old Testament times the Jewish nation had been known as the kingdom of Judah, or the southern kingdom, these modern-day descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob through the tribe of Judah named their country "Israel." President Joseph Fielding Smith provided the following commentary on this choice of name: "It seems a little strange that in this present time, when again the government of the Jews is established, that they call it Israel instead of Judah. In doing so, perhaps they have built better than they knew, for eventually this land is to be inhabited by those of the other tribes of Israel and it will not be a kingdom just of Jews." (ST, p. 234; italics added.)

Independence did not come without its pains. Several wars and uncounted skirmishes have been part of the price paid by the citizens of Israel. However, against overwhelming odds they have fiercely maintained their independence.

What Constitutes the Gathering of the Jews?

An important aspect of the gathering of Judah is their return to the land of their forefathers. In this respect, Elder George Q. Morris of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles made the following declaration in April 1960:

"Strangely enough when the State of Israel was reborn in 1948, it was a nation of 600,000, the same number which the Bible reports that Moses led out of bondage in Egypt. It now numbers some two million, the same number which it is said populated the ancient Kingdom of Solomon, when Israel was in all its glory." ([As quoted from] Know the Word: Israel, "Around the World Program" by Peggy Mann.)

That is why we may now say that the Jews have returned to Palestine. . . .

I think perhaps we may well now not continue saying the Jews are going to gather in Jerusalem. I think now we may well say they have gathered. (CR, April 1960, p. 101.)

However, there is another and more important element of the prophesied gathering. Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated:

Portions of Jewish Israel hold forth in various nations or have gathered in a political sense to the land of their fathers. This gathering, however, is simply one that puts persons of the proper lineage in the same geographic locale where their ancestors dwelt; it is not the true gathering of Israel of which the prophets speak. . . .

What, then, is involved in the gathering of Israel? The gathering of Israel consists in believing and accepting and living in harmony with all that the Lord once offered his ancient chosen people. It consists of having faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, of repenting, of being baptized and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, and of keeping the commandments of God. It consists of believing the gospel, joining the Church, and coming into the kingdom. It consists of receiving the holy priesthood, being endowed in holy places with power from on high, and receiving all the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, through the ordinance of celestial marriage. And it may also consist of assembling to an appointed place or land of worship. . . .

The present assembling of people of Jewish ancestry into the Palestinian nation of Israel is not the scriptural gathering of Israel or of Judah. It may be prelude thereto, and some of the people so assembled may in due course be gathered into the true church and kingdom of God on earth, and they may then assist in building the temple that is destined to grace Jerusalem's soil." (NWAF, pp. 511, 515, 519; italics added.)

As noted in chapter 12, the converted Jews are destined to build a temple under the direction of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This seems consistent with the Lord's admonition to "let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house." (D&C 133:13.)

Thus, while we watch with great interest the continuing strengthening of a Jewish homeland, we look forward with great eagerness to the day when Judah shall be converted to Christ and truly be gathered.
