Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 15

The Gathering of the Lamanites

"But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose."

—D&C 49:24

Promises to Lehi's Posterity

Latter-day Saints believe firmly that one reason for the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is to assist in restoring the natives of the Americas to a knowledge of their forefathers and of the gospel of Jesus Christ. These natives, known anciently as Lamanites, are descendants of the prophet Lehi, whom the Lord led to the Americas from his home in Jerusalem around 600 B.C.

The Book of Mormon title page, which was written by the prophet-historian Moroni, states that the record was "written to the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel. . . . and also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ." Around five hundred years before Christ was born, an early record keeper of this people, Enos, stated that he "did cry unto God that he would preserve the records; and he covenanted with me that he would bring them forth unto the Lamanites in his own due time." (Enos 1:16.)

Over two millennia later, the Lord promised His latter-day prophet Joseph Smith that the testimony of the Savior, as preserved in the translation of that ancient record, would "come to the knowledge of the Lamanites." He then declared the purpose of the record: "And that the Lamanites might come to the knowledge of their fathers, and that they might know the promises of the Lord, and that they may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved." (D&C 3:18, 20.)

Almost a century later, this purpose was reiterated by the sixth prophet of this last dispensation, President Heber J. Grant: "God gave us the Book of Mormon and the chief reason, as set forth in one of the revelations, is that it shall be the means of bringing to the descendants of Father Lehi the knowledge of the Redeemer of the world, and to establish them in the faith of their fathers." (CR, October 1926, p. 40.)

Around 545 B.C. the prophet Nephi prophesied that the Lamanites would be "restored unto the knowledge of their fathers, and also to the knowledge of Jesus Christ." (2 Nephi 30:4-5.) From the day that the first missionaries took copies of the Book of Mormon to the native Americans, that prophecy began to be fulfilled. It is still ongoing as the gospel continues to be taken to the natives of the Americas.

Gathered to Houses of Worship

The role of the Lamanites in latter-day theology is found in part in this declaration by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "One of the most important points in the faith of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, through the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, is the gathering of Israel (of whom the Lamanites constitute a part)—that happy time when Jacob shall go up to the house of the Lord, to worship Him in spirit and in truth, to live in holiness." (HC, 2:357.)

As noted in chapter 12, the Lamanites will ultimately assist in building the temple in the New Jerusalem. In the meantime these descendants of Lehi and Sariah assist in the other temples and houses of worship in their various locations. In 1947, as one of the newer members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Spencer W. Kimball stated: "The Lamanites must rise in majesty and power. We must look forward to the day when they . . . shall be organized into wards and stakes of Zion, furnishing much of their own leadership; when they shall build and occupy and fill the temples, and serve in them." (CR, October 1947, p. 22.)

To Blossom as the Rose

An 1831 revelation addressing some of the false beliefs surrounding the Second Coming gave a great promise to the Lamanites: "But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose." (D&C 49:24.)

Commenting on the progress being made by the descendants of Father Lehi's children, Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated: "Throughout the whole Book of Mormon account, the Lehite prophets looked forward to that glorious day when the Lamanites—then a dark and benighted and loathsome people—would again become pure and delightsome. The fulfillment of these promises is pre-Millennial, and it is now beginning to occur, particularly in South America, where Father Lehi's seed are coming into the Church in such great numbers." (NWAF, pp. 631-32.)

Consider the following examples of the fulfillment of these promises:

Â While in Bolivia in the middle 1970s, President Marion G. Romney of the First Presidency stated that the descendants of Jacob in Bolivia would "live to see the day when millions of Indians will join The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (As quoted in DCE, p. 273.) About the same time at a conference in Chile, Elder Bruce R. McConkie declared, "I foresee the day . . . when The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will be the most powerful influencing leaven in this entire nation." (Ibid., pp. 272-73.)

Â At a special area conference held in Mexico City in 1977, President Spencer W. Kimball told of a dream he had experienced thirty years earlier. "Maybe it was a vision," he declared. In this dream he saw the flourishing and blossoming of the descendants of Lehi in Mexico as they rose to responsible positions in the Church and community in their native land. He also saw "stakes by the hundreds [and] a temple." (Church News, 19 February 1977, p. 3.)

Â In remarks that clearly indicated a fulfillment of President Kimball's vision, President Gordon B. Hinckley stated the following during a general conference session of the Church:

I have been to Mexico a number of times extending over a period of many years. Once our people there seemed so poor, their education so meager. They appeared to be seriously handicapped in many ways.

Now, recently, when the Mexico City Temple was dedicated, they came by the thousands. They were clean, their faces bright and smiling, their clothes neat and attractive. They bore every mark of education and refinement. There was something of greatness apparent in them. Most of them have the blood of Lehi in their veins. The shackles of darkness have fallen from their eyes, as promised by the prophets of the Book of Mormon. They have become "a pure and delightsome people." (2 Ne. 30:6.) (Ensign, November 1985, p. 54.)

There is an interesting parallel between what is currently happening in the great countries of Latin America and South America and what occurred among the ancient inhabitants of the Americas just prior to their being visited by the resurrected Savior. Elder H. Verlan Andersen, while serving as a member of the First Quorum of Seventy, noted: "The history of the Lamanites just prior to the Lord's first appearance on this continent reveals an interesting parallel between what occurred then and what is happening today. Commencing about the year 92 B.C., the Lamanites began coming into the Lord's church by the tens of thousands. That conversion miracle, which took place just shortly before the Lord's first advent, is being repeated now just prior to his second coming." (Ensign, November 1986, p. 23; italics added.)

To watch the miracle of Church growth among the Lamanite people is to see prophecy in process of fulfillment as we await the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.
