Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 16

The Gathering at Adam-ondi-Ahman

"Spring Hill is named by the Lord Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said he, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the prophet."

—D&C 116:1

The Land Where Adam Dwelt

On May 19, 1838, Joseph Smith led several companions on a surveying excursion to an area about seventy miles north of present-day Kansas City known as Spring Hill, in Daviess County, Missouri. The Prophet surprised his companions by renaming the location "Adam-ondi-Ahman." Joseph explained that the name was given "by the mouth of the Lord . . . because, said He, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days [Adam] shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet." (HC, 3:35; see also D&C 116; Daniel 7:9-14.)

We know that the name Ahman, or possibly Ah Man, is the name of God the Father in the pure Adamic language. In essence it means "Man of Holiness." Elder Orson Pratt of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said that the "whole term [Adam-ondi-Ahman] means Valley of God, where Adam dwelt. It is in the original language spoken by Adam, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph." (JD, 18:343; italics added.)

Early leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints taught that the Garden of Eden was located in what is now Jackson County, Missouri. (See JD, 11:337.) When Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden, they traveled north to Adam-ondi-Ahman, where they offered sacrifices to God. The Prophet Joseph Smith discovered in that area an ancient pile of stones that he identified as part of Adam's sacrificial altar.

The First Great Gathering

It was in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman that Adam gathered his righteous posterity three years before his death to bless them:

Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a prince over them forever.

And Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation. (D&C 107:53-56.)

It is important to understand that this was a gathering of Adam's righteous posterity. Elder Orson Pratt noted that all of the eight generations who had been invited to attend "were righteous . . . , while millions of his children, descendants that were wicked," were not invited. (JD, 18:343.)

The Second Great Gathering

Before the ushering in of the Millennium, a second great gathering of Adam's righteous posterity will take place in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. President Joseph Fielding Smith provides us with a description of this grand occasion:

Not many years hence there shall be another gathering of high priests and righteous souls in this same valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. At this gathering Adam, the Ancient of Days, will again be present. At this time the vision which Daniel saw will be enacted. The Ancient of Days will sit. There will stand before him those who have held the keys of all dispensations, who shall render up their stewardships to the first Patriarch of the race, who holds the keys of salvation. This shall be a day of judgment and preparation. . . .

This council in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman is to be of the greatest importance to this world. At that time there will be a transfer of authority from the usurper and impostor, Lucifer, to the rightful King, Jesus Christ. Judgment will be set and all who have held keys will make their reports and deliver their stewardships, as they shall be required. Adam will direct this judgment, and then he will make his report, as the one holding the keys for this earth, to his Superior Officer, Jesus Christ. Our Lord will then assume the reins of government; directions will be given to the Priesthood; and He, whose right it is to rule, will be installed officially by the voice of the Priesthood there assembled. This grand council of Priesthood will be composed, not only of those who are faithful who now dwell on this earth, but also of the prophets and apostles of old, who have had directing authority. Others may also be there, but if so they will be there by appointment, for this is to be an official council called to attend to the most momentous matters concerning the destiny of this earth.

When this gathering is held, the world will not know of it; the members of the Church at large will not know of it, yet it shall be preparatory to the coming in the clouds of glory of our Savior Jesus Christ as the Prophet Joseph Smith has said. The world cannot know of it. The Saints cannot know of it—except those who officially shall be called into this council—for it shall precede the coming of Jesus Christ as a thief in the night, unbeknown to all the world. (WP, pp. 289-91; italics added; see also TPJS, pp. 157-58.)

In a revelation dealing with the sacrament, the Lord identified a number of individuals who would be present with him at some future occasion when he would "drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth." (D&C 27:5.) Could this be a grand sacrament meeting? Could it be the great gathering of the righteous in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman?

While we may not have all answers, this much we know: Before the great day of the Lord—the second coming of Son Ahman (Son of the Man of Holiness)—there will be a powerful meeting of prophets, apostles, and other righteous Saints in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. Perhaps these inspired words of W. W. Phelps will be sung on that sacred occasion:

This earth was once a garden place, With all her glories common, And men did live a holy race, And worship Jesus face to face, In Adam-ondi-Ahman. We read that Enoch walked with God, Above the pow'r of mammon, While Zion spread herself abroad, And Saints and angels sang aloud, In Adam-ondi-Ahman. Her land was good and greatly blest, Beyond all Israel's Canaan; Her fame was known from east to west, Her peace was great, and pure the rest Of Adam-ondi-Ahman. Hosanna to such days to come, The Savior's second coming, When all the earth in glorious bloom Affords the Saints a holy home, Like Adam-ondi-Ahman. ("Adam-ondi-Ahman," Hymns, 1985, no. 49.)
