Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 17

The New Jerusalem or City of Zion

"And it shall come to pass that I will establish my people, O house of Israel. And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your father Jacob; and it shall be a New Jerusalem. And the powers of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I [Jesus Christ] will be in the midst of you."

—3 Nephi 20:21-22

Prophecies of an American Jerusalem

The terms New Jerusalem and Zion have been used interchangeably by the prophets throughout the ages. Old Testament prophets referred to the New Jerusalem as Zion. For instance, Isaiah spoke of millennial times when "out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from [old] Jerusalem." (Isaiah 2:3; see also Micah 4:2.) The Apostle Paul wrote of a "Jerusalem which is above" (Galatians 4:26), and John the Revelator saw "the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband" (Revelation 21:2; see also 3:12).

Ether, the last prophet of the Jaredite civilization, which flourished in ancient America from the time of the Tower of Babel to about 590 B.C., prophesied that "a new Jerusalem should be built upon this land [America], unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph." (Ether 13:6.) Then, speaking of millennial conditions, the prophet further proclaimed: "And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new. And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the house of Israel." (Ether 13:9-10.) The resurrected Savior also spoke of the New Jerusalem being established in the land of America and proclaimed that "the power of heaven shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the midst of you." (3 Nephi 20:22.)

The Lord revealed the exact location of this future city in an 1831 revelation. It was to be in the "land of Missouri," which the Lord "appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints" and which "is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion." The Lord then identified the city of Independence as the "center place." (See D&C 57:1-5.) This city of Zion was to "be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God." (D&C 45:66.)

Based on the revelation he had received, Joseph Smith wrote the following as one of the basic beliefs of Latter-day Saints: "We believe . . . that Zion (the New Jerusalem) will be built upon the American continent." (Articles of Faith 1:10.) The Prophet's grandnephew, President Joseph Fielding Smith, added: "This western continent is known as the land of Joseph and is also designated as the land of Zion. . . . We should keep in mind that these terms (City of Zion, and New Jerusalem) have reference to the same sanctified place from whence shall go forth the law, with the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Enoch's city was also called Zion, which means by interpretation, the pure in heart." (DS, 3:67.)

Relation of Zion to the Garden of Eden

As mentioned in the chapter on Adam-ondi-Ahman, early Church leaders taught that the Garden of Eden was just south of the present site of Independence, Missouri.

President Brigham Young instructed the Saints on this matter: "In the beginning . . . the Lord commenced his work upon what is now called the American continent, where the Garden of Eden was made. In the days of Noah, in the days of the floating of the ark, he took the people to another part of the earth." (JD, 8:195.) Apparently Brigham Young learned this from the Prophet Joseph Smith, for Brigham Young is quoted as having said: "Joseph, the Prophet, told me that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson County, Missouri. When Adam was driven out he went to the place we now call Adam-ondi-Ahman, Daviess County, Missouri. There he built an altar and offered sacrifices." (As quoted in WW, p. 481.)

This teaching has been repeated more recently by President Joseph Fielding Smith, who declared: "In accord with the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we teach that the Garden of Eden was on the American continent located where the City Zion, or the New Jerusalem, will be built. . . .

"We are committed to the fact that Adam dwelt on this American continent. But when Adam dwelt here, it was not the American continent, nor was it the Western Hemisphere, for all the land was in one place, and all the water was in one place. There was no Atlantic Ocean separating the hemispheres." (DS, 3:74.)

The Gathering to Zion Deferred

The Saints in the days of Joseph Smith fully expected to build the glorious City of Zion but were prevented from doing so by the actions of their persecutors. Because of these difficulties, the Lord temporarily rescinded the requirement to build the New Jerusalem and its magnificent temple. On January 19, 1841, the voice of Deity declared: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to any of the sons of men to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all their might and with all they have to perform that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come upon them and hinder them from performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offering." (D&C 124:49.)

The Lord, who knows the end from the beginning, was aware that the establishment of the City of Zion was to be deferred. President Joseph Fielding Smith suggested that the Lord had hinted of this deferral in an 1831 revelation. (See D&C 58:3-4; DS, 3:77-78.) President Smith has noted that the city and temple will yet be built and that Latter-day Saints are still under a sacred obligation to work toward that divine purpose:

Over one hundred years have passed since the site of Zion was dedicated and the spot for the temple was chosen, and some of the members of the Church seem to be fearful lest the word of the Lord should fail. Others have tried to convince themselves that the original plan has been changed, and that the Lord does not require at our hands this mighty work which has been predicted by the prophets of ancient times. We have not been released from this responsibility, nor shall we be. The word of the Lord will not fail. . . . It is true that the Lord commanded the saints to build to his name a temple in Zion. This they attempted to do, but were prevented by their enemies, so the Lord did not require the work at their hands at that time. The release from the building of the temple in 1833, did not, however, cancel the responsibility of building the city and the house of the Lord, at some future time. When the Lord is ready for it to be accomplished, he will command his people, and the work will be done." (WP, pp. 268-69.)

Return to Jackson County

There has been some speculation that civil disobedience or disasters may precede the future building of the City of Zion, or the New Jerusalem. Most, if not all, of this is based on two sources: first, a reported prophecy of Joseph Smith to General Alexander Doniphan, his friend and attorney in Missouri; and second, an alleged prophecy by President Heber C. Kimball, counselor in the First Presidency to Brigham Young.

The Joseph Smith prophecy was recorded by General Doniphan's brother-in-law some seventy years after it was reportedly spoken. According to the account, the Prophet warned Doniphan that "God's wrath hangs over Jackson County . . . and you will live to see the day when it will be visited by fire and sword. . . . The fields and farms and houses will be destroyed, and only the chimneys will be left to mark the desolation." (L. M. Lawson, as quoted in Junius F. Wells, "A Prophecy and Its Fulfillment," Improvement Era, November 1902, p. 9; italics added.)

General Doniphan is reported to have said that "the devastation of Jackson County [during the Civil War] forcibly reminded him of this remarkable prediction." (Ibid.) Elder B. H. Roberts used this account as well as vivid descriptions of the destruction in Jackson County during this terrible war to show the fulfillment of Joseph Smith's prophecy regarding this land of Zion. (See Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:537-59.)

The alleged prophecy of President Heber C. Kimball is often referred to as the "yellow dog" prophecy. This declaration focuses on some future destruction in Jackson County. Elder Graham W. Doxey, of the Seventy, has written the following regarding its origin:

It seems to have originated in a conversation between Heber C. Kimball and Amanda H. Wilcox in Salt Lake City in May 1868. She reports him as saying, "The western boundaries of the State of Missouri will be swept so clean of its inhabitants that, as President Young tells us, when we return to that place, 'There will not be left so much as a yellow dog to wag his tail.'" (Prophetic Sayings of Heber C. Kimball to Sister Amanda H. Wilcox, n.p., n.d., p. 6.)

There seem to be a number of questions about the authenticity of this account since Heber C. Kimball was apparently in Provo, not Salt Lake, during the month of May. Also, no other record exists of Brigham Young making a similar statement. However, it is sufficiently similar to Joseph Smith's statements, except for the "yellow dog," that someone may have remembered the original substance but in the retelling allowed embellishment to creep in. ("Missouri Myths," Ensign, April 1979, p. 65.)

One other statement should be considered regarding the return to Jackson County to build the City of Zion. As a counselor in the First Presidency, President Joseph F. Smith stated the following:

When God leads the people back to Jackson County, how will he do it? Let me picture to you how some of us may be gathered and led to Jackson County. I think I see two or three hundred thousand people wending their way across the great plain enduring the nameless hardships of the journey, herding and guarding their cattle by day and by night, and defending themselves and little ones from foes on the right hand and on the left, as when they came here. They will find the journey back to Jackson County will be as real as when they came out here. Now, mark it. And though you may be led by the power of God "with a stretched out arm," it will not be more manifest than the leading the people out here to those that participate in it. They will think there are a great many hardships to endure in this manifestation of the power of God, and it will be left, perhaps to their children to see the glory of their deliverance, just as it is left for us to see the glory of our former deliverance from the hands of those that sought to destroy us. This is one way to look at it. It is certainly a practical view. Some might ask, what will become of the railroads? I fear that the sifting process would be insufficient were we to travel by railroads. We are apt to overlook the manifestations of the power of God to us because we are participators in them, and regard them as commonplace events. But when it is written in history—as it will be written—it will be shown forth to future generations as one of the most marvelous, unexampled and unprecedented accomplishments that has ever been known to history." (JD, 24:156-57; italics added.)

Elder Graham W. Doxey provided the following commentary on President Smith's statement: "This is a vivid mental picture, but people frequently remember the picture and forget he said 'some of us' and 'may be gathered.' We should also keep in mind that he said this is 'one way to look at it,' remembering also the perspective of 1882. From our perspective [today], it seems even less likely that we would sell our automobiles and herd cattle along our freeway systems. But we simply have no scriptural information about who—if any general Church members—will be called to go back and the means that they might use. The prophets of our day have not found it timely or necessary to speak on the matter." ("Missouri Myths," pp. 64-65.)

Zion Redeemed by Righteousness

In March 1831 the Lord admonished the Saints to "gather up your riches that ye may purchase an inheritance which shall hereafter be appointed unto you." (D&C 45:65.) That inheritance was shortly thereafter identified as the land of Zion, or Independence, Missouri; and again the Lord stressed the importance of purchasing the land. (D&C 57:1-5.)

In August 1831 the Saints were warned against obtaining the land of Zion through the shedding of blood: "Wherefore, the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase or by blood, otherwise there is none inheritance for you. And if by purchase, behold you are blessed; And if by blood, as you are forbidden to shed blood, lo, your enemies are upon you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance." (D&C 63:29-31.)

The fifth prophet of this last dispensation, President Lorenzo Snow, emphasized that the lands upon which the New Jerusalem will be built shall not be obtained by force: "We will not take possession of the land of Zion by force. If we should do, it would turn out to us as it did with the people who were upon the land of Zion when this revelation [D&C 63] was given." (CR, October 1900, p. 62.) The Saints heeded the admonition and purchased many pieces of property in Jackson County, Missouri, in hopes of establishing their Zion. Persecution and mobocracy drove them from their lands, but they were instructed by revelation to "hold claim" to their properties even "though they should not be permitted to dwell thereon." (D&C 101:99.)

An interesting revelation was received near the conclusion of the march of Zion's Camp, a unit of about two hundred men who had gone to the relief of the beleaguered Latter-day Saints in Missouri. On June 22, 1834, while the relief group was encamped on the banks of Fishing River in Missouri, the Lord reaffirmed his desire to have the Saints purchase land in Jackson County and in the adjoining counties. He then declared:

And after these lands are purchased, I will hold the armies of Israel guiltless in taking possession of their own lands, which they have previously purchased with their moneys, and of throwing down the towers of mine enemies that may be upon them, and scattering their watchmen, and avenging me of mine enemies unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.

But first let my army become very great, and let it be sanctified before me, that it may become fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners may be terrible unto all nations.

That the kingdoms of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ; therefore, let us become subject unto her laws. (D&C 105:28-32.)

Speaking of the people of Enoch's ancient Zion, Elder Orson Pratt asked, "What was it that made their banners terrible to the nations? It was not their numbers." Then, speaking of the future New Jerusalem, Elder Pratt continued: "If, then Zion must become great it will be because of her sanctification." (JD, 17:112.)

Thus, the great army that will redeem Zion will be one that is sanctified and holy before the Lord. This unified army of sanctified Saints will not be armed with weapons of war but with robes of righteousness and the power of the priesthood.

On another occasion, Elder Pratt spoke of the need for the Saints to be sanctified in order to redeem Zion: "When we go back to Jackson County, we are to go back with power. Do you suppose that God will reveal his power among an unsanctified people, who have no regard nor respect for his laws and institutions but who are filled with covetousness? No. When God shows forth his power among the Latter-day Saints, it will be because there is a union of feeling in regard to doctrine, and in regard to everything that God has placed in their hands; and not only a union, but a sanctification on their part, that there shall not be a spot or wrinkle as it were, but everything shall be as fair as the sun that shines in the heavens." (JD, 15:361.)

Not all of the millions of Latter-day Saints will be asked to return to the land where Adam and Eve once dwelt. President Brigham Young preached that "a portion of the Priesthood will go and redeem and build up the centre Stake of Zion." (JD, 11:16.)

In 1877 President Young further proclaimed: "Are we going back to Jackson County? Yes. When? As soon as the way opens up. Are we all going? O no! of course not. The country is not large enough to hold our present numbers. When we do return there, will there be any less remaining in these mountains than we number today? No, there may be a hundred then for every single one that there is now. It is folly in men to suppose that we are going to break up these our hard earned homes to make others in a new country. We intend to hold our own here, and also penetrate the north and the south, the east and the west, there to make others and to raise the ensign of truth." (JD, 18:355-56.)

Who will be invited to return and redeem Zion, to participate in the building of the Holy City and its attendant temple? A holy city can only be built by a holy people. Consider this observation by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

As to the building of the New Jerusalem, different criteria apply than those pertaining to the Second Coming. Zion could have been redeemed a century and a half ago. If the newly called saints of that day had kept the commandments and seen eye to eye as did the saints of Enoch's day, they too could have built a City of Holiness, called Zion, and the glory of God would have rested upon it. That day of opportunity passed, however, and the Lord's people began the arduous process of establishing stakes of Zion in all nations as part of a schooling process to prepare them for the day when they would build Zion itself.

The stakes of Zion that now are must be strengthened and perfected before they can uphold and sustain that Zion which is destined to be. When Zion is fully established, it will be by obedience to the law of the celestial kingdom, which law is operative in the stakes of Zion only in part. As of now, we are living under a preparatory law, as it were; as the Mosaic law was a schoolmaster to prepare Israel for the fulness of the gospel, so the church and kingdom, as now constituted, is a schoolmaster to prepare the saints for an inheritance in that perfect society of souls of which Zion will be composed. The most obvious illustration of this concept is that we today have the law of tithing, which we do not live perfectly, but when Zion is built we will have the law of consecration in its fulness. It follows that the righteousness of the saints can hasten the redemption of Zion. And, viewing the present state of the Church, good as it is when compared with the world, the day of the building of Zion seems to be some years away. (NWAF, pp. 591-92.)

While serving as a counselor in the First Presidency, President Joseph F. Smith taught that those who are called upon to return and build the New Jerusalem must be able to live the law of consecration and sacrifice: "When shall I be prepared to go there? Not while I have in my heart the love of this world more than the love of God. Not while I am possessed of that selfishness and greed that would induce me to cling to the world or my possessions in it, at the sacrifice of principle or truth. But when I am ready to say, 'Father, all that I have, myself included, is Thine; my time, my substance, everything that I possess is on the altar, to be used freely, agreeable to Thy holy will, and not my will, but Thine, be done,' then perhaps I will be prepared to go and help to redeem Zion. For Zion can only be built up by the law that God revealed for that purpose, which is the law of consecration—not the law of tithing." (Millennial Star, 56:385-86.)

Led by a Man like Moses

The Lord revealed that "the redemption of Zion must needs come by power." He then declared, "Therefore, I will raise up unto my people a man, who shall lead them like as Moses led the children of Israel." (D&C 103:15-16.)

There has been some confusion and speculation regarding the identity of the "man . . . like as Moses." Elder John Taylor, while serving as the editor of the Times and Seasons, the official Church publication in Nauvoo, declared, "The president [of the Church] stands in the same relationship to the Church as Moses did the Children of Israel." (6:922.) Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles stated emphatically, "The man like unto Moses in the Church is the President of the Church." (Evidences and Reconciliations, arr. G. Homer Durham, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960, p. 248.)

When the land of Zion is redeemed, it will be under the direction of the Lord's prophet on earth—the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Whether he physically stands at the head of those who are directed to return to build the New Jerusalem, or whether he simply stands as the spiritual leader under whose direction the move takes place, is of little consequence. In either case, he will be acting as a modern-day Moses, with full authority to do whatever needs to be done.

A World Capital

The Old Testament prophets Isaiah and Micah foresaw that the New Jerusalem would be a world capital out of which the law of the Lord would go forth. (See Isaiah 2:2-3; Micah 4:1-2.) In this last dispensation, the Council of the Twelve Apostles issued a proclamation to the world in 1845:

He [God] will assemble the Natives, the remnants of Joseph in America; and make them a great, and strong, and powerful nation: and he will civilize and enlighten them, and will establish a holy city, and temple, and seat of government among them, which shall be called Zion.

And there shall be his tabernacle, his sanctuary, his throne, and seat of government for the whole continent of North and South America forever.

In short, it will be to the western hemisphere what Jerusalem will be to the eastern. . . .

The city of Zion, with its sanctuary and priesthood, and the glorious fulness of the gospel, will constitute a standard which will put an end to jarring creeds and political wranglings, by uniting the republics, states, provinces, territories, nations, tribes, kindred, tongues, people, and sects of North and South America in one great and common bond of brotherhood.

While truth and knowledge shall make them free, and love cement their union. The Lord also shall be their king and their lawgiver; while wars shall cease and peace prevail for a thousand years." (As quoted in James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols., Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75, 1:259-60.)

Two Other Holy Cities Yet to Come

Yet to come are two other holy cities that should not be confused with the millennial New Jerusalem: the city of Enoch and the celestial Jerusalem of the postmillennial period. "John the Revelator saw in vision the holy city come down from God in heaven twice. First he saw the City of Enoch, a Holy City called the New Jerusalem, come down after the Second Coming to remain with men on earth a thousand years. Then with seeric eyes he beheld the celestial Jerusalem, the Holy City where God and angels dwell, come down from heaven to be with men forever in that day when this earth becomes a celestial sphere." (NWAF, p. 588; see also Revelation 21.)

Prepare to Abide the Day

While we anxiously await that glorious day when the New Jerusalem shall be established, one might be inclined to say, "What does the concept of a future New Jerusalem have to do with me personally today?" The answer to that question is at least partially found in a statement by Elder G. Homer Durham of the Seventy: "The vision of the New Jerusalem has moved generations of mankind. It has moved our people. We look to the day when 'Christ will reign personally upon the earth.' (A of F 1:10.) But, as the prophet Malachi asked, 'Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth?' (Mal. 3:2.) Let us prepare to abide the day of his coming by building Zion in our hearts, in our families." (Ensign, May 1982, p. 68.)

Our task is to strive to live worthy of being among those who will be called upon to build the Holy City and the magnificent temple. And if we are among the many who, though worthy, are not called to assist in this glorious undertaking, our task is to so live as to make the places where we do dwell similar to the center stake of Zion, "for this is Zion—the pure in heart." (D&C 97:21.)
