Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 18

The Return of the City of Enoch

"And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other."

—Moses 7:63

Faith and Power of the Prophet Enoch

Few names evoke more feelings of awe than that of the prophet Enoch. His own personal history gives hope to those who struggle with feelings of inadequacy, especially when matters of faith are concerned. When the Lord first called Enoch to His work, the young prophet cried, "Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?" (Moses 6:31.)

Although feeling unqualified for the call he received, Enoch was humble and responded in faith. And though "all men were offended because of him" (Moses 6:37), he taught and testified, leading the people to new heights of spirituality. The scriptures tell us:

And so great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course; and the roar of the lions was heard out of the wilderness; and all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him. . . .

And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them.

And Enoch continued his preaching in righteousness unto the people of God. And it came to pass in his days, that he built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even Zion. . . .

And lo, Zion, in process of time, was taken up into heaven. (Moses 7:13, 18-19, 21.)

Status of the City of Enoch

Elder Joseph Young, the second man in seniority among those called to preside over the Seventy in this last dispensation, provided some interesting insights into the taking up of the City of Enoch: "The people, and the city, and the foundations of the earth on which it stood, had partaken of so much of the immortal elements, bestowed upon them by God through the teachings of Enoch, that it became philosophically impossible for them to remain any longer upon the earth; consequently, Enoch and his people, with the city which they occupied, and the foundations on which it stood, with a large piece of earth immediately connected with the foundations and the city, had assumed an aerial position within the limits of our solar system; and this in consequence of their faith." (History of the Organization of the Seventies, Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1878, p. 11.)

Elder Young's comments about the actual ground also being taken up appear to be based on a statement Joseph Smith was alleged to have made that "the City of Enoch would again take its place in the identical spot from which it had been detached, now forming that chasm of the earth, filled with water, called the Gulf of Mexico." (Ibid., p. 12n.)

While some may debate the issue of the transplanting of ground and structures, there should be no question about the fact that the people of the City of Enoch were taken from this earth. These people had raised themselves to a higher order of living that was incompatible with the other residents of this world. In the words of President Joseph Fielding Smith, they "were as pilgrims and strangers on the earth . . . due to the fact that they were living the celestial law in a telestial world." (CHMR, 1:195.)

What does it mean to say that the people of the City of Enoch were "taken up"? Not only were they separated physically from this earth without experiencing death, but they also underwent a physical change in which their bodies were raised to a terrestrial order. They were no longer subject to death or disease and were then in the same status later granted to John the Beloved and the Three Nephites. (See John 21:20-23; D&C 7; 3 Nephi 28:1-10.)

According to Elder Bruce R. McConkie, Enoch and his people are no longer in a state of translation but went through the change of instantaneous death and resurrection when Jesus Christ rose from the tomb. They were evidently among the righteous who had lived from the time of Adam and Eve to the time of Christ's resurrection and who were raised to a resurrected status, as mentioned in both the Bible and the Book of Mormon. (See Matthew 27:52-53; 3 Nephi 23:9.) Elder McConkie stated, "[Among] those who were with [Christ] in his resurrection [were] those of Enoch's city, a righteous people who first were translated and who then gained full immortality when Christ rose from his tomb." (MM, p. 636.)

Ministers to Other Worlds

The Prophet Joseph Smith provided some insights regarding translated beings: "Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead." (TPJS, p. 170; italics added.)

President John Taylor wrote that the people of the City of Enoch may be serving as "ministering angels unto many planets":

It would appear that the translated residents of Enoch's city are under the direction of Jesus, who is the Creator of worlds; and that He, holding the keys of the government of other worlds, could, in His administrations to them, select the translated people of Enoch's Zion, if He thought proper, to perform a mission to these various planets, and as death had not passed upon them, they could be prepared by Him and made use of through the medium of the Holy Priesthood to act as ambassadors, teachers, or messengers to these worlds over which Jesus holds the authority. . . .

It is recorded that to Jesus has been given all power in heaven and in earth, and . . . he evidently had power which he used to commission the citizens of the Zion of Enoch to go to other worlds on missions. (The Mediation and Atonement, reprint of 1882 edition, Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1964, pp. 76-77.)

City of Enoch to Return

The Lord declared that the people of Enoch "were separated from the earth, and were received unto myself—a city reserved until a day of righteousness shall come." (D&C 45:12.)

A description of this "day of righteousness" is found in the Joseph Smith Translation of Old Testament writings:

And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant, which I made unto thy father Enoch; that, when men should keep all my commandments, Zion should again come on the earth, the city of Enoch which I have caught up unto myself. And this is mine everlasting covenant, that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth, and look upward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy; And the general assembly of the church of the first-born shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come. And this is mine everlasting covenant, which I made with thy father Enoch. (JST, Genesis 9:21-23; italics added.)

A hymn to be sung when the Savior returns to earth includes these words: "The Lord hath brought down Zion from above. The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath." (D&C 84:100; see verses 98-102.) The third prophet of this last dispensation, President John Taylor, said the following regarding the Zion which should be "brought up . . . from beneath": "And Zion that is on the earth will rise, and the Zion above will descend, as we are told, and we will meet and fall on each other's necks and embrace and kiss each other." (JD, 21:253.)

Elder Orson Pratt suggested that this city of holiness will return to the earth "at the commencement of the Millennium to meet the Zion [New Jerusalem] here." (JD, 2:103.) In a revelation given anciently to Enoch, the Lord declared that these righteous inhabitants of "Zion, a New Jerusalem," would meet with Enoch and his city in a glorious reunion accompanying the Second Coming. (Moses 7:62-65.)

People's Righteousness to Unite the Two Zions

The thing that will make it possible for these two cities of holiness to intermingle in fellowship will be their common ground of celestial living. Those who will inhabit the New Jerusalem will be of the same character as those of the ancient City of Zion. Elder Orson Pratt provided the following commentary on this subject: "The Latter-Day Zion will resemble, in most particulars, the Zion of Enoch: it will be established upon the same celestial laws—be built upon the same gospel, and be guided by continued revelation. Its inhabitants, like those of the antediluvian Zion, will be the righteous gathered out from all nations: the glory of God will be seen upon it; and His power will be manifested there, even as in Zion of old. All the blessings and grand characteristics which were exhibited in ancient Zion will be shown forth in the Latter-Day Zion." (Seer, May 1854, p. 265.)

The commencement of the Millennium will not be hastened by the righteousness or the wickedness of the people of this world, for the time is set and is unalterable. However, the building of the City of Holiness, the New Jerusalem, can be hastened by the development of a Zion-like people. To become a people "pure in heart," a prerequisite for Zion (D&C 97:21), should be a goal towards which we all strive. "Enoch and his city of Zion are powerful symbols among the Latter-day Saints, affirming that supreme righteousness can be attained on earth as it is in heaven." (EM, s.v. "Enoch.")
