Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Section 4

The Second Coming

Chapter 19

Preparedness and the Second Coming

"Ye hear of wars in far countries, and you say that there will soon be great wars in far countries, but ye know not the hearts of men in your own land . . . ; wherefore, treasure up wisdom in your bosoms, lest the wickedness of men reveal these things unto you by their wickedness, in a manner which shall speak in your ears with a voice louder than that which shall shake the earth; but if ye are prepared ye shall not fear."

—D&C 38:29-30

Panic and Complacency

The commotion and tribulations of the last days surely lead to much fear, anxiety, and panic. Adverse economic conditions cause people to fear losing their jobs and consequently their ability to provide food and shelter for themselves and those who depend upon them. Raging violence causes many to fear for their personal safety. Dim prospects for the future create discouragement and despair.

Indeed, one of the signs of the last days will be "men's hearts failing them for fear." (Luke 21:26; see also D&C 45:26.) As a result of fear, many people panic, forgetting their faith in the Lord and his words, "If ye are prepared ye shall not fear." (D&C 38:30.)

At the other extreme are those who do not fear because of their complacency. Consequently, they do not prepare for the prophesied calamities of the future or even for the unforeseen disasters or setbacks that can occur without warning. There is great danger in complacency. President Ezra Taft Benson warned "Too often we bask in our comfortable complacency and rationalize that the ravages of war, economic disaster, famine, and earthquake cannot happen here. Those who believe this are either not acquainted with the revelations of the Lord, or they do not believe them. Those who smugly think these calamities will not happen, that they somehow will be set aside because of the righteousness of the Saints, are deceived and will rue the day they harbored such a delusion." (Ensign, November 1980, p. 34.)

Prophecies of the last days have been given so that we might properly prepare to meet the predicted challenges. Whether or not we will ultimately experience a calamity or challenge to our safety and security makes no difference. Our task is to be prepared—to keep both our temporal and spiritual lamps trimmed and ready and to follow the Savior's admonition to "watch" and be prepared. (See Matthew 25:1-13.)

A Personal Responsibility

From the time it was organized in 1830, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has stressed personal preparedness, taking care of oneself and one's family, and seeking to alleviate the condition of the poor. The primary responsibility for taking care of oneself rests first with the individual and second with the family. Resources of the Church and community are to be used only after relying upon oneself and one's family.

Bishop Victor L. Brown expressed concern that "because the Church program includes production projects, canneries, bishops' storehouses, Deseret Industries, and other visible activities, our people are mistakenly led to believe these things replace the need for them to provide for themselves." He then declared, "This simply is not so." (Ensign, November 1980, p. 81.) Elder L. Tom Perry of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles added: "We must remind ourselves that the Church welfare system was never designed or intended to care for the healthy member who, as a result of his poor management or lack of preparation, has found himself in difficulty." (Ensign, May 1981, p. 87.) "No true Latter-day Saint," President Spencer W. Kimball admonished, "while physically or emotionally able will voluntarily shift the burden of his own or his family's well-being to someone else." (Ensign, November 1977, p. 77.)

Latter-day Saints are taught to take seriously the Apostle Paul's pointed counsel that "if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel." (1 Timothy 5:8.) An 1832 revelation stressed the fact that women have "claim" upon their husbands and that children have claim upon their parents "for their maintenance." (D&C 83.)

While serving as a counselor in the First Presidency, President Marion G. Romney emphasized that preparedness and welfare services are "not a doomsday program, but a program for today." (Ensign, November 1982, p. 93.) Taking care of oneself and one's family is an ongoing responsibility. President Spencer W. Kimball taught that "we could refer to all the components of personal and family preparedness, not in relation to holocaust or disaster, but in cultivating a life-style that is on a day-to-day basis its own reward." (Ensign, November 1977, p. 78.)

The present welfare services program of the Church is designed to assist members to live providently now and to be prepared for future emergencies. This was emphasized by Bishop Victor L. Brown: "I fear that many think the welfare services program was designed primarily for doomsday. This is not true. The principles of the welfare services program are designed to help us live providently each day and to cope successfully with serious problems as they come into our lives." (Ensign, November 1982, p. 79.)

Admonitions from Church Leaders

What have Latter-day Saints, and for that matter all people, been admonished by Church leaders—the Lord's servants—to do in terms of personal preparedness? While serving as a counselor in the Presiding Bishopric of the Church, Bishop J. Richard Clarke said: "The greatest test for any generation is how it responds to the voice of the prophets. Our prophets have admonished us to—

Let's look at each of these items.

Counsel on Food Storage and Debt

Initially, the welfare program of the Church was called the "security" program. In an address at the April 1937 general conference of the Church, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., first counselor in the First Presidency, admonished "every head of every household . . . [to have] on hand enough food and clothing, and, where possible, fuel also, for at least a year ahead." (CR, April 1937, p. 26.)

Regarding the type of food one should store, Elder Harold B. Lee, then an apostle, counseled: "Perhaps if we think not in terms of a year's supply of what we ordinarily would use, and think more in terms of what it would take to keep us alive in case we didn't have anything else to eat, that last would be very easy to put in storage for a year . . . just enough to keep us alive if we didn't have anything else to eat." (Welfare conference, 1 October 1966.)

President Ezra Taft Benson emphasized that "the Church has not told you what foods should be stored. This decision is left up to individual members." However, he did indicate that wheat and water should have high priority and that the "other basics could include honey or sugar, legumes, milk products or substitutes, and salt or its equivalent." (Ensign, November 1980, p. 33.)

President Benson cautioned people about going into debt for their food storage and added this counsel:

You do not need to go into debt . . . to obtain a year's supply. Plan to build up your food supply just as you would a savings account. Save a little for storage each pay-check. Can or bottle fruit and vegetables from your gardens and orchards. Learn how to preserve food through drying and possibly freezing. Make your storage a part of your budget. Store seeds and have sufficient tools on hand to do the job. If you are saving and planning for a second car or a TV set or some item which merely add to your comfort or pleasure, you may need to change your priorities. We urge you to do this prayerfully and do it now.

I speak with a feeling of great urgency. I have seen what the days of tribulation can do to people. (Ibid.)

Perhaps the most urgent statement made by President Benson on the subject was this: "The revelation to produce and store food may be as essential to our temporal welfare today as boarding the ark was to the people in the days of Noah." (Ibid.)

"Let us avoid debt as we would avoid a plague," words spoken by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., well over half a century ago, are even more appropriate in today's world of credit cards—the buy-now-and-pay-later philosophy—and rising consumer debt.

A basic part of preparedness is financial planning. Wise management of our income precludes impulse spending and the consequent loss of personal peace through debt. President Heber J. Grant, who was a master at handling financial matters, observed: "If there is any one thing that will bring peace and contentment into the human heart, and into the family, it is to live within our means. And if there is any one thing that is grinding and discouraging and disheartening, it is to have debts and obligations that one cannot meet." (Gospel Standards, Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1941, p. 111.)

Another master in financial matters, President N. Eldon Tanner, who served as a counselor in the First Presidency to three presidents of the Church, provided this sage commentary: "Live on less than you earn. I have discovered that there is no way that you can ever earn more than you can spend. I am convinced that it is not the amount of money an individual earns that brings peace of mind as much as it is having control of his money. . . . Those who structure their standard of living to allow a little surplus, control their circumstances. Those who spend a little more than they earn are controlled by their circumstances." (Ensign, November 1979, p. 81.)

Specific counsel regarding how to avoid debt was given by Elder M. Russell Ballard, who had spent years in the business world before his call to serve as a General Authority in 1976:

Obviously, there are some legitimate areas where debt must be incurred. These would include a home mortgage and possibly the need to borrow for legitimate, sound business investments and "reasonable debt for education." (See "The Dangerous Threat of Increasing Indebtedness," Church News, 17 March 1962, p. 13; and "Stay Free from Debt," ibid., 12 April 1975, p. 18.)

Insurance and Retirement Planning

I once had a friend who should have known better than not to plan for his retirement. He said to me that he was not saving anything for retirement because the Second Coming would be here before then. How foolish! We need to plan for retirement as if the Second Coming would not come in our lifetime yet live our lives in such a way that we would be worthy of greeting the Savior if he did come during our lifetime.

On one occasion, President Lorenzo Snow spoke of those who refused to put down their roots and live in the present because of their singular focus on anticipated events of the future: "The time is speedily coming—we do not want to talk very much, though, about going to Jackson County, Missouri, because through our foolishness and weakness we would not care anything about building houses and making ourselves comfortable here. I know when we first started a colony in Brigham City, the people generally thought it was nonsense, perfectly useless, to plant peach trees, apple trees, currant bushes and the like, because we were going to Jackson County so speedily; and it was with the utmost effort that we were enabled to disabuse them of this idea." (CR, April 1898, p. 64.)

We need to "plant" not only for ourselves, but also for those who will follow after us. I believe the Lord taught this principle to the Saints in Ohio in an 1831 revelation when he said the land would be consecrated unto them "for a little season" and then admonished them to "act upon this land as for years." (D&C 51:16-17.)

Because "no man knoweth" the exact time of the Second Coming, all should "act upon this land as for years," preparing for the future. Too many are not adequately providing for the future or falsely believe they can depend upon what in fact has become an endangered social security system. A recent report on retirees is frightening: "Financial prospects for many Americans on the eve of retirement are grim: Forty percent have no pension income other than Social Security. One in five households has no assets. One in seven individuals has no health insurance. And 20 percent are disabled.

"Those are the principal findings of the largest federal study of Americans approaching retirement ever undertaken." ("Older Americans Face Uncertain Future," Salt Lake Tribune, 18 June 1993, p. A1.)

Planning for the future includes providing adequate insurance protection for oneself and any dependents. President N. Eldon Tanner counseled: "Nothing seems so certain as the unexpected in our lives. With rising medical costs, health insurance is the only way most families can meet serious accident, illness, or maternity costs, particularly those for premature births. Life insurance provides income continuation when the provider prematurely dies. Every family should make provision for proper health and life insurance." (Ensign, November 1979, p. 82.)

With regard to the amount of insurance one should obtain, perhaps the words of Jacob would suffice: "O be wise; what can I say more?" (Jacob 6:12.)

The Most Important Preparation

So far in this chapter we have focused on temporal preparedness. This is appropriate, for there is an interrelationship between temporal and spiritual matters, expressed in the Lord's declaration that "all things unto me are spiritual." (D&C 29:34.) "It has always been a cardinal teaching with the Latter-day Saints," said President Joseph F. Smith, "that a religion which has not the power to save the people temporally and make them prosperous and happy here cannot be depended upon to save them spiritually, and exalt them in the life to come." (As quoted in EM, s.v. "Welfare Services.")

While serving in the Presiding Bishopric of the Church, Bishop J. Richard Clarke stated, "Most important of all, brothers and sisters, with all our storing, let us store righteousness that we may stand approved of the Lord." (Ensign, November 1980, p. 84.) Elder John Longden, who served as a General Authority from 1951 until his death in 1969, wisely observed, "We may survive physically and materially but unless we sur-vive spiritually these things avail nothing." (CR, October 1960, p. 112.)

The storage of food, clothing, and fuel and the avoidance of debt will ultimately mean little if we have not stored up sufficient spiritual oil to keep our lamps lit and shining brightly.

In commenting on the parable of the ten virgins, half of whom were wise enough to have sufficient oil in their lamps and half of whom were foolishly unprepared, President Spencer W. Kimball said: "I believe that the Ten Virgins represent the people of the Church of Jesus Christ. . . . They had the saving, exalting gospel, but it had not been made the center of their lives." (Faith Precedes the Miracle, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1972, pp. 253-54; see also Matthew 25:1-13.)

While serving as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Harold B. Lee spoke of some requisites for preparing ourselves to meet and associate with the Savior and the Saints who are worthy of His presence:

Now, I have asked myself, this being the time to prepare for the millennial reign, how shall we set about to prepare a people to receive the coming of the Lord? . . . This preparation demands first that a people, to receive the coming of the Lord, must be taught the personality and the nature of God and his Son, Jesus Christ. . . .

Another requisite . . . demands that the people be taught to accept the divinity of the mission of Jesus as the Savior of the world. . . .

We must be cleansed and purified and sanctified to be made worthy to receive and abide that holy presence. . . .

We must accept the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith as the instrumentality through which the restoration of the gospel and the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ was accomplished. (Improvement Era, December 1956, pp. 941-42.)

In other words, strengthening one's testimony is one of the best ways to prepare for Christ's coming. President Harold B. Lee stated, "There is nothing better that we can do to prepare ourselves spiritually than to read the Book of Mormon." (Improvement Era, January 1969, p. 13.) "In the Book of Mormon we find a pattern for preparing for the Second Coming" said President Ezra Taft Benson, who then gave these insights: "A major portion of the book centers on the few decades just prior to Christ's coming to America. By careful study of that time period, we can determine why some were destroyed in the terrible judgments that preceded His coming and what brought others to stand at the temple in the land of Bountiful and thrust their hands into the wounds of His hands and feet." (Ensign, November 1986, pp. 6-7.)

It is of interest to note that Sister Virginia Lee Perry, deceased wife of Elder L. Tom Perry of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, made the Book of Mormon a "fundamental part of her storage program." In addition to the cans of wheat and other food supplies, Sister Perry maintained "a supply of a dozen copies of the Book of Mormon," true spiritual food that she replenished as regularly as she gave them out. (Ensign, May 1975, p. 33.)

Perhaps an appropriate conclusion to this chapter on preparing for the Second Coming is the following sure witness by Elder Neal A. Maxwell: "An economic depression would be grim, but it would not change the reality of immortality. The inevitability of the second coming is not affected by the unpredictability of the stock market. . . . A case of cancer does not cancel the promises of the temple endowment." Elder Maxwell adds this assurance: "All that matters is gloriously intact. The promises are in place. It is up to us to perform." (Notwithstanding My Weakness, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1981, p. 57.)
