Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 20

The Sign of the Son of Man

"There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in Heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet. . . . But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east."

—HC, 5:337

Signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars

In taking to task the scurrilous writings of one newspaper of his day, the Prophet Joseph Smith commented on the newspaper's report of a claim that a Mr. Hyrum Redding of Ogle County, Illinois, had already "seen the sign of the Son of Man." The Prophet noted that the Lord would reveal such an event to His earthly prophet and that no man had yet seen such a sign, "nor will any man, until after the sun shall have been darkened and the moon bathed in blood." (HC, 5:290-91.)

There are Biblical and latter-day references to a forthcoming time preceding the Second Coming when great signs shall be shown that will affect the sun, moon, and stars. For example, during his nocturnal visit to Joseph Smith on September 21, 1823, the angel Moroni quoted from the Old Testament prophet Joel: "And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come." (Joel 2:30-31; see also JS-H 1:41.)

The prophet Isaiah proclaimed: "Behold the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine." (Isaiah 13:9-10.) John the Revelator spoke of these signs in the heavens occurring at the time the "sixth seal" was to be opened: "And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood; and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind." (Revelation 6:12-13.)

The Savior warned of the terrible days of trial prior to his coming and declared, "Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken." (Matthew 24:29; see also Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:33.) The Lord affirmed these signs in several latter-day revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith: "But, behold, I say unto you that before this great day [the Second Coming] shall come the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall be turned into blood, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and there shall be greater signs in heaven above and in the earth beneath." (D&C 29:14; see also 34:9; 45:42; 88:87; 133:49.)

One of the means whereby these signs could occur is suggested by a statement of President Brigham Young, who declared, "When man fell, the earth fell into space, and took up its abode in this planetary system, and the sun became our light." (JD, 17:143.) At some future point this earth will be rolled back into its former paradisiacal planetary orbit. At that time its source of light will be from God's presence rather than from the sun. (This is similar to the source of light in the New Jerusalem Temple; see chapter 12.) In this sense, then, the face of the sun will be hidden or darkened. (See DCE, pp. 364, 435, 570.)

Another possible means whereby the sun might be darkened is by being obscured by heavy clouds of volcanic ash, such as what might have occurred in ancient America at the time of the Crucifixion (see 3 Nephi 8:20-23) or because of smoke from great fires caused by warfare. Recall the scenes of the blackened skies and consequent obliterated sun when the invading Iraqis set fire to the oil fields of Kuwait during the Persian Gulf War.

How shall the moon be turned into blood? This is yet to be revealed. However, its blood-red color might be a result of volcanic ash or nuclear dust and clouds in the atmosphere. The moon might also undergo a real or perceived change of color as a result of its changed condition when the earth is rolled back into its terrestrial or paradisiacal orbit.

What about the stars falling from heaven? Once again, the starry spectacle could occur when the earth is rolled back to its former orbit near the abode of God. In the process of such a move, as the earth hurtles through space, it could well appear that the stars are falling from the heavens.

Other explanations for the falling stars could be meteor showers or missiles and bombs streaking through the skies. Dr. Sidney B. Sperry suggested that the falling stars spoken of "are probably not the distant suns we see in space, but the falling of bodies that will create tremendous light when they pass through the layers of our earthly atmosphere." (Doctrine and Covenants Compendium, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960, p. 434.)

Whatever the final cause of these heavenly wonders may be, it seems apparent that these signs will be visible and will precede the great sign of the Son of Man.

The Great Sign Seen by All

Isaiah, who pronounced so many messianic prophesies, declared, "And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." (Isaiah 40:5.)

The Savior Himself prophesied that after the above-mentioned heavenly wonders occur, "then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory." (Matthew 24:30.) In latter-day revelation, He reaffirmed that "all people shall see [the great sign in heaven] together." (D&C 88:93; see also 101:23.)

What is this great sign that all people shall see? That it will be accompanied by a very brilliant and visible light is evidenced by the words of Jesus, who said, "As the light of the morning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be." (JS-M 1:26.)

There is at least one tradition suggesting that this great sign will be "the return of the City of Enoch to the earth." (Wandle Mace, in "Sayings of Joseph Smith as reported by those who claimed to hear him make the statements," JSP.) We do know that the Savior will be accompanied by the righteous hosts of heaven, including the apostles from His earthly ministry: "For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand. And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, and it hath gone forth in a firm decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else." (D&C 29:11-12.)

Although the entire population of this planet will see the sign, whatever it may be, the Prophet Joseph indicated that the world "will say it is a planet, a comet." (HC, 5:337.) As with other signs, spiritually discerning people will recognize the great sign's true meaning and prepare themselves to worship the Son of God. They understand the significance of the following words of the Lord: "And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man. And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath. . . . And then they shall look for me, and, behold, I will come; and they shall see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels; and he that watches not for me shall be cut off." (D&C 45:39-40, 44.)

And so we watch . . . and wait to see the grand sign of the coming of the Son of Man.
