Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 21

The Savior Comes Again

"And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south."

—(Zechariah 14:4.)

The Savior's Coming in Relation to Armageddon

The terrible nature of Armageddon has already been discussed in chapter 10. Its relationship to the Second Coming has been described by Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

When the Lord Jesus comes again, it will be not as the Prince of Peace, not as the Suffering Servant, not as one who descends below all things, but as the Man of War and the God of Battles who will wage war and overthrow kingdoms and spread destruction as he did when Joshua and Gideon and David led his people anciently. The Millennial era will not be ushered in by the righteousness of the people. Christ will come in the midst of war such as has never been known before in the whole history of the world. All the nations of the earth will be engaged. Those who oppose freedom and liberty and Christianity and the Jews will attack Jerusalem. The focal point will be the ancient battlegrounds of Megiddo and Armageddon. In the midst of this war, "this same Jesus" who ascended from Olivet "shall so come in like manner" as he went up into heaven. (Acts 1:11.) His feet shall once again stand upon the Mount of Olives. And in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, which is between Jerusalem and Olivet, he shall sit to judge the heathen nations. (NWAF, p. 637; italics added.)

Jerusalem will be under a terrible siege when the Savior appears. The prophet Zechariah described the plight of the city's inhabitants: "For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city." (Zechariah 14:2.) Isaiah also described the cruelty to be inflicted upon Jerusalem's citizens and "every one that is joined unto them": "Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished." (Isaiah 13:15-16.)

Only the coming of Jesus Christ will save the people from utter destruction. The valley created by the splitting of the Mount of Olives will offer an escape route for the beleaguered people, and then they will see and recognize their true Messiah, even Jesus Christ: "And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet? Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king." (D&C 45:51-53; see also Zechariah 12:10; 13:6.)

Not only the Jews, but those in all nations shall weep and mourn because of their unbelief and wickedness. The more righteous of the people will repent and be baptized, cleansing them of their "sin and uncleanness." (See Zechariah 13:1.)

The Great Earthquake

Latter-day revelation informs us that the Savior's voice "shall be heard among all people," and it shall "break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found." (D&C 133:21-22.) Indeed, His very presence "shall be as the melting fire that burneth, and as the fire which causeth the waters to boil." When He comes "the mountains [shall] flow down." (D&C 133:41, 44.)

As noted in chapter 3, the occurrence of a great earthquake at the time of the Second Coming will split the Mount of Olives and shake the entire earth. John the Revelator tells us that "cities of the nations" of the world will fall as a result of this great quake and that islands will flee and mountains would disappear. (Revelation 16:18, 20.)

The prophet Micah described the effect of the Lord's coming: "For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth. And the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a steep place." (Micah 1:3-4.) Another Old Testament prophet, Ezekiel, added this description of the shaking of the earth at Christ's appearance: "And it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face. For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel; So that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground." (Ezekiel 38:18-20.)

John the Revelator gave specific numbers to the destruction and death that would take place in Jerusalem during this great earthquake: "And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven." (Revelation 11:13.)

Dr. Richard D. Draper suggests that the tenth represents "the Lord's portion—his tithe that he will demand of the wicked." He further suggests that "the figure seven thousand. . . . is probably not to be taken literally. Rather, it signifies . . . fullness and completeness." (OSS, p. 124.)

The Savior's Red Apparel

In contrast to the clothing "of most exquisite whiteness" (Joseph Smith-History 1:31) normally attributed to heavenly beings, when the Savior appears He "shall be red in his apparel, and his garments like him that treadeth the wine-vat." (D&C 133:48; see also Isaiah 63:1-3.) This could be symbolic of the blood of the wicked who are slain at His coming, for the Lord declared, "And I have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my raiment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart." (D&C 133:51.)

His red apparel could also be representative of the blood He shed during His atoning sacrifice, having "trodden the wine-press alone." (D&C 76:107; 88:106; 133:50.) Elder Neal A. Maxwell observed: "Having bled at every pore, how red His raiment must have been in Gethsemane, how crimson that cloak!

"No wonder, when Christ comes in power and glory, that He will come in reminding red attire (see D&C 133:48), signifying not only the winepress of wrath, but also to bring to our remembrance how He suffered for each of us in Gethsemane and on Calvary!" (Ensign, May 1987, p. 72; see also Luke 22:44; D&C 19:18.)

144,000 to Stand with the Savior

One of the intriguing aspects of the Savior's second coming and the ushering in of the Millennium is the appearance of the 144,000 with Him. John the Revelator spoke of these being "sealed in their foreheads" (Revelation 7:2-8) and then said, "And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's name written in their foreheads." (Revelation 14:1; see also D&C 133:17-18.)

Latter-day revelation gives understanding to the mission of this body of 144,000:

"Q. What are we to understand by sealing the one hundred and forty-four thousand, out of all the tribes of Israel—twelve thousand out of every tribe?

"A. We are to understand that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn." (D&C 77:11; italics added.)

Thus, it appears that this 144,000 will have a special missionary assignment. President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "This certainly is a great honor to be one of the 144 thousand who are specially called by the power of 'the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth,' to bring souls unto Christ. John the Apostle had the great desire to bring souls to Christ. Three of the Nephite disciples likewise sought this great honor and it was granted to them. It is one of the noblest desires that a man can have. It will be a wonderful blessing to those who are called in this great group." (CHMR, 1:302.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith referred to the 144,000 as "saviors on Mount Zion" and added they would be accompanied by "an innumerable host that no man can number." (HC, 6:365.)

Regarding the location of the "Mount Zion" where they will appear, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

All of the references to Mount Zion which talk of the Second Coming and related latter-day events appear to have in mind the new Mount Zion in Jackson County, Missouri. Thus we read [in D&C 133:17-18]: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, for the hour of his coming is nigh—When the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads."

Then comes this explanatory comment [in verse 20] which shows the Lord will appear many places at his coming: "For behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion." And then, [in verses 21-22,] using some language borrowed from Rev[elation] 14:2, the revelation continues: "And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people; And it shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys shall not be found." (D&C 133:17-22.)

It seems clear that the Lord and his exalted associates shall stand in glory upon the American Mount Zion, although it may well be that in his numerous other appearances, including that on the Mount of Olivet, which is itself but a few stones' throw from old Mount Zion, he shall also be accompanied by the 144,000 high priests, "for they follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth." [Revelation 14:4.] (DNTC, 3:525-26.)

Just how the Savior will deploy this force of 144,000 special emissaries remains to be revealed. It seems obvious that because of the "innumerable host" that will accompany them, missionary work will move forward with great zeal among those who escape the wrath of God when the world as we now know it comes to an end.
