Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 22

The End of the World

"For, behold the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch."

—Malachi 4:1

The Great and Dreadful Day

An Old Testament prophecy refers to the second coming of Jesus Christ as "the great and dreadful day of the Lord." (Malachi 4:5.) It is significant that the resurrected Savior recited this prophecy to the ancient people of the Americas during His visit with them. (See 3 Nephi 24:1; 25:5.) It is also of interest to note that the angel Moroni quoted this statement three times on the night he first visited young Joseph Smith in 1823. (See Joseph Smith-History 1:36-38, 44-46.) The scripture is also repeated twice in the Doctrine and Covenants. (See D&C 2:1; 110:14.) Thus, reference to "the great and dreadful day of the Lord" appears in all four standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

This "great and dreadful day" is also referred to by other descriptive terms such as the "day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation" (D&C 56:16), the "day of wrath" (D&C 63:6), the "day of vengeance" (D&C 133:51), and the "day . . . that shall burn as an oven" (Malachi 4:1; D&C 133:64).

Such a day will truly be a great day to those who are righteous, but to the wicked it shall be a dreadful day of exquisite sorrow. Elder Orson Pratt defined this momentous day as fol lows: "The day in which wickedness should be entirely swept from the earth, and no remnants of the wicked left, when every branch of them and every root of them should become as stubble, and be consumed from the face of the earth." (JD, 7:77.)

The Wicked Shall Be Burned

The great and dreadful day of the Lord is the promised day in which the wheat and tares will no longer be allowed to grow together (see Matthew 13:24-30; D&C 86:1-11), for the tares, or the wicked, will be "bound in bundles to be burned" (JST, Matthew 13:29), while the wheat, or the righteous, shall be "secured in the garners to possess eternal life, and be crowned with celestial glory" (D&C 101:65).

The Prophet Joseph's inspired rendering of the parable of the wheat and the tares declares: "The harvest is the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked. The reapers are the angels or the messengers sent of heaven. As, therefore, the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world, or the destruction of the wicked. . . . For the world shall be burned with fire." (JST, Matthew 13:39-42, 44.)

The Book of Mormon similarly records the burning of the wicked: "For behold, saith the prophet, the time cometh speedily that Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of men; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day cometh that they must be burned." (1 Nephi 22:15.)

As the earth was cleansed of wickedness in the days of Noah through the great flood, at the Second Coming the earth will be cleansed by fire so that "wickedness shall not be upon the earth." (D&C 29:9.) While serving as an editor of the official Church publication in Nauvoo, Elder John Taylor wrote: "The earth, a part of the creation of God, has [fulfilled] and will fulfil the measure of its creation. It has been baptized by water, it will be baptized by fire." (Times and Seasons, 15 January 1844, p. 408.) The baptism of fire will be preparatory to the final change that will occur at the end of the Millennium when the earth will be transformed into a celestial sphere and take up its abode in the presence of God.

The Fall of Babylon

The burning of the wicked is the destruction of the kingdom of Babylon—the symbol of all that is wicked and evil. While Babylon anciently was an actual city of wickedness, in modern times the Lord referred to the name as a representation of those in all nations whose wicked actions would qualify them for citizenship in ancient Babylon. His plea has been, "Go ye out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon." (D&C 133:14.)

Spiritual Babylon is also referred to as "the great whore, which did corrupt the earth" (Revelation 19:2), the "church of the devil [and the] mother of abominations" (1 Nephi 14:10), and "the great and abominable church" (D&C 29:21). The Lord gave further clarification regarding those who would be classified among Babylon: "Wherefore, he that fighteth against Zion, both Jew and Gentile, both bond and free, both male and female, shall perish; for they are they who are the whore of all the earth; for they who are not for me are against me, saith our God." (2 Nephi 10:16.)

The Apostle John from the New Testament and Nephi from the Book of Mormon both refer to Babylon as "the great whore that sitteth upon many waters." (Revelation 17:1; see also verse 15; 1 Nephi 14:11.) The description of "many waters" is symbolic of the power Babylon has to enslave many nations and people with her wicked ways.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie provided the following definition of Babylon and her forthcoming destruction:

The destruction of Gog and Magog constitutes the fall of Babylon, the overthrow of the great and abominable church, and the destruction of the wicked. Babylon is the world; it is carnality, sensuality, and devilishness; it is the church of the devil; it is every religious and political kingdom and power that is not of God. Within its folds are found Catholics, Protestants, and Latter-day Saints; communists, worldly peoples, and godless nations; the Islamics, the Buddhists, and all who worship any God but the Lord; atheists, humanists, and evolutionists—yes, within its folds are all those who live after the manner of the world. And they all "shall be cast down by devouring fire" (D&C 29:21), as Ezekiel said with reference to Gog and Magog. (NWAF, pp. 638-39.)

The Destruction of the Wicked

When the Prophet Joseph Smith declared that "the destruction of the wicked . . . is the end of the world" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:4), he was referring to the end of wickedness in the world and not to the end of the earth, for that time will come at the end of the Millennium when the earth as we now know it will be changed and become a celestial sphere. (See chapter 26.)

When the wicked are destroyed, those of a telestial nature will be swept from the face of the earth, and only those ca-pable of living celestial and terrestrial lives will remain. While this is not the final judgment, which will come at the end of the Millennium, it is a judgment that illustrates the efficacy of these principles: "For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory. And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a terrestrial glory." (D&C 88:22-23.)

The millennial earth will be a terrestrial sphere, and those who cannot live at this level will not be permitted to livethere, at least until the "little season" at the end of the one-thousand-year period. President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "When the reign of Jesus Christ comes during the millennium, only those who have lived the telestial law will be removed. The earth will be cleansed of all its corruption and wickedness. Those who have lived virtuous lives, who have been honest in their dealings with their fellow men and have endeavored to do good to the best of their understanding, shall remain." (DS, 3:62.)

The Lord revealed that "every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed." (D&C 101:24.)

Satan to Be Bound

Along with the destruction of the wicked will come the binding of Satan. The Lord revealed that at the beginning of the Millennium, "Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years." (D&C 88:110.) During that period of time, "Satan shall not have power to tempt any man" (D&C 101:28), and he "shall have no place in the hearts of the children of men" (D&C 45:55).

The Revelator described the binding of Satan: "And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years." (Revelation 20:1-2.)

The limitation of the adversary's power was also described by Nephi: "For behold, saith the prophet, the time cometh speedily that Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of men; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day cometh that they must be burned. . . . And because of the righteousness of his [God's] people, Satan has no power; wherefore, he cannot be loosed for the space of many years; for he hath no power over the hearts of the people, for they dwell in righteousness, and the Holy One of Israel reigneth." (1 Nephi 22:15, 26.)

There are several points of view regarding the binding of Satan. President Joseph Fielding Smith explained the limitation of Satan's power this way: "There are many among us who teach that the binding of Satan will be merely the binding which those dwelling on the earth will place upon him by their refusal to hear his enticings. This is not so. He will not have the privilege during that period of time to tempt any man." (CHMR, 1:192.)

President Daniel H. Wells, counselor to Brigham Young, held a different view, believing that the righteousness of the people would bind Lucifer: "How is [the binding of Satan] to be accomplished? By our becoming so impregnated with the principles of the Gospel—with the Holy Ghost—that the enemy will have no place in us or in our families. . . . He will be chained to all intents and purposes when he can have no influence—no power—no tabernacles into which he can enter." (JD, 5:43.) This same position was taken by Elder Bruce R. McConkie, who stated:

What does it mean to bind Satan? How is he bound? Our revelation says: "And in that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any man." (D&C 101:28.) Does this mean that power is withdrawn from Satan so that he can no longer entice men to do evil? Or does it mean that men no longer succumb to his enticements because their hearts are so set on righteousness that they refuse to forsake that which is good to follow him who is evil? Clearly it means the latter. Satan was not bound in heaven, in the very presence of God, in the sense that he was denied the right and power to preach false doctrine and to invite men to walk away from that God whose children they were; nay, in this sense, he could not have been bound in heaven, for even he must have his agency.

How, then, will Satan be bound during the Millennium? It will be by the righteousness of the people. . . . The destruction of the wicked sets the stage for millennial righteousness. (MM, p. 668.)

However he is bound, the fact is that his reign of blood and terror on this earth will be terminated for a millennium. Peace will prevail and enmity will cease for a thousand years. The work of the kingdom will move forward under the direction of Him whose kingdom it is, for "Christ will reign personally upon the earth." (Articles of Faith 1:10.)
