Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Section 5

The Millennium

Chapter 23

The Millennium: Righteousness Prevails

"For I will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand."

—D&C 29:11

The First Resurrection: A Look Back

On the Sunday morning following His crucifixion, Jesus Christ became the "first fruits" of the Resurrection as He rose from the grave and defeated death. But He was not alone, for following His resurrection, "the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose." (Matthew 27:52; see also 3 Nephi 23:6-13.)

Elder Parley P. Pratt, one of the original apostles of this last dispensation, described this "first resurrection": "The first general resurrection took place in connection with the resurrection of Jesus Christ. This included the Saints and Prophets of both hemispheres, from Adam down to John the Baptist; or,in other words, all those who died in Christ before His resurrection." (Key To Theology, Liverpool: Albert Carrington, 1883, p. 138.)

Among those resurrected at the time of Christ's resurrection were those who had been temporarily spared from death through the process of translation. These translated beings, who included Moses and Elijah, went through an instantaneous death and resurrection at the time. President Joseph Fielding Smith explained the reason for their translation:

Elijah and Moses were preserved from death: because they had a mission to perform, and it had to be performed before the crucifixion of the Son of God, and it could not be done in the spirit. They had to have tangible bodies. Christ is the first fruits of the resurrection; therefore if any former prophets had a work to perform preparatory to the mission of the Son of God, or to the dispensation of the meridian of times, it was essential that they be preserved to fulfill that mission in the flesh. . . . The Lord preserved [Moses], so that he could come at the proper time and restore his keys, on the heads of Peter, James, and John, who stood at the head of the dispensation of the meridian of time. He reserved Elijah from death that he might also come and bestow his keys upon the heads of Peter, James, and John and prepare them for their ministry. (DS, 2:110-11.)

Because there was no necessity for Moses and Elijah to remain as translated beings following the resurrection of Christ, they went through death and resurrection in the twinkling of an eye. Thus, when they restored priesthood keys to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in 1836 (see D&C 110), they did so as resurrected beings.

Since the time of the first resurrection, there have been others who have been granted translated bodies in order to continue their ministry upon this earth, notably the Apostle John (see D&C 7) and the Three Nephite Disciples (see 3 Nephi 28.) There have also been individuals resurrected since the time of Christ who had special missions to perform in the flesh, namely Peter, James, and Moroni. The former two joined with the Apostle John in restoring the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in 1829. (See D&C 27:12.) Moroni appeared to the Prophet as a resurrected angel to instruct him regarding the translation of the Book of Mormon. (See JS-H 1:27-54.)

As to where resurrected beings now reside, we turn again to the writings of Elder Parley P. Pratt: "Those raised left the earth and ascended, or were transplanted far on high, with the risen Jesus, to the glorified mansions of His Father, or to some planetary system already redeemed and glorified. The reasons for thus leaving the earth are obvious. Our planet was still in its rudimental state, and therefore subject to the rule of sin and death. It was necessary that it should continue thus, until the full time of redemption should arrive; it was, therefore, entirely unfitted for the residence of immortal man." (Pratt, Key to Theology, p. 139.)

It is noteworthy to consider the present status of three ancient prophets who were resurrected at the time of Christ. The Lord revealed that "Abraham, . . . Isaac, . . . and Jacob . . . have entered into their exaltation, according to the promises, and sit upon thrones, and are not angels but are gods." (D&C 132:37.)

Millennial Resurrection of the Righteous

With few exceptions, all who have died from the time of Christ to the present await the day when their spirits shall be reunited with the flesh. To the righteous, this resurrection—the resurrection of the just—will come at the beginning of the Millennium. "While there was a general resurrection of the righteous at the time Christ arose from the dead," declared President Joseph Fielding Smith, "it is customary for us to speak of the resurrection of the righteous at the Second Coming of Christ as the first resurrection. It is the first to us, for we have little thought or concern over that which is past. The Lord has promised that at the time of his Second Advent the graves will be opened, and the just shall come forth to reign with him on the earth for a thousand years." (DS, 2:295.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie gave further understanding to the meaning of the "first resurrection": "No matter when they lived, the righteous dead, those destined to gain eternal life in our Father's kingdom, always come forth in the next available resurrection. That resurrection to them is the first resurrection." (MM, p. 634.)

Those who receive patriarchal promises that they shall be raised in the "morning of the first resurrection" are those who are worthy to be "first caught up to meet him" in the heavens prior to His earthly descent. (D&C 88:97-98.)

As discussed in chapter 21, when Christ returns at His second coming, He will be accompanied by a specially designated group of 144,000 (see Revelation 14:1; D&C 133:18), as well as an innumerable company of resurrected Saints who have qualified for celestial glory (see D&C 76:50-70). In addition, "the saints that are upon the earth, who are alive shall be quickened and be caught up to meet him." (D&C 88:96; see also 1 Thessalonians 4:16-17.)

While the worthy Saints among the living are "quickened and . . . caught up to meet him," it seems reasonable to believe that not all will pass through death and resurrection at this time. In order for mortal children to be born during the Millennium, they must be begotten by mortal parents. Much is yet to be revealed regarding these matters.

Those who are resurrected after the morning of the first resurrection are "those who are Christ's at his coming." (D&C 88:99.) President Joseph Fielding Smith explained their status: "In this resurrection will come forth those of the terrestrial order, who were not worthy to be caught up to meet him, but who are worthy to come forth to enjoy the millennial reign." (DS, 2:296-97.)

Only those worthy of celestial or terrestrial glory will inhabit the earth during the Millennium. All others must wait for the resurrection of the unjust when the thousand years of peace will be disrupted for a little season prior to the final judgment. Until then, the wicked and unrepentant remain unressurected. President Joseph Fielding Smith noted: "It is decreed that the unrighteous shall have to spend their time during this thousand years in the prison house prepared for them where they can repent and cleanse themselves through the things which they shall suffer." (DS, 3:60.) Such, for example, will be the status of King David, whose adulterous relationship with Bathsheba led him to take the life of the faithful Uriah. (See TPJS, pp. 188-89.)

Human Lifespan

This earth will be a paradisiacal planet during the Millennium, and death—at least as it now exists in our present telestial world—will cease. The Lord revealed: "And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death. In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree. And when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious." (D&C 101:29-31.)

The "age of a tree" has been identified as "one hundred years old." (Joseph Fielding Smith; as quoted in DCE, p. 9.) The prophet Isaiah foretold that "the child shall die an hundred years old." (Isaiah 65:20.)

Membership in Christ's Church

It is of interest to note that the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "There will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years." (TPJS, pp. 268-69.) Commenting on this statement, President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "The saying that there will be wicked men on the earth during the millennium has been misunderstood by many, because the Lord declared that the wicked shall not stand, but shall be consumed. In using this term wicked it should be interpreted in the language of the Lord as recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 84, verses 49-53. Here the Lord speaks of those who have not received the gospel as being wicked as they are still under the bondage of sin, having not been baptized. The inhabitants of the terrestrial order will remain on the earth during the millennium, and this class is without the gospel ordinances." (DS, 3:63-64.)

While every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ (see Philippians 2:10-11), according to Brigham Young not all who remain on the millennial earth will be members of His true church: "In the millennium men will have the privilege of being Presbyterians, Methodists or Infidels, but they will not have the privilege of treating the name and character of Deity as they have done heretofore. No, but every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God the Father that Jesus is the Christ." (JD, 12:274.)

On another occasion, President Young said: "When all nations are so subdued to Jesus that every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess, there will still be millions on the earth who will not believe in him; but they will be obliged to acknowledge his kingly government. You may call that government ecclesiastical, or by whatever term you please; yet there is no true government on earth but the government of God, or the holy Priesthood." (JD, 7:142; see also 2:316-17.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith also expressed his belief that not all inhabitants of the millennial earth would be members of Christ's church: "From the words of the prophets it is quite evident that there will be on the earth some who will not belong to the Church, but they will have to pay homage to the government of God. If, in that day, a man shall die unrepentant he shall be accursed. (Isa. 65:20.) We cannot help thinking, however, that under such conditions of righteousness and influence of the teachings of heavenly beings, the time will not be very long before all people will forsake the ways of the world, and even the heathens will come unto the brightness of the Gospel light." (WP, p. 312.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie, however, took a different view regarding the existence of other churches than "the only true and living church" of Jesus Christ (D&C 1:30) during the Millennium:

How and in what manner will men worship their God during the Millennium? In answer, we can only call attention to the pure and perfect worship ordained to be in that blessed age. . . . This we know: the Millennium is designed to save souls; Satan will be bound, and sin as we know it will cease; all false religions and every rite and practice that is not of God will go the way of all the earth; and true wor ship, untainted, unalloyed, unabridged, will fill the hearts of all men. The gospel in its fulness and perfection will fill every heart; all people will be baptized; all shall glory in the gift of the Holy Ghost; all men will hold the priesthood and magnify their callings; and there will be no marriage but eternal marriage. (NWAF, p. 643.)

Millennial Government

Two Old Testament prophets foresaw two world capitals during the Millennium: "for out of Zion [the New Jerusalem] shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from [old] Jerusalem." (Isaiah 2:3; Micah 4:2.)

Thus, there will be two world capitals during the millennial era, one in the western hemisphere and one in the eastern hemisphere. "There will be no conflict," declared President Joseph Fielding Smith, "for each city shall be headquarters for the Redeemer of the world, and from each he shall send forth his proclamations as occasion may require." (DS, 3:70.)

Regarding the nature of government during the Millennium, President Smith stated:

When our Savior comes to rule in the millennium, all governments will become subject unto his government, and this has been referred to as the kingdom of God, which it is; but this is the political kingdom which will embrace all people whether they are in the Church or not. . . . But the kingdom of God is the Church of Jesus Christ, and it is the kingdom that shall endure forever. When the Savior prayed, "Thy kingdom come," he had reference to the kingdom in heaven which is to come when the millennial reign starts.

When Christ comes, the political kingdom will be given to the Church. The Lord is going to make an end to all nations; that means this nation as well as any other. The kingdom of God is the Church, but during the millennium, the multitudes upon the face of the earth who are not in the Church will have to be governed, and many of their officers, who will be elected, may not be members of the Church. (DS, 1:229-30.)

The separate nature of the church of God and the kingdom of God was described by President George Q. Cannon:

We are asked, Is the Church of God and the Kingdom of God the same organization? and we are informed that some of the brethren hold that they are separate.

This is the correct view to take. The Kingdom of God is a separate organization from the Church of God. There may be men acting as officers in the Kingdom of God who will not be members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. On this point the Prophet Joseph gave particular instructions before his death, and gave an example, which he asked the younger Elders who were present to always remember. It was to the effect that men might be chosen to officiate as members of the Kingdom of God who had no standing in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Kingdom of God when established will not be for the protection of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints alone, but for the protection of all men, whatever their religious views or opinions may be. Under its rule, no one will be permitted to overstep the proper bounds or to interfere with the rights of others." (Juvenile Instructor, 1 March 1896, p. 140; italics added; see also HC, 7:382.)

President Brigham Young further clarified the difference between the Church and the political kingdom of God. Speaking of the kingdom of God, he said: "That kingdom grows out of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but it is not the church; for a man may be a legislator in that body which will issue laws to sustain the inhabitants of the earth in their individual rights and still not belong to the Church of Jesus Christ at all. And further though a man may not even believe in any religion it would be perfectly right, when necessary, to give him the privilege of holding a seat among that body which will make laws to govern all the nations of the earth and control those who make no profession of religion at all; for that body would be governed, controlled and dictated to acknowledge others in those rights which they wish to enjoy themselves." (HC, 7:382.)

Temple Work

A major effort during the thousand-year period of Christ's reign on earth will be the focus on temple work. This will be "the great work of the millennium," said President Joseph Fielding Smith, who then explained: "The work of the millennium will be largely work for the dead who did not have an opportunity when living to obtain the blessings, but who would have accepted the blessings if they had lived. Justice demands this. We need not worry, therefore, because young men or young women die without being married. All who are worthy will be blessed just the same as if they had lived and obtained the blessings." (DS, 2:167, 177.)

President Wilford Woodruff added this testimony regarding the extent of temple work during the Millennium: "This work of administering the ordinances of the house of God to the dead, I may say, will require the whole of the Millennium, with Jesus at the head of the resurrected dead to attend to it. The ordinances of salvation will have to be attended to for the dead who have not heard the Gospel, from the days of Adam down, before Christ can present this world to the Father, and say, 'It is finished.'" (JD, 13:327.)

In September 1877, at a time when there was only one operating temple on the earth, President Woodruff said: "When the Savior comes, a thousand years will be devoted to this work of redemption; and Temples will appear all over this land of Joseph,—North and South America—and also in Europe and elsewhere." (JD, 19:230.)

As discussed in chapter 12, we are presently in the greatest era of temple building the world has ever experienced as we prepare for this millennial work. But there will yet be "thousands" of temples built, said President Brigham Young, and "tens of thousands of men and women will go into those temples and officiate for people who have lived as far back as the Lord shall reveal." (JD, 3:372.)

In order to accomplish this mighty work of redemption, temples will need to have extended operating hours. In 1899 President Lorenzo Snow foresaw such a day: "The time will come when there will be Temples established over every portion of the land, and we will go into these Temples and work for our kindred dead night and day." (Millennial Star, 31 August 1899, p. 546.) More recently, at the rededication of the Arizona Temple in 1975, President Spencer W. Kimball saw a time when "temples will be used around the clock and throughout the year. We have been promised hundreds of temples and hundreds of thousands of people who want to go to the temples." (Church News, 19 April 1975, p. 3.)

John the Revelator saw this around-the-clock labor of redemption in vision: "And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they? . . . Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them." (Revelation 7:13, 15; italics added.) President Spencer W. Kimball commented on the Revelator's vision, saying, "John saw that sometime in the future (and it is still in the future to us), those who [are] faithful and have cleansed their lives will work night and day in the holy temples. Evidently there will be then a constant succession of groups going through the temple." (Ensign, January 1977, p. 7.)

Interaction of Mortals and Resurrected Beings

Regarding the question of who will actually perform or participate in the ordinances of the temple, President Joseph Fielding Smith stated: "Will resurrected beings during the millennium actually take part in the endowment work of the temple along with mortal beings?

"The answer to this question is no! That is, they will not assist in performing the ordinances. Resurrected beings will assist in furnishing information which is not otherwise available, but mortals will have to do the ordinance work in the temples." (DS, 2:178.)

Much divine assistance will be provided to those who perform temple work during the Millennium. President John Taylor observed that "communications from the heavens will be received in regard to our labors, how we may perform them, and for whom." (JD, 25:185.) President Joseph Fielding Smith added this testimony: "Those who will be living here then will be in daily communication with those who have passed through the resurrection, and they will come with this information, this knowledge that we do not have and will give it to those who are in mortality saying, 'Now go into the temples and do this work; when you get this done, we will bring you other names.' And in that way every soul who is entitled to a place in the celestial kingdom of God will be ferreted out, and not one soul shall be overlooked." (DS, 2:167.)

Two statements by President Brigham Young add insight in how interaction with immortals will facilitate temple work during the Millennium:

Before this work is finished, a great many of the Elders of Israel in Mount Zion will become pillars in the Temple of God, to go no more out: they will eat and drink and sleep there; and they will often have occasion to say—"Somebody came into the Temple last night; we did not know who he was, but he was no doubt a brother, and told us a great many things we did not before understand. He gave us the names of a great many of our forefathers that are not on record, and he gave me my true lineage and the names of my forefathers for hundreds of years back. He said to me, You and I are connected in one family: there are the names of your ancestors; take them and write them down, and be baptised and confirmed, and save such and such ones, and receive of the blessings of the eternal Priesthood for such and such an individual, as you do for yourselves." (JD, 6:295.)

Some of those who are not in mortality will come along and say, "Here are a thousand names I wish you to attend to in this temple, and when you have got through with them I will give you another thousand." (JD, 3:372.)

Those who work in the temples will have direct knowledge that the work they are doing is acceptable to those for whom it is being done. President Anthon H. Lund, counselor in the First Presidency to President Joseph F. Smith, said: "The veil, I believe, will be much thinner between the spirit world and this; and we will work for the dead, not only in faith that those for whom we labor will accept the Gospel, but with an actual knowledge that they are longing for the work to be done." (CR, October 1903, p. 82.)

The Abode of Resurrected Beings

Regarding the abode of resurrected beings, President John Taylor said, "There will be a peculiar habitation for the resurrected bodies. This habitation may be compared to paradise, whence man, in the beginning was driven." (The Gospel Kingdom, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964, p. 218.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith added this statement: "During all these years men dwelling in mortality will have the privilege of associating with those who have received their resurrection. Our Lord and Savior will be a familiar figure among the righteous saints. Instruction will be given by resurrected prophets. How could wickedness remain under such conditions? Those who have passed through resurrection will not, however, dwell with those in mortality. They will not stay in earthly, or human homes nor sleep in the beds of mortals. Such a thing would be inconsistent." (WP, pp. 312-13.)

While much remains to be made known regarding this final chapter in the earth's history, we rejoice in that which has been revealed and look forward to the further light and knowledge that shall be forthcoming.
