Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 24

The Millennium: A Paradisiacal Glory

"We believe . . . that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory."

—Articles of Faith 1:10

Enmity to Cease

The Millennium will be a period of peace not only to mankind—"violence shall no more be heard in thy land" (Isaiah 60:18)—but also to the brute creation and every living thing. The Lord declared: "And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face." (D&C 101:26.) The writings of the prophet Isaiah are very descriptive of this period of peace: "The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock; and dust shall be the serpent's meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord." (Isaiah 65:25; see also 11:6-9; 2 Nephi 21:6-9; 30:12-15.)

During the march of Zion's Camp, the Prophet Joseph Smith preached a mini-sermon on eliminating enmity. He recorded these words in his journal:

In pitching my tent we found three massasaugas or prairie rattlesnakes, which the brethren were about to kill, but I said, "Let them alone—don't hurt them! How will the serpent ever lose its venom, while the servants of God possess the same disposition, and continue to make war upon it? Men must become harmless before the brute creation, and when men lose their viscious dispositions and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together, and the sucking child can play with the serpent in safety." The brethren took the serpents carefully on sticks and carried them across the creek. I exhorted the brethren not to kill a serpent, bird, or an animal of any kind during our journey unless it became necessary in order to preserve ourselves from hunger. (TPJS, p. 71.)

While the millennial earth may not be a paradise for hunters, surely it will be a place of peace for all God's creatures.

Paradisiacal Glory Returns to Earth

The lack of enmity between animals and humans is indicative of the terrestrial, or paradisiacal, state of the earth during the Millennium. As noted at the beginning of the chapter, "We believe . . . the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." (Articles of Faith 1:10.) The footnote to this scripture identifies paradisiacal glory as "a condition like the Garden of Eden." President Joseph Fielding Smith provided further insight into the meaning of this "paradisiacal glory":

Too many have the idea that this has reference to the celestialized earth, but this is not the case. It refers to the restored earth as it will be when Christ comes to reign. This is taught in Isaiah 65:17-25, and in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 101:23-31. . . .

Now in time past this earth had a paradisiacal glory, and then came the fall, bringing a change, and that change has been upon the earth in the neighborhood of 6,000 years. . . .

This earth is to be renewed and brought back to the condition in which it was before it was cursed through the fall of Adam. When Adam passed out of the Garden of Eden, then the earth became a telestial world, and it is of that order today. I do not mean a telestial glory such as will be found in telestial worlds after the resurrection, but a telestial condition which has been from the days of Adam until now and will continue until Christ comes. . . .

It will become a terrestrial world then and will so remain for 1,000 years. . . .

At the end of the world the earth will die; it will be dissolved, pass away, and then it will be renewed, or raised with a resurrection. It will receive its resurrection to become a celestial body. (DS, 1:84-88; see also DCE, p. 411.)

The Earth Transfigured

The change the earth will undergo is called a "day of transfiguration." (D&C 63:20.) Part of this change is bringing the mass of the earth back to the condition it was in before the continents and islands were separated, when the earth was "divided." This occurred in the days of Peleg, who was a great-great-great-grandson of Noah. (See Genesis 9:18; 10:21-25.)

Isaiah described this as a time when the "land shall be married." (Isaiah 62:4.) In a revelation received in 1831, the Lord declared: "He shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north countries, and the islands shall become one land; And the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided." (D&C 133:23-24.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith provided this insightful information:

We are committed to the fact that Adam dwelt on this American continent. But when Adam dwelt here, it was not the American continent, nor was it the Western Hemisphere, for all the land was in one place, and all the water was in one place. There was no Atlantic Ocean separating the hemispheres. . . .

Then we read in Genesis that there came a time when the earth was divided. There are some people who believe that this simply means that the land surface was divided among the various tribes, but this is not the meaning; it was an actual dividing of the surface of the earth, and it was broken up as we find it now. (DS, 3:74-75; see also DCE, pp. 144-45.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie suggested it is possible that "the very axis of the earth will shift so that the seasons cease and the whole earth enjoys both seedtime and harvest at all times." (NWAF, pp. 649-50.) The marrying of the land mass and the combining of the oceans may be, in part, the result of land changes at the time of the Second Coming.

John the Revelator prophesied of the time when "every mountain and island were moved out of their places." (Revelation 6:14; see also 16:20.) Isaiah foresaw the mountains flowing at the presence of the Lord: "Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence, as when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence! When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence." (Isaiah 64:1-3.)

Micah spoke of the mountains being "molten under him" (Micah 1:4), and the Doctrine and Covenants includes three references to this great event (see 49:23; 109:74; 133:22). Elder Bruce R. McConkie added this commentary:

Not only will the Lord come in flaming fire, but that fire will produce fervent, glowing, intense heat, heat that has not been known in the entire history of the earth, heat that will cause the very elements to melt, the mountains to flow down at his presence, and the very earth itself, as now constituted, to dissolve. Nowhere is this better expounded than by Peter. "The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night," he says, "in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up." In this dread day when "the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat," there will come into being "new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness." (2 Peter 3:10-13.) (NWAF, p. 645.)

The Millennial and Postmillennial New Heaven and New Earth

The concept of a new heaven and new earth includes both a millennial and a postmillennial aspect.

Isaiah prophesied of "new heavens and a new earth" and then proceeded to describe millennial conditions. (See Isaiah 65:17-25.) In commenting on Isaiah's writings, President Joseph Fielding Smith said: "[Isaiah's writings have] reference to the change which shall come to the earth and all upon it, at the beginning of the Millennial reign, as we declare in the tenth article of the Articles of Faith. This is the renewed earth when it shall receive its paradisiacal glory, or be restored as it was before the fall of man." (CHMR, 1:143.)

The Lord setting his foot upon the Mount of Olives and the occurrence of the great earthquake may be what triggers the reuniting of the land masses, for "the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake." (D&C 45:48; see also 49:23; 88:87.)

The postmillennial new heaven and earth is described in latter-day revelation: "And again, verily, verily, I say unto you that when the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season; and the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth. For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea." (D&C 29:22-24.)

This postmillennial change "is the final change, or resurrection, of the earth, after the 'little season' which shall follow the Millennium," stated President Joseph Fielding Smith. (CHMR, 1:143.)

Isaiah spoke of the earth reeling to and fro like a drunkard and being "utterly broken down, . . . dissolved, . . . [and] moved exceedingly." (Isaiah 24:19-20.) President Smith wrote: "The interpretation is that [the earth] should not be restored to the same mortal or temporal condition. When the earth passes away and is dissolved, it will pass through a similar condition which the human body does in death, but, like the human body, so shall the earth itself be restored in the resurrection and become a celestial body, through the mercy and mission of Jesus Christ." (CHMR, 1:143.)

John the Revelator spoke of this changed earth as a "sea of glass" (Revelation 4:6), which the Lord identified as "the earth, in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state" (D&C 77:1). "After [the earth] hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father." (D&C 88:19.) Before the earth fills the "measure of its creation," however, the forces of evil will once again assemble their hellish hosts for one last battle before they are everlastingly banished.
