Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 25

The Millennium: A Little Season

"And again, verily, verily, I say unto you that when the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season."

—D&C 29:22

An Ancient Zion Society Destroyed

The Book of Mormon provides a classic example of what creates a Zion and how that celestial society can be destroyed.

Following the visit of the resurrected Redeemer, the ancient inhabitants of the Americas enjoyed almost two hundred years of happiness. This celestial society was one in which "there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another." (4 Nephi 1:2.) Furthermore, "they did walk after the commandments which they had received from their Lord and their God, continuing in fasting and prayer, and in meeting together oft both to pray and to hear the word of the Lord." (Verse 12.)

The happiness of this people was described by Mormon, their prophet-scribe: "And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God. . . . They were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God." (Verses 15-17; italics added.)

Only eighty-four years later, the first signs of a breakdown began to appear as a "small part of the people . . . revolted from the church." (Verse 20.) The majority of the people continued to live their lives "after the manner of happiness" (2 Nephi 5:27) and to enjoy the Spirit of the Lord in their lives for about another one hundred years. Ultimately, however, their peace was destroyed. They "were lifted up in pride, such as the wearing of costly apparel." (4 Nephi 1:24.) They "began to be divided into classes . . . and began to deny the true church of Christ." (Verse 26.) Wickedness spread, and Satan "did get hold upon their hearts." (Verses 24-26, 28.) Secret oaths and combinations spread, and hatred filled the hearts of the people. Eventually, because of their exceeding anger towards one another, they not only lost their love of others, but began to "thirst after blood and revenge continually." (Moroni 9:3-5.) Their society was completely destroyed.

The Great Last Struggle

Unfortunately, the celestial society of the Millennium will face some similar challenges near the end of the thousand-year period of peace and reign of righteousness. The Lord warned that the time would come when "men [would] again begin to deny their God." (D&C 29:22.) It seems likely that many of the main factors in the destruction of the ancient society in the Americas will once again be present: pride, loss of love, creation of social classes, selfishness, fault-finding, hatred, and the pursuit of pleasure through wickedness.

Satan will be "loosed a little season" to work his wickedness in one last effort to gather souls to his evil cause. (See Revelation 20:1-3; D&C 43:30-31; 88:110-111.) One must remember that Satan has no hope of winning! His war is the destruction of souls, for "the devil will not support his children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to hell." (Alma 30:60.) Nephi reminded us that Lucifer "seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27; see verse 18.)

What is "a little season"? President Joseph Fielding Smith suggested it may be close to one thousand years: "Our Lord came about 4,000 years from the time of the fall. The millennium is to come some time following the 2,000 years after his coming. Then there is to be the millennium for 1,000 years, and following that a 'little season,' the length of which is not revealed, but which may bring 'time' to its end about 8,000 years from the beginning." (DS, 1:81.)

If the Fall of Adam and Eve took their paradisiacal world to a telestial state, what will happen to the paradisiacal earth of the Millennium when many people turn to wickedness and Satan once again rages in their hearts? President Joseph Fielding Smith provided an answer: "Will the earth go back to the telestial order after the millennium? No, but the people on the face of the earth, many of them, will be like the Nephites who lived 200 years after the coming of Christ. They will rebel against the Lord knowingly, and the great last struggle will come, and the devil and his forces will be defeated; then the earth will die and receive its resurrection and become a celestial body. The resurrection of the wicked will take place as one of the last events before the earth dies." (DS, 1:87.)

Resurrection of the Unjust

The first resurrection, which commenced with Christ and will continue through the Millennium, includes all who are worthy of a celestial or a terrestrial glory. The second resurrection, or the resurrection of the unjust (see D&C 76:17), will first include telestial beings, those who have been "thrust down to hell" and "who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection." (D&C 76:84-85.) Finally, rising from the grave with a resurrected body of no glory will be the sons of perdition.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie provided this commentary: "At the end of the millennium, and in the morning of this second resurrection, those shall come forth who merit telestial bodies, and they shall be rewarded accordingly. Finally, in the afternoon of the second resurrection, those who 'remain filthy still,' those who having been raised in immortality are judged and found wholly wanting, those whom we call sons of perdition, shall be cast out with Lucifer and his angels." (DNTC, 1:196-97.)

Those who come forth in the morning of the second resurrection will be redeemed to inherit a telestial glory. However, the sons of perdition—"vessels of wrath" (D&C 76:33)—"shall not be redeemed" (verse 38) and are "doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil and his angels in eternity" (verse 33).

Some of these vessels of wrath will come from among those who live near the end of the Millennium. President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "After the thousand years Satan will be loosed again and will go forth again to deceive the nations. Because men are still mortal, Satan will go out to deceive them. Men will again deny the Lord, but in doing so they will act with their eyes open and because they love darkness rather than light, and so they become sons of perdition. Satan will gather his hosts, both those on the earth and the wicked dead who will eventually also be brought forth in the resurrection. Michael, the Prince, will gather his forces and the last great battle will be fought. Satan will be defeated with his hosts. Then will come the end. Satan and those who follow him will be banished into outer darkness." (DS, 1:87.)

Second Battle of Gog and Magog

As noted in chapter 10, there will be two future battles of Gog and Magog: one at the time of Armageddon, preceding the Second Coming; and, as taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith, one "will be after the millennium." (TPJS, p. 280.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught: "The great war involving Gog and Magog is both premillennial . . . and also postmillennial in the sense that there will be another great conflict with wicked nations just before this globe becomes a celestial sphere. . . .

"Postmillennial events will be revealed in full to those who live during the Millennium. The knowledge then given will stand as a warning for those of future generations, even as the words of Ezekiel [39:1-16] warn us to live as becometh saints. We speculate that much the same thing that happens in the first war with Gog and Magog will be repeated in the second." (MM, p. 488.)

The apocalyptic writings of the Apostle John include this description of this final battle between good and evil: "And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down from God out of heaven and devoured them." (Revelation 20:7-9.) The "fire" mentioned by John could be symbolic of the glory of Michael the archangel, who is Adam, as he descends with his heavenly hosts in the power of God to battle Lucifer.

What will this final conflict consist of, and who will be involved? According to Elder McConkie, it will consist mainly of a war of ideologies: "The war in heaven was a war of ideologies; it was a war to determine how men would be saved; and so it is in the warfare of the world today. Lucifer's forces advocate a plan of salvation that is contrary to the Lord's true plan. And in the process, armies assemble and wars are fought, for the devil delights in destruction. And so shall it be after the Millennium." (MM, pp. 696-97.)

Truth and righteousness will prevail in this final conflict, just as it did when Michael led the hosts of heaven to victory over the devil and his followers in the premortal war in heaven. (See Revelation 12:7-9.) Latter-day revelation describes this coming conflict: "And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven. And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies. And then cometh the battle of the great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all. For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb." (D&C 88:112-15.)

What a glorious day that shall be! The adversary and his wicked ways and followers "shall not have power over the saints any more at all." Surely one will want to be found in the Lord's army on this occasion.
