Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Section 6

Immortality for All, Eternal Life for Some

Chapter 26

All Will Be Judged

"We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God."

—Romans 14:10-12

Judgment: A Process

At least from the time when the great plan of salvation was presented in the premortal world—and perhaps before—the children of God have been in a constant process of being judged.

Those who chose to reject God as their Father and Christ as their Savior were judged not worthy of "advancing" to mortality. All who have been or will be born on this earth were supportive of their premortal Mentors and qualified to come to earth to continue their progression. Here Deity declared, "We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abraham 3:25.)

The process of judgment continues throughout mortality. Those who accept the gospel of Jesus Christ in this life and who are judged worthy of receiving the ordinance and covenant of baptism are brought into God's kingdom and church on earth. Throughout their mortal lives, these Saints of God receive regular checkups by ecclesiastical judges. Worthiness interviews are conducted in order for Church members to hold office or participate in sacred ordinances.

Furthermore, all are encouraged to constantly evaluate and judge their own progress through this mortal schooling. Each is urged to evaluate his or her thoughts, words, and deeds and to repent where necessary. (See Mosiah 4:30.) Perhaps the quintessential questions we need to ask ourselves are those postured by the prophet Alma: "And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? . . . I say unto you, can ye look up to God at that day [of judgment] with a pure heart and clean hands? I say unto you, can you look up, having the image of God engraven upon your countenances?" (Alma 5:14, 19.)

At the time of death, as the spirit separates from the body, there is a judgment passed regarding the abode of the newly disembodied spirit. Those who are judged righteous will enter into a state of happiness and peace in the paradise of God, while others are consigned to a spirit prison. (See Alma 40:6-14.) But there is still hope for those in the latter part of the spirit world. During the three days in which the Savior's spirit was separated from the body following His death on Calvary, the Savior organized those in paradise to take the gospel to those in the spirit prison. (See 1 Peter 3:18-20; 4:6; D&C 138.)

As noted elsewhere in this volume, a judgment is passed at the time of resurrection. Those judged worthy of a celestial or terrestrial resurrection will be brought forth in the first resurrection, while others are required to await the second resurrection.

Ultimately, He to whom all judgment has been committed, even Jesus Christ, will pass a final and "just" judgment upon all. (See John 5:22-30.) This judgment will evidently include a review of the records kept in heaven and on earth (see Revelation 20:12; D&C 128:6-7), as well as input from prophets and apostles whose writings, teachings, and stewardships will impinge on that final judgment (see 1 Nephi 12:9-10; Jacob 6:8-9, 13; Mormon 3:19; Moroni 10:34.)

It is of interest to note that the Greek New Testament word for judgment (krino) means to separate or to decide. Thus, the final judgment will be an act of separating people not only into kingdoms of glory, but also into degrees of glory within each of those kingdoms.

Many Mansions in Heaven

When all things are complete and the Lord Jesus Christ turns to His Father and utters the irrevocable words "It is finished!" each individual will receive his or her just reward.

Alma taught that all people would "be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice. . . . And thus, none but the truly penitent are saved." (Alma 42:23-24.) According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "Salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him." (As quoted in MM, p. 705.) Therefore, in the ultimate sense, salvation, or exaltation, consists of partaking of eternal life, being co-heirs with the Father and Son, and living the kind of life that God does: possessing all things and enjoying all the blessings of a celestial glory.

Yet, all who have not committed the unpardonable sin will partake of a degree of salvation and glory in some kingdom. (See TPJS, pp. 356-57.) The Gospel of John records the Savior as saying, "In my Father's house are many mansions. . . . I go to prepare a place for you." (14:2.) The Prophet Joseph Smith gave further understanding to John's words, suggesting they should be rendered, "In my Father's kingdom are many kingdoms." (TPJS, p. 366.) Furthermore, the Prophet indicated that the Savior's next words were "I go to prepare a kingdom for you, that the exaltation that I receive you may receive also." (As quoted in Andrew E. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith, Salt Lake City: Publisher's Press, 1988, p. 371.)

The Final Judgment

As revealed in the great vision to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon (see D&C 76), the hereafter does not consist of merely a heaven and a hell. There are three kingdoms of glory—celestial, terrestrial, and telestial—and each of these kingdoms has subdivisions. In addition, there is a space known as "outer darkness," which has absolutely no glory. Here the devil, his unembodied so-called angels, and the sons of perdition are sent to remain throughout eternity.

Within the celestial kingdom, which reflects the glory of the sun, are three degrees of glory, with the highest being reserved for those who qualify for eternal lives. (See D&C 76:50-70; 131:1-4; 132:15-17.) These persons will be resurrected with gloriously renewed and sanctified bodies of a celestial nature. And none but those possessing such bodies will enter this kingdom, "for he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory." (D&C 88:22.) Celestial beings "shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever." (D&C 76:62.)

The glory of those who inherit the terrestrial kingdom will differ from those of the celestial kingdom as the moon differs from the sun. Heirs of this kingdom will "receive of the presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of the Father." (D&C 76:77; see verses 71-80.) Only those who qualify for this kingdom will enter, for "he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a terrestrial glory." (D&C 88:23.)

The glory of the telestial kingdom will differ from that of the terrestrial kingdom as the stars differ from the moon. Into this kingdom will pass those individuals who will continue to pay the price of penitence throughout the Millennium and who will have to await the second resurrection before being redeemed. Yet the Lord in His mercy will grant them a glory that "surpasses all understanding." (D&C 76:89.) President Brigham Young taught: "The glory of those who are not permitted to enter into the presence of the Father and the Son will be greater than mortals can imagine, in glory, excellency, exquisite pleasure, and intense bliss." (JD, 9:315; italics added.)

Regarding the numerous gradations of glory within the kingdoms of glory, Elder James E. Talmage has written:

The three kingdoms of widely differing glories [sun, moon, and stars] are severally organized on a plan of gradation. The Telestial kingdom comprises subdivisions; this also is the case, we are told, with the Celestial; and, by analogy, we conclude that a similar condition prevails in the Terrestrial. Thus the innumerable degrees of merit amongst mankind are provided for in an infinity of graded glories. The Celestial kingdom is supremely honored by the personal ministrations of the Father and the Son. The Terrestrial kingdom will be administered through the higher, without a fulness of glory. The Telestial is governed through the ministrations of the Terrestrial, by "angels who are appointed to minister for them." (Articles of Faith, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984, pp. 370-371.)

The sons of perdition, those who commit the unpardonable sin and knowingly and openly rebel against and deny Christ, are "doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil and his angels in eternity." (D&C 76:33.) They are consigned to "a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory." (D&C 88:24.)

Perhaps there will be a great degree of self-judgment involved in the process of determining to what kingdom or glory one is assigned, for the scriptures teach that "your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened." (D&C 88:28.) We will naturally be assigned to places where beings of a glory similar to our own will reside.

This may give added meaning to Isaiah's declaration that "the shew of their countenance doth witness against them." (Isaiah 3:9; 2 Nephi 13:9.) To the wicked, who are filled with darkness, one may ask, "Where is thy glory?" (Moses 1:12-14.) Yet the righteous "shall shine forth in the kingdom of God" (Alma 40:25), and of them it will be said they are "glorious beyond description [with a] countenance truly like lightning" (JS-H 1:32).
