Hoyt W. Brewster, Behold, I Come Quickly: The Last Days and Beyond ( 1994)

Chapter 27

The Measure of Creation

"For after [the earth] hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father."

—D&C 88:19

The Gifts of Immortality and Eternal Life

The essence and purpose of earth life could be summed up in this declaration of Deity: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

The infinite atonement of Jesus Christ makes this divine purpose possible. By willingly allowing His life to be taken on Calvary, then rising in the Resurrection, the Redeemer overcame death and hell. His act of mercy and love freed us from eternal servitude to Satan. (See 2 Nephi 9:6-12.) Truly we sing: "Let the whole wide earth rejoice. Death is conquered, man is free. Christ has won the victory." ("He Is Risen!" Hymns, 1985, no. 199.)

The free gift of immortality, given through the grace of Christ, will be granted to every living thing. (See D&C 29:24-25.) All will be raised from the grave, and the spirit and the body will be inseparably reunited for eternity. Eternal life, however, or that life which God lives, will only be granted to those who qualify. Eternal life is the reward of the righteous—not only they who have lived valiantly, but also they who have accepted the saving covenants and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, including baptism and temple sealings.

Those who are granted eternal life have fully accepted that holy and sinless blood shed for them in Gethsemane and on Calvary. (See D&C 19:15-20; 2 Nephi 2:7.) These are they who in spite of their good works "know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (2 Nephi 25:23.) These are they who have truly come to "know . . . the only true God, and Jesus Christ." (John 17:3; see also D&C 132:24.) Only these will be exalted and dwell in the presence of the Father and Son throughout eternity.

Truly, these are they who will have filled the measure of their creation.

Celestialization of the Earth

In preparation for its final destiny, filling "the measure of its creation," the earth will go through one final refiner's fire. Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught that the earth would go through a second burning in preparation for its final destiny: "After the Millennium, plus a little season, which we assume will be a thousand years, the earth will again be burned; it will again be changed; there will again be new heavens and a new earth, but this time it will be a celestial earth. This is also spoken of as the resurrection of our planet." (MM, p. 536.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith spoke of the earth dying and being resurrected: "At the end of the world the earth will die; it will be dissolved, pass away, and then it will be renewed, or raised with a resurrection. It will receive its resurrection to become a celestial body, so that they of the celestial order may possess it forever and ever. Then it will shine forth as the sun and take its place among the worlds that are redeemed. When this time comes the terrestrial inhabitants will also be taken away and be consigned to another sphere suited to their condition. Then the words of the Savior will be fulfilled, for the meek shall inherit the earth." (DS, 1:87-88.)

The physical change the earth will undergo in preparation for its celestialization was taught by President Brigham Young: "When it becomes celestialized, [this world] will be like the sun, and be prepared for the habitation of the Saints, and be brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory: it will be a body of light. John compared it, in its celestialized state, to a sea of glass [Rev. 4:6; 15:2]." (JD, 7:163.)

In 1843 the Prophet Joseph Smith gave some inspired items of instruction, including the following description of the new earth: "[Angels] reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire, where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord. The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim. This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's." (D&C 130:7-9.)

The ancient revelator John described the surface of this celestial sphere as "a sea of glass like unto crystal." (Revelation 4:6.) The modern-day revelator Joseph Smith said that the "sea of glass spoken of by John . . . is the earth, in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state." (D&C 77:1.) All inhabitants of this celestial sphere will be given their own personal Urim and Thummim "whereby, things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known." (D&C 130:10.) John described this Urim and Thummim as "a white stone" that has written on it a "new name . . . which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it." (Revelation 2:17; see also D&C 130:11.)

The Celestial City of Zion

In the twenty-first chapter of Revelation, John describes two holy cities: the "new Jerusalem" that will reign during the Millennium (see Revelation 21:2-3) and the "holy Jerusalem" that will descend from heaven to take up its abode on the newly celestialized earth (see Revelation 21:9-11).

John then proceeded to describe the "holy Jerusalem": "[It] had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel: On the east three gates; on the north three gates; on the south three gates; and on the west three gates. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb." (Revelation 21:12-14.) Richard D. Draper provided the following informative commentary:

The city resembles the temple of Ezekiel (see 48:31-35.) But there are differences. First, at each of John's gates stands an angel as sentinel. The prophet Brigham Young provided insight into the duty of these angels. Defining the endowment, he stated: "Your endowment is, to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell." [JD, 2:31.] Appropriately, these angels are placed at the gates of the celestial city, symbolizing that only those who have made and kept their covenants in God's holy house will enter his kingdom. . . .

The repetition of number twelve in the stones and gates stands as a constant reminder of the priestly power that guards and envelops all aspects and operations of the holy city. This is seen especially in the measurement of the walls. John notes they are 144 cubits [see Revelation 21:17], after the measure of an angel. The size of an angelic cubit is unknown. What is important is the number—twelve squared—signifying the fullness of priesthood authority. This is what surrounds and stands as a great bulwark to the city." (OSS, pp. 235-36.)

John saw that the city had no temple, for the whole face of this celestial sphere will be a temple: "And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. [The whole earth is the Lord's temple or Holy of Holies.] And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. (Revelation 21:22-23.)

In light of the magnificence to be bestowed both upon this planet and the people who inherit it, the words of Elder Orson Pratt are well worth pondering: "O man, remember the future destiny and glory of the earth, and secure thine everlasting inheritance upon the same, that when it shall be glorious, thou shalt be glorious also." (Millennial Star, 1 March 1850, p. 72.)

"Then Shall They Be Gods"

The Lord's promise to those who qualify for the highest degree within the celestial kingdom is "Then shall they be gods." (D&C 132:20.) These gods are eternally sealed husbands and wives who are given the promise of a "continuation of the seeds" (procreative power) throughout the eternities. (D&C 132:19.) In 1916 the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles declared: "Only resurrected and glorified beings can become parents of spirit offspring. Only such exalted souls have reached maturity in the appointed course of eternal life; and the spirits born to them in the eternal worlds will pass in due sequence through the several stages or estates by which the glorified parents have attained exaltation." (James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-75, 5:34.)

These gods will have traveled the same path trodden by their Father in Heaven eons before. The Prophet Joseph Smith declared, "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens!" (TPJS, p. 345; see also DCE, pp. 214-16.)

The truth of the divine destiny of worthy husbands and wives was revealed originally to Elder Lorenzo Snow, who stated it in poetic form: "As man now is, God once was; as God now is, man may be." Elder Snow, who lived to become the fifth prophet of this last dispensation, said of that revelation: "Nothing was ever revealed more distinctly than that was to me." (Improvement Era, June 1919, p. 661.)

Men and women who qualify for godhood will have been true to the purpose of their creation. While they will still have much to learn and experience before truly becoming as God is, they will have filled in large part the measure of their creation.

It should be remembered that a man who holds the priesthood does not have an advantage over a woman who can bear children, nor she over him. Exaltation is a joint process. It requires a worthy man and a worthy woman—husband and wife joined by the sealing powers of the priesthood and sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise—to qualify for this exalted status. The Apostle Paul said it well: "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord." (1 Corinthians 11:11.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie provided an appropriate summary statement on the destiny of those who receive a fulness of the Father's blessings and dominions: "Thus those who gain eternal life, which is exaltation, become like God. They believe what he believes, know what he knows, and exercise the same powers he possesses. Like him they become omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent. They have advanced and progressed and become like him. They are the ones who receive an inheritance in the Celestial City." (MM, p. 706.)

And so the possibilities of eternity begin to unfold, and the wonders of the universe become manifest. The blessed will forever associate with their God and Father in Heaven. This will be but the beginning of an eternity of association with Him who is known as the "Beginning and the End." Joy and peace will reign supreme as righteous husbands and wives live together in love in a family unit where time no longer exists.
