Hortense H. Child
First Counselor in the Young Women General Presidency

“My bishop is the greatest!” This was an expression overheard as Nancy came down the hall from her personal interview with the bishop. Obviously, the interview had been rewarding—the kind that every young woman should have.

A personal interview between you and your bishop is a sacred opportunity. Only youth have a regular schedule for interviews; older members have to make a special request for one. Generally, the interview is a time to get better acquainted with the bishop and to report spiritual progress to him as well as any other matters you care to discuss. What a special opportunity to feel and be directed by the authority and power of the priesthood!

Many young women have indicated that they often feel nervous and perhaps a little awkward about their visit with the bishop. Remember that he is your friend and wants to get to know you and be a strength to you. How then can you prepare for this personal interview?

Both spiritual and temporal preparation are necessary. A frame of mind that is receptive to the spirit of your Father in heaven is essential. If you have this, you will be anxious to receive instruction and guidance from the bishop, who is a special servant of the Lord. A discussion and prayer with your parents before the interview could help to dispel apprehensions you might have. Perhaps a talk with your Young Women class adviser can give you confidence.

In Doctrine and Covenants 63:64, it says, “Ye receive the Spirit through prayer.” You will want to pray for the Spirit of the Lord to guide and direct you. Perhaps there will be occasions when you will want to fast and pray before your interview.

Your physical appearance will make a difference in the spirit of your interview. A clean and shining look is in keeping with the scriptures—“Be ye clean.” (D&C 38:42.) You should ask yourself how you would want to dress to visit with someone who is a chosen representative of the Lord. Make sure you look your best. A modest dress is probably most appropriate to wear. Always go early. If you know you have kept the bishop waiting, it will be difficult for you to relax and talk easily.

Go to the interview prepared to talk about yourself. Perhaps you might be ready to answer questions such as the following:

1. What are your personal goals?

2. What progress are you making toward these goals?

3. What are your hobbies?

4. Do you have daily prayer?

5. Do you obey the Word of Wisdom?

6. Do you use clean language?

7. Do you have any problems with morality?

8. What contributions are you making to your home and your family?

9. How do you like your teachers in Sunday School and seminary and your adviser in Young Women?

10. How do you like the subjects you are studying in your Church classes?

11. How is your attendance at Sunday School, seminary, youth activity night, and sacrament meeting?

12. How are you getting along in school?

13. What are your best and worst classes?

14. Who are your closest friends and do they have the same standards you have?

Remember to be honest in all of your answers. Your interview is held in confidence, and you need not fear that the bishop will betray your confidence. He may give you the opportunity to make recommendations and suggestions concerning the program of activities in the ward. You might think about this beforehand.

Again, remember that the bishop is your friend and wants to help you. If you have problems, talk them out with him and let him help you resolve them.

If you make the necessary preparations, your personal interview will be a positive and uplifting experience. Prepare well and rely on the security of the Lord’s plan to be a guide and protection for you.
