Lenet Hadley Read, How We Got the Bible ( 1985)

CHAPTER NINE

The Gift of Latter-day Light

As the Lord inspired his prophets in the various dispensations and revealed to them his word, so he has dispensed additional gifts of scriptural light in the latter days. The need for additional light or fleshed-out knowledge was revealed early while the Book of Mormon was in process of translation. From the things revealed to Nephi we learn that, while the Bible is very special, it is not whole: "The book that thou beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord . . . made unto the house of Israel; and it also containeth many of the prophecies. . . . When it proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord. . . . After the book hath gone forth . . . there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book." (1 Ne. 13:23-24, 28.)

The Lord had promised that in the latter days there would be a restitution of all things. (See Acts 3:21.) We know now that part of that restitution was to be knowledge once contained in, but lost from, the Bible. This knowledge has been restored through several different methods: (1) through the gold plates that were translated as the Book of Mormon; (2) through papyrus records that came into Joseph Smith's hands to become the Book of Abraham, now contained in the Pearl of Great Price; (3) through Joseph Smith's inspired translation of the Bible; and (4) through direct revelations to Joseph Smith, most of which are now in the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price. Each of these four bodies of revelation would restore portions of knowledge lost from the Bible.

One of the contributions made by the Book of Mormon was clarification (sometimes through fulfillment) of biblical prophecies. Because of that, Latter-day Saints need not puzzle over many statements that cause confusion among other Christians. Christ's statement, "Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd" (John 10:16), refers in part to the Nephites and Lamanites. Ezekiel's reference to a stick written upon for Judah and a stick written upon for Joseph has been fulfilled through the uniting of testimonies from the Bible and the Book of Mormon, therefore truly becoming one stick in God's hand. (Ezek. 37:15-19.) These two scriptures have been made understandable largely through the Book of Mormon. Of this effect Dr. Hugh Nibley writes, "Just as the New Testament clarified the long misunderstood message of the Old, so the Book of Mormon is held to reiterate the messages of both Testaments in a way that restores their full meaning." [^1]

In addition to the Book of Mormon clarifying the Bible, the Lord restored actual portions of lost scripture. According to the History of the Church, the early Saints themselves began to express considerable interest in biblical references to scriptures that were not in their possession. Joseph Smith wrote, "The common remark was, 'They are lost books;' but it seems the Apostolic Church had some of these writings, as Jude mentions or quotes the Prophecy of Enoch." [^2]

In the establishment of the fullness of the gospel, some of the writings of ancient prophets not contained in our Bible were returned. These writings include the Book of Moses and the Book of Abraham, now in the Pearl of Great Price, some prophecies of Joseph of Egypt, presently in the Book of Mormon (see 2 Ne. 3), and some writings of John the Beloved and John the Baptist, contained in the Doctrine and Covenants (see D&C 7, 93:7-17).

Hugh Nibley has done extensive research to show us that the writings of Moses and other patriarchs that were revealed to Joseph Smith parallel very closely manuscripts that bear the names of ancient patriarchs and that were unknown to the Western world during the time of Joseph Smith. Such ancient manuscripts were written in difficult foreign languages and buried in dusty Continental libraries, ignored by scholars of the world when Joseph produced his versions. [^3]

Joseph Smith was also used as an instrument to purify the Bible through his work upon an inspired translation. As Robert J. Matthews has pointed out, since the publication of the King James Version in 1611, British and American scholars have attempted many revisions, among which are the Revised Standard Version, prepared by the National Council of Churches, and the New English Bible, published by Oxford University Press and Cambridge University Press. All of these attempts witness that there was a need for a purer Bible, a need recognized and stated also by Joseph Smith: "I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." [^4]

While there are many other revisions of the King James Version, Joseph Smith's work of clarification was unique. His work was "not merely a clarification of languages, but rather it introduced several new concepts and historical events of biblical times that are not contained in the King James Version. . . . It appears that he supplied some of the missing parts which had been taken away from the Bible or which had been lost before it was compiled. Therefore, Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible was unique in inception, procedure, and content." [^5]

In fact, it was actually during his work on the Bible that he received the Book of Moses and translated Matthew 24, adding several verses and clarifications from new parts of verses. Both bodies of scripture are contained in the Pearl of Great Price.

Overall, Joseph Smith returned lost material, rephrased material so as to remove contradictions, and made many clarifications in his translation, all of which was done under direction of the Spirit. Joseph's special ability to understand the scriptures seems to have been a gift from God, as indicated in his record of his and Oliver Cowdery's baptism: "We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation. Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of." (JS-H 1:73-74.) Later, in a letter to William W. Phelps on July 31, 1832, Joseph Smith wrote, "We have finished the translation of the New Testament. Great and glorious things are revealed, we are making rapid strides in the old book [Old Testament], and in the strength of God we can do all things according to his will." [^6]

In addition to the importance of the manuscript itself, the translation also brought about further knowledge pertaining to the fullness of the gospel. Dr. Matthews details some of the results of Joseph's work:

Several significant doctrines revealed in this dispensation are inseparably connected with Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible. Few subjects are more prominent in the gospel than the age of accountability, the building of Zion, Adam's role in the gospel plan, the degrees of glory, and the doctrine of celestial marriage.

It is likely that other important items also were revealed to the Prophet in connection with his work of translating the Bible. There is some evidence that much of what the Prophet knew about the ancient patriarchs, ancient councils and Church organizations, and other topics were revealed to him in the context of this work.

The real product of the Prophet's work with the Bible, then, is not simply the manuscript that constitutes the JST, but also the many revelations and spiritual experiences that came to the Prophet (and from him to the Church) as a result of his work with the Bible. Both the manuscript of the JST and the additional revelations are important, but of these it would seem that the multitude of the specific revelations on doctrine are of the greatest significance. These give increased knowledge and clarity to items on priesthood, resurrection, premortal existence and such things, and also enrich our understanding of the ministries of Jesus, Adam, Enoch, Melchizedek, Abraham, Paul, Peter, and John the Baptist. One can hardly have a clear perspective of the biblical record without these revelations. [^7]

In spite of the many spiritual blessings that arose from Joseph's translation of the Bible, he constantly experienced barriers in his efforts to translate it and to get it published. Though the members of the Church at times supported the Prophet, there were a number of periods when such assistance was not forthcoming, and he then had to lay aside the work of translation to fulfill the needs of his family. For example, at a conference of the Church on October 25, 1831, the minutes show this statement: "Brother Joseph Smith Jr. said . . . that the promises of God was that the greatest blessings which God had to bestow should be given to those who contributed to the support of his family while translating the fulness of the Scriptures. . . . Further said that God had often sealed up the heavens because of covetousness in the Church." [^8]

This problem was to continue throughout Joseph's life, as indicated in a letter dated March 1843 from Brigham Young to the Church: "[Joseph Smith] has but one thing to hinder his devoting his time to the spiritual interests of the Church, to the bringing forth of the revelations, translation, and history. And what is that? He has not provision for himself and family, and is obliged to spend his time in providing therefor." The Saints were asked to bring wheat, corn, beef, eggs, and "everything eatable at [their] command." Perhaps most interesting is the postscript: "P.S. Brethren, we are not unmindful of the favors our President has received from you in former days. But a man will not cease to be hungry this year because he ate last year." [^9]

The Prophet was able to accomplish much in the actual work of translating, but his other duties and the lack of full support from the Saints prevented his publishing or completing the translation to his satisfaction before his death.

The work of Joseph Smith in providing us with the word of God has borne fruit a hundredfold in the lives of the Saints. The restoration and translation of lost scriptures, the addition of modern-day revelation, and the clarification of the Bible are all part of the Lord's promise to reveal the fullness of the gospel. However, not until recent times has the vital step been taken of drawing together the divergent pieces of the scriptural puzzle.

For more than 150 years, Latter-day Saints have used many different editions of the King James Version of the Bible. Though the translation has been the same, study aids and explanatory notes have differed drastically from one edition to the next. Furthermore, none of the editions has fully utilized the knowledge available through latter-day revelation.

In the early 1970s proposals were made to have the curricula of adult classes and seminary and institute courses concentrate more heavily and systematically on the sciptures. Those who were preparing the various manuals felt a strong need for study aids in the Bible that would cross-reference scriptures to the other standard works. Much of this early work came from the grassroots level and was channeled through the newly organized Internal Communications Department, which was then managed by J. Thomas Fyans (later called to be a General Authority). The advisers to this department—Elders Thomas S. Monson, Boyd K. Packer, and Marvin J. Ashton of the Council of the Twelve—took the recommendations to the Twelve and the First Presidency, and in mid-1972 they received the approval and blessing of President Joseph Fielding Smith. The three advisers were subsequently appointed to serve as the Scriptures Publication Committee (Elder Ashton was later replaced by Elder Bruce R. McConkie). [^10] That fall a letter was sent to two scholars at Brigham Young University, inviting them to serve on a committee to begin preparing "a King James Bible which would include a standardized concordance, dictionary, atlas, and index, and . . . footnotes, ready references, and cross references related to other L.D.S. scriptures." [^11] The scope of the work was later expanded to include similar study aids for the books in the Triple Combination.

As the project got underway, scholars in ancient languages and latter-day scriptures, professionals in editing and publishing, and experts in computer technology added their efforts. Their labor covered seven years and resulted in two truly outstanding works of light: the 1979 Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible and the 1981 edition of the Triple Combination. [^12]

The new edition of the Bible has many unique features, including the following: new summary headings for every chapter of every book in the Old and New Testaments; extensive footnotes cross-referenced to all the Standard Works; topical guide and concordance with more than 2300 subject headings; a Bible dictionary that includes modern-day revealed knowledge; footnotes with verses from the Joseph Smith Translation that differ significantly from the King James Version; and twenty-four pages of full-color maps with a gazetteer.

The Triple Combination includes a greatly expanded and combined index for the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price; new introductions to each of the three Standard Works; new summary headings for every chapter and section in the three books; four Church history maps, two new sections, and the 1978 revelation on the priesthood in the Doctrine and Covenants; and changes in some verses in the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants to correct errors made in previous printings.

One of the great problems in Christendom is the tendency for sects to establish doctrine based on isolated scriptures. Keeping in perspective all that the Lord has said about any principle is actually more useful and enlightening. One method of keeping proper balance and perspective is to read scriptures as a unified whole, making constant reference to related material. The new LDS editions of the scriptures help in that area more than any other Bible edition possibly could. The new system of footnote references is designed to unify God's word as well as to elucidate the relationships between passages of scripture. It also helps by providing other possible translations of the original Greek and Hebrew, by noting the word meanings that have changed since the first publication of the King James Version, and by referring the reader to translative changes made by Joseph Smith.

An excellent example of how this system works is in the account of Christ's baptism, contained in Matthew 3:13-17. Within that five-verse span, there are fourteen references to entries in the Topical Guide at the back of the edition, including "Jesus Christ, Baptism of" and "Holy Ghost, Dove, Sign of." There are also five immediate scripture references to related passages in the Gospels, the Book of Mormon, and the Pearl of Great Price. A significant variation in the Joseph Smith Translation is noted, and, since the variation is quite lengthy, it is printed in the back of the edition in its entirety rather than at the bottom of the page. [^13] "Suffer" and "becometh us" have alternate Greek readings of "Permit it now" and "is fitting for us." The word "straightway" is listed with the Greek meaning of "immediately." Not only do the references clarify the meaning, but they also provide the means to do an extended study on the topic.

The Topical Guide adds nearly 600 pages to the Bible. Each entry gives related subject headings, then a list of scripture references, with a part of each scripture quoted or paraphrased. The pertinent word is italicized. In the above reference to "Jesus Christ, Baptism of," seven additional references with phrases are given. The overall topic of Jesus Christ is divided into fifty-seven categories, with thousands of scriptural references.

The index in the Triple Combination is now one complete index of 416 pages. In previous editions of the Triple Combination, each standard work had its own index, with references limited to the book it was attached to. The indexes to the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price were combined and expanded for the 1981 edition. For instance, the previous Book of Mormon index entry for "God" lists only ten scriptures, whereas the present edition breaks the entry into thirteen categories, such as "God, Foreknowledge of" and "God, Power of," that contain eight pages of scripture references. The index also contains a marking system for names of people and places. The word Nephi has nine entries: the individuals are identified through lineage and dating, with additional entries for city, land, people, and plates.

Such extensive cross-referencing as these new editions of the scriptures entail was extremely difficult to accomplish before the 1970s. The Strong's Exhaustive Concordance to the Bible, which lists every word and every citation from the Bible, was first published in 1890 and took 100 men thirty years to compile. [^14] The computer was thus necessary to the work; and even with modern technology, the cross-referencing took numerous assistants over six years to complete. [^15] Truly this is an instance of the Lord's promise: "I will hasten my work in its time." (D&C 88:73.)

The printing of the Standard Works was an arduous process too. The search for a suitable printer eventually led to Cambridge University Press. The press had been printing Bibles since 1611 and had the facilities to accommodate the unusual requirements of the new editions. For example, the company developed a special typeface that shortened the descending and ascending lines of such letters as d and y. This shortened the extra spacing between lines that is usually required, reducing the overall length of the Bible considerably. Even so, the LDS edition of the Bible totals over 2,400 pages.

The university press also uses a method of printing known as monotype, one of the few printers still doing so. This old-fashioned system of printing is necessary in its work of printing Bibles. Since each letter and punctuation mark is a separate piece of metal, monotype allows for the minute adjustment needed when narrow columns, several different sizes of type, and extensive footnotes all appear on each page. [^16]

The LDS edition of the Bible, when printing was completed, was so impressive that Cambridge University Press won the top graphics award for typesetting excellence in England for 1980 for its work on the book. [^17] Roger Coleman, publishing director of Bibles and religious books for the press, echoed the feeling of many when he said, "Nothing is perfect in this world, . . . but this Bible is as nearly perfect as human beings can manage." [^18]

These new editions of the scriptures certainly are unique in many respects. But they also share a common thread running through all work on the scriptures since the time of Adam. The love for the word of God has induced countless men and women to give their best efforts, to make their work on holy writ" as nearly perfect" as possible. Each time the Lord has worked through man to make his word available to a people, it is as if a great light has been shed upon them—the revelation of Christ himself. Isaiah says it this way: "The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined." (Isa. 9:2.) No wonder Peter exclaimed, "Ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light." (1 Pet. 2:9.) Surely when we understand how we got the Bible, we will find it easier to follow the Lord's admonition in Deuteronomy 11:18: "Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hugh W. Nibley, Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1967), p. 26.
[^2] History of the Church 1:132.
[^3] See Hugh W. Nibley, "To Open the Last Dispensation: Moses Chapter 1," in Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1978), pp. 1-20.
[^4] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1976), p. 327.
[^5] Robert J. Matthews, "A Plainer Translation": Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, a History and Commentary (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975), p. 12.
[^6] "To William W. Phelps, July 31, 1832," in The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, ed. Dean C. Jessee (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1984), p. 248.
[^7] Robert J. Matthews, "The Bible and Its Role in the Restoration," Ensign, July 1979, p. 45.
[^8] Donald Q. Cannon and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., Far West Record: Minutes of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-1844 (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1983), p. 23.
[^9] History of the Church 5:293.
[^10] Lavina Fielding Anderson, "Church Publishes First LDS Edition of the Bible," Ensign, October 1979, pp. 11-12.
[^11] Letter from Spencer W. Kimball, acting president of the Council of the Twelve, dated October 27, 1972, and sent to Dr. Ellis T. Rasmussen and Dr. Robert C. Patch.
[^12] For details of the work involved, see Anderson, pp. 12-14; Eleanor Knowles, "The Scriptures: A Personal Odyssey," in A Woman's Choices: The Relief Society Legacy Lecture Series (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1984), pp. 151-57; and William James Mortimer, "The Coming Forth of the LDS Editions of Scripture," Ensign, August 1983, pp. 35-41.
[^13] "Appendix," in King James Version of the Holy Bible (Salt lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979), p. 802.
[^14] Edward J. Brandt, "The Development of the New LDS Bible," address given October 19, 1979.
[^15] See note 12.
[^16] See Anderson, pp. 14-15; Mortimer, p. 39.
[^17] Mortimer, p. 40.
[^18] Anderson, p. 15
