Lenet Hadley Read, How We Got the Bible ( 1985)

Conclusion

Throughout this book we have tried to trace those forces that have unitedly worked to channel God's teachings to his children. In our tracings we have particularly sought to emphasize the love and sacrifice behind those labors. But we have of necessity portrayed as well the counter movements seeking always to inhibit the spread and effectiveness of Jehovah's word.

Ironically, at a time when the best and most useful edition of the Bible is available, the Bible is still suppressed in much of the world. Where there is free access to it, its voice of influence struggles to be heard over constant bombardments of false ideologies.

While free access to the Bible has indeed caused it to suffer somewhat from abuse and misunderstanding, it has unquestionably suffered most from abandonment. Its messages, however, are abandoned at great peril, for it represents eternal truth—truth passed down from the very Creation, truth added upon and reinforced with experience, truth revealed through word and deed beforehand, truth shaped in unforgettable language, truth personified in Jesus Christ, truth now bound together and illuminated with latter-day light, truth in constant struggle against untruth. And ultimately, it will be truth unconquered and unconquerable. Every gift of love and sacrifice that has been offered to relay that truth to men shall not have been given in vain.

in process

Flesh and blood cannot go there; but flesh and bones, quickened by the Spirit of God, can. (HC 6:52.)

Spirits and Angels

Spirits can only be revealed in flaming fire or glory. Angels have advanced further, their light and glory being tabernacled; and hence they appear in bodily shape. The spirits of just men are made ministering servants to those who are sealed unto life eternal, and it is through them that the sealing power comes down.

Patriarch Adams is now one of the spirits of the just men made perfect; and, if revealed now, must be revealed in fire; and the glory could not be endured. Jesus showed himself to his disciples, and they thought it was his Spirit, and they were afraid to approach his Spirit. Angels have advanced higher in knowledge and power, than spirits. (HC 6:51.)

Angels and Ministering Spirits

He explained the difference between an angel and a ministering spirit; the one a resurrected or translated body, with its spirit ministering to embodied spirits—the other a disembodied spirit, visiting and ministering to disembodied spirits. Jesus Christ became a ministering spirit (while his body was lying in the sepulchre) to the spirits in prison, to fulfil an important part of his mission, without which he could not have perfected his work, or entered into his rest. After his resurrection he appeared as an angel to his disciples.

Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions.

The angel that appeared to John on the Isle of Patmos was a translated or resurrected body [i.e. personage]. Jesus Christ went in body after his resurrection, to minister to resurrected bodies. There has been a chain of authority and power from Adam down to the present time. (HC 4:425.)
