Lucy Mack Smith, Preston Nibley, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother ( 1853)

CHAPTER 40

AS HYRUM, my eldest son, was directed to go to Missouri by the way of Detroit, I thought it would be a good opportunity to visit the family of my brother, General Mack. Accordingly, my niece, Almira Mack, Hyrum, brothers Murdock, Lyman Wight, and Corril and I, set out together for Detroit. When we first went on board the vessel which took us across the lake, we concluded to keep perfectly still upon the subject of religion; but it was afterwards proposed by Hyrum, that Mother Smith should say just what she pleased, and if she got into difficulty, the Elders should help her out of it. Shortly after this, I was sitting at the door of the cabin, reading the Book of Mormon, when a lady came up and inquired of me what book I was reading. "The 'Book of Mormon,'" I replied. But the title of the book was no advantage to her, for she had never before heard of there being such a work in existence. By her request I gave her a brief history of the discovery and translation of the book. This delighted her, and when I mentioned that it was a record of the origin of the aborigines of America, she said, "how I do wish I could get one of your books to carry to my husband, for he is now a missionary among the Indians."

Just then another lady, who was a doctor's wife, came near us, with the appearance of wishing to hear our conversation. She was gorgeously dressed, and carried herself very daintily, I assure you. She wore a splendid satin scarf, which, as she walked to and fro before us, she would occasionally let fall from the left shoulder, and expose a neck and bosom decorated with very brilliant jewels. Presently she stopped short and said, "I do not want to hear any more of that stuff, or anything more about Joe Smith either. They say that he is a 'Mormon' prophet; but it is nothing but deception and lies. There was one Mr. Murdock, who believed in Joe Smith's doctrines; and the 'Mormons' all believe they can cure the sick and raise the dead; so when this Mr. Murdock's wife was sick, he refused to send for a doctor, although the poor woman wanted him to do so, and so by his neglect his wife died."

I told her I thought she must be a little mistaken, that I was acquainted with the family and knew something in regard to the matter.

"I know all about it," said the lady.

"Well now, perhaps not," said I, "just stop a moment and I will explain it to you."

"No, I won't," returned the woman.

"Then," said I, "I will introduce you to Mr. Murdock, and let him tell the story himself." I then turned to Mr. Murdock, who stood near, and gave her an introduction to him. Before this, however, the chambermaid went downstairs and complained to the doctor of his wife's unbecoming behavior, and before she had heard a dozen words from our brother, her husband came bustling up stairs. "Here," said he to his wife, "they tell me that you are abusing this old lady," and taking her hand, he drew it within his arm and marched her off without further ceremony.

This circumstance introduced the subject of "Mormonism" among the passengers, and it continued to be the topic of conversation until we arrived at Detroit. On landing in Detroit, we repaired immediately to a tavern, as my niece, Mrs. Cooper, was exceedingly nervous and we deemed it imprudent to disturb her that evening. The next morning, Almira Mack and myself visited Mrs. Cooper, who was Almira's sister. Almira went into her room and found her lying on the bed. After the usual salutations she informed Mrs. Cooper that Aunt Lucy was in the parlor waiting to see her, and requested the privilege of inviting me into her room; but it was some time before her nerves were sufficiently settled to see me. However, before I was admitted into her presence, she was further informed that her cousin Hyrum, as also several other Elders, had come to Detroit in company with me, and that I would expect them to be invited as well as myself. But this was refused, Mrs. Cooper declaring that she could not endure the presence of so many visitors. She sent for me, but forbade her sisters inviting anyone else.

I went to her, and after the compliments were over, I said, "Lovisa, I have with me four of my brethren, one of whom is your cousin Hyrum, if I stay they must be invited also."

"Oh! no, no; I never can consent to it," exclaimed she. "Why, aunt, I am so nervous I am scarcely ever able to see any company."

"Now, Lovisa," I replied, "do you know what ails you? I can tell you exactly what it is: there is a good spirit and an evil one operating upon you, and the bad spirit has almost got possession of you; and when the good spirit is the least agitated, the evil one strives for the entire mastery, and sets the good spirit to fluttering, just ready to be gone, because it has so slight a foothold. But you have been so for a long time, and you may yet live many years. These men who are with me are clothed with the authority of the Priesthood, and through their administration you might receive a blessing; and even should you not be healed, do you not wish to know something about your Savior before you meet him? Furthermore, if you refuse to receive my brethren into your house, I shall leave it myself."

It was finally concluded that a sumptuous dinner should be prepared, and that the brethren should all be invited. While they tarried with her, they administered to her twice by the laying on of hands in the name of the Lord. They stopped with her during the day, and in the evening left for Pontiac. When she learned that they were not expected back again, she seemed greatly distressed, because she had not urged them to stay and preach.

The next morning, I and my niece set out for Pontiac, in the first stage, to visit Sister Mack, my brother's widow, and her daughter, Mrs. Whitermore. Here we were treated with great attention and respect by Mr. Whitermore and his family. The subject of religion was introduced immediately after our arrival, and continued the theme of conversation until near tea-time, when Sister Mack arose, saying, "Sister Lucy, you must excuse me, for I find my nerves are so agitated I cannot bear conversation any longer; the subject is so entirely new, it confuses my mind." I requested her to stop a moment. I then repeated to her the same that I had done two days previous to Lovisa, adding, "Suppose a company of fashionable people were to come in and begin to talk about the balls, parties, and the latest style of making dresses, do you think that would agitate you so?" She smiled at this, and said, "I do not know that it would, Sister Lucy; you know that those are more common things."

I then told her that I would excuse her, and that she might go where she pleased, concluding in my own mind never to mention the subject to her again, unless it should be by her own request. That night we slept in the same room. When I was about retiring to rest, she observed, "Do not let my presence prevent you from attending to any duty which you have practiced at home." And soon afterwards she again remarked, "The house is now still, and I would be glad to hear you talk, if you are not too much fatigued." I told her I would have no objections, provided the subject of religion would not make her nervous; and, as she did not think it would, we commenced conversation, the result of which was, she was convinced of the truth of the gospel.

In a few days subsequent to this, we all set out to visit Mrs. Stanly, who was also my brother's daughter. Here Mr. Whitermore gave me an introduction to one Mr. Ruggles, the pastor of the Presbyterian church to which this Mr. Whitermore belonged.

"And you," said Mr. Ruggles, upon shaking hands with me, "are the mother of that poor, foolish, silly boy, Joe Smith, who pretended to translate the Book of Mormon."

I looked him steadily in the face, and replied, "I am, sir, the mother of Joseph Smith; but why do you apply to him such epithets as those?"

"Because," said his reverence, "that he should imagine he was going to break down all other churches with that simple 'Mormon' book."

"Did you ever read that book?" I inquired.

"No," said he, "it is beneath my notice."

"But," rejoined I, "the Scriptures say, 'prove all things'; and, now, sir, let me tell you boldly, that that book contains the everlasting gospel, and it was written for the salvation of your soul, by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost."

"Pooh," said the minister, "nonsense—I am not afraid of any member of my church being led astray by such stuff; they have too much intelligence."

"Now, Mr. Ruggles," said I, and I spoke with emphasis, for the Spirit of God was upon me, "mark my words—as true as God lives, before three years we will have more than one-third of your church; and, sir, whether you believe it or not, we will take the very deacon, too."

This produced a hearty laugh at the expense of the minister.

Not to be tedious, I will say that I remained in this section of country about four weeks, during which time I labored incessantly for the truth's sake, and succeeded in gaining the hearts of many, among whom were David Dort and his wife. Many desired me to use my influence to have an elder sent into that region of country, which I agreed to do. As I was about starting home, Mr. Cooper observed that our ministers would have more influence if they dressed in broadcloth.

When I returned, I made known to Joseph the situation of things where I had been, so he despatched Brother Jared Carter to that country. And in order that he might not lack influence, he was dressed in a suit of superfine broadcloth. He went immediately into the midst of Mr. Ruggles' church, and, in a short time, brought away seventy of his best members, among whom was the deacon, just as I told the minister. This deacon was Brother Samuel Bent, [^1] who now presides over the High Council.

In less than a month after my arrival, Samuel returned home from Missouri, and remained until the succeeding October, at which time a revelation was given, commanding him and Wm. McLellin to go to the town of Hiram, which was about thirty miles distant. Samuel commenced making preparations, but before he was ready to start he heard a voice in the night, which said, "Samuel, arise immediately, and go forth on the mission which thou wast commanded to take to Hiram." He arose from his bed and took what clothing he had in readiness, and set off without further delay.

On arriving at the above-mentioned place, he found Wm. E. McLellin there according to previous appointment. Here they commenced preaching together, and after laboring a while in this town, they went from place to place, bearing testimony of the truth, in whatever city, town, or village they entered, until the twenty-seventh of December, at which time they arrived at Kirtland. Samuel was not long permitted to remain at home in quiet; on the first of January he was sent, with Orson Hyde, on a mission into the eastern country. They went and preached from city to city, until they were called home to receive the ordinance of the washing of feet.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Emma at this time had one child, her adopted daughter, Julia Murdock. Joseph Murdock died in March, 1832.
