Lucy Mack Smith, Preston Nibley, History of Joseph Smith by His Mother ( 1853)

Children of Joseph Smith, Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith

I

ALVIN

(1798 - 1823)

Alvin was the first-born, and from all accounts, he was an excellent son; a good and worthy young man. We are not sure of the exact date of Alvin's birth. Mrs. Smith gives the date, in the first edition of her book, published in 1853, as February 11, 1799. The Documentary History of the Church gives the date as February 11, 1798.

There has also been some discrepancy in the date of Alvin's death. For over one hundred years this date was given as November 19, 1824. This, however, was found by Willard Bean to be an error. Some years ago, while residing on the Smith farm, he went through some old Palmyra newspapers, and there found in the Wayne Sentinel, under date of September 25, 1824, the following somewhat startling notice, signed by Joseph Smith, Sr.:

NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC

"Whereas reports have been industriously put in circulation that my son, Alvin, had been removed from the place of interment and dissected, which reports, every person possessed of human sensibility must know, are peculiarly calculated to harrow up the mind of a parent and deeply wound the feelings of relations; therefore, for the purpose of ascertaining the truth of such reports, I, with some of my neighbors, this morning repaired to the grave, and removing the earth, found the body, which had not been disturbed.

"This method is taken for the purpose of satisfying the minds of those who may have heard these reports, and of informing those who have put them in circulation, that it is earnestly requested that they would desist therefrom; and that it is believed by some, that they have been circulated more by a desire to injure the reputation of certain persons, than by a philanthropy for the peace and welfare of myself and friends.

(Signed) Joseph Smith, Sr."

This notice effectually solved the date of Alvin's death—that it was not in the year 1824, but rather in the preceding year of 1823, the same year in which Joseph, Jr. was visited by the Angel Moroni.

There is something pathetic in the publication of this "notice" by Father Smith. It is evident that various unfounded and harmful rumors were being circulated in the neighborhood regarding the Smith family, probably directed against Joseph, Jr. who had related the story of his visions. Then the rumors grew, and some uninspired yokel put out the story that Father Smith had allowed certain physicians to remove Alvin's body from its grave to be dissected. Father Smith's prompt denial and publication of the notice effectually put an end to these rumors. It also established the date of Alvin's death.

The Prophet Joseph makes frequent reference to his brother Alvin, in his own personal history. Under date of January 21, 1836, at Kirtland, Ohio, we find the following account of a vision in the Kirtland Temple:

"The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the Celestial Kingdom of God, and the glory thereof. . . . I saw Fathers Adam and Abraham, and my father and mother, and my brother Alvin, who had long since slept, and marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that Kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set his hand to gather Israel the second time and had not been baptized for the remission of sins." (History of the Church, Vol. 2, pp. 380-381.)

At the funeral of a young man named Ephraim Marks, held in Nauvoo on the 9th of April, 1842, the Prophet made the following remarks:

"It is a very solemn and awful time; I never felt more solemn. It calls to mind the deaths of my oldest brother Alvin, who died in New York, and my youngest brother Don Carlos Smith, who died in Nauvoo. It has been hard for me to live on earth and see these young men, upon whom we have leaned for support and comfort, taken from us in the midst of their youth."

And again, on August 22, 1842, he expresses his admiration and love for his brother Alvin, in his History:

"Alvin, my oldest brother; I remember well the pangs of sorrow that swelled my youthful bosom and almost burst my tender heart when he died. He was the oldest and noblest of my father's family. He was one of the noblest of the sons of men."

Alvin's life, as set forth in this volume, and the added compliments of his gifted brother, the Prophet, are all calculated to convince us that he was indeed "one of the noblest of the sons of men."

II

HYRUM

(1800 - 1844)

Hyrum Smith, the second son of Joseph and Lucy Mack Smith, was born February 9, 1800, at Tunbridge, Vermont. He removed with his father's family to western New York when sixteen years of age. On November 2, 1826, he was married to Jerusha Barden, at Manchester, N. Y., by whom he had six children, Lovina, Mary, John, Hyrum, Jerusha and Sarah. His wife died October 13, 1837, while he was absent at Far West, Mo. The same year he was married to Mary Fielding, by whom he had two children, Joseph F. and Martha.

Like his brother Joseph, Hyrum spent his early years in agricultural labor, and nothing of particular note characterized that period of his life. He speedily became a believer in Joseph's mission, and by him was baptized in Seneca Lake, in June, 1829. He was one of the eight persons permitted to view the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, and his name is prefixed to it as a witness. November 7, 1837, at a conference assembled in Far West, Mo., he was appointed second counselor to Pres. Joseph Smith, in the place of Frederick G. Williams, who was rejected. January 19, 1841, he was called by revelation to take the office of Patriarch to the whole Church, to which he had been appointed by his deceased father, by blessing and also by birthright, and was likewise appointed a Prophet, Seer and Revelator. He was personally connected with many of the principal events of the Church, up to the time of his death, and in the various offices he filled, won the love and esteem of all Church members. In the revelation calling him to be the Patriarch, he is spoken of in the following words: "Blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith, for I the Lord love him, because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord." (Doc. Cov., 124:15.) Hyrum was tenderly attached to his brother Joseph, whom he never left more than six months at one time, during their lives. He was arrested with Joseph at Far West, Mo., and imprisoned with him at Liberty, Missouri, and finally split his blood with him at Carthage, Ill., June 27, 1844. In this catastrophe he fell first, exclaiming, "I am a dead man," and Joseph responding, "O dear Brother Hyrum!" In the Times and Seasons we find the following beautiful eulogy: "He lived so far beyond the ordinary walk of man, that even the tongue of the vilest slanderer could not touch his reputation. He lived godly, and he died godly, and his murderers will yet have to confess, that it would have been better for them to have had a millstone tied to them, and have been cast into the depths of the sea, and remain there while eternity goes and eternity comes, than to have robbed that noble man of heaven of his life." At his death he held various military and civil offices in the Nauvoo Legion and in the municipality. (Sketch by Andrew Jenson in the Biographical Encyclopedia, Vol. 1, P. 71.)

III

SOPHRONIA

(1803 -——)

We know less about the life of Sophronia, the third child and eldest daughter of Joseph and Lucy Mack Smith, than of any of the children of the family. From Mrs. Smith we learn that Sophronia was born at Tunbridge, Vermont, on the 18th of May, 1803. She was thirteen years of age when the family moved to Palmyra. Mrs. Smith further tells us that Sophronia was married to a young man named Calvin Stoddard on December 2, 1827, at Palmyra. By this marriage she had two daughters. Mrs. Smith gives the names of these daughters as Eunice, born March 22, 1830 and Maria, born April 12, 1832.

Apparently Calvin Stoddard died between the years 1832 and 1838. We do not know the date of his death, but it was during the residence of the Smith family in Kirtland that Sophronia was married the second time, to a man named William McCleary. Sophronia and her husband moved to Missouri in 1838, and back to Illinois in 1839. They were residing in Hancock county at the time of the murder of Joseph and Hyrum.

When the Saints moved west in the spring of 1846, under the leadership of President Brigham Young, Sophronia and her husband remained behind. From that time on we have only meagre knowledge of her activities. She was living in or near Colchester, Illinois, in 1860, and was a widow, when she was visited by her nephew, Joseph F. Smith. The date of Sophronia's death is not known.

IV

JOSEPH, JR.

(1805 - 1844)

In as much as this entire volume is written around the life and accomplishments of the Prophet Joseph Smith, no account of his activities needs to be recorded here.

V

SAMUEL HARRISON

(1808 - 1844)

The fourth son of Joseph Smith and Lucy Mack, was born in the town of Tunbridge, Orange County, Vermont, March 13, 1808. In his early life he assisted his father in farming. He possessed a religious turn of mind, and at an early age joined the Presbyterian Church, to which sect he belonged until he visited his brother Joseph in Pennsylvania in May 1829, when Joseph informed him that the Lord was about to commence his latter-day work. He also showed him that part of the Book of Mormon which he had translated, and labored to persuade him concerning the gospel of Jesus Christ, which was about to be revealed in its fulness.

Samuel was not, however, very easily persuaded of these things, but after much inquiry and explanation he retired and prayed that he might obtain from the Lord wisdom to enable him to judge for himself; the result was that he obtained revelation for himself sufficient to convince him of the truth of the testimony of his brother Joseph.

May 15, 1829, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were baptized, and as they were returning from the river to the house, they overheard Samuel engaged in secret prayer. Joseph said that he considered that a sufficient testimony of his being a fit subject for baptism; and as they had now received authority to baptize, they spoke to Samuel upon the subject, and he went straightway to the water with them, and was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, he being the third person baptized in the last dispensation.

Samuel was present at the organization of the Church. April 6, 1830, and was one of the six who at that time constituted the first members of the Church. He was ordained to the Priesthood on that day.

On the 30th of June following the organization of the Church, Samuel took some Books of Mormon and started on his mission, to which he had been set apart by his brother Joseph, and on traveling twenty-five miles, which was his first day's journey, he stopped at a number of places in order to sell his books, but was turned out of doors as soon as he declared his principles.

In December 1830, Samuel was sent to preach in Kirtland, Ohio, and the surrounding country. In the beginning of 1831, Joseph, the Prophet, moved to Kirtland to preside, accompanied by Hyrum and many of the Saints, and soon after his father's family, and the Saints who were located in Fayette, near Waterloo, also moved to Kirtland.

In June, 1831, Samuel was called by revelation to go to Missouri on a mission, in company with Reynolds Cahoon.

When they started for Missouri, about fifty brethren set out for the same place, and when they all arrived they met on the spot selected for the Temple, in Jackson County.

Brothers Smith and Cahoon spent several days in Jackson County, attended several conferences, and were with Joseph when he received several revelations. While in Missouri they were required to remain together on their mission until they reached home, which was in September following.

Soon after their arrival in Kirtland, they took a mission into the southern townships and counties of Ohio. Brother Cahoon returned after laboring about six weeks, but Samuel continued preaching through the winter, strengthening the churches and comforting the Saints.

In a revelation given in January, 1832, Orson Hyde and Samuel H. Smith were called to go on a mission to the Eastern country; accordingly they started in March, and traveled and preached the gospel through the states of Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts and Maine. They returned to Kirtland in December.

February 17, 1834, Samuel was ordained and set apart as one of the High Council in Kirtland, in which office he officiated until he went to Missouri in 1838.

On August 13, 1834, Samuel married Mary Bailey, who was born in Bedford, Hillsborough County, New Hampshire, December 20, 1808.

In 1838 he traveled in company with his brother Joseph from Kirtland to Missouri. He passed through the mobbings of that year, in Far West and Adam-ondi-Ahman, Missouri, and his family suffered from exposure as they were driven out of the state by the mob.

Samuel arrived in Quincy, and was there to assist his father and mother over the river on their arrival. He rented a house for them, into which he also assisted four other families of the Saints.

In September, 1840, Samuel received the following blessing under the hands of his father, Joseph Smith, Sr., upon his dying bed:

"Samuel, you have been a faithful and obedient son. By your faithfulness you have brought many into the Church. The Lord has seen your diligence, and you are blessed, in that he has never chastised you, but has called you home to rest; and there is a crown laid up for you which shall grow brighter and brighter unto the perfect day.

"When the Lord called you, he said, 'Samuel, I have seen thy sufferings, have heard thy cries, and beheld thy faithfulness; thy skirts are clean from the blood of this generation.' Because of these things, I seal upon your head all the blessings which I have heretofore pronounced upon you; and this my dying blessing I now seal upon you. Even so: Amen."

Samuel's wife died January 25, 1841. She was the mother of four children, namely: Susannah B., Mary B., Samuel Harrison B. and Lucy B.

In April, 1841, he was sent on a mission to preach the gospel in Scott and adjoining counties, Illinois. May 3rd, he married Levira Clark, daughter of Gardner and Delecta Clark, born in Livonia, Livingston County, New York, July 30, 1815.

In the month of November he returned to Nauvoo, taking his family with him, where he remained during the winter, and also the summer of 1842, during which time he worked mostly for Joseph, and harvested in the country.

In the fall of 1842 Samuel removed to his brother William's tavern at Plymouth. In the summer of 1843 he was often at Nauvoo. In the fall he chopped wood, and prepared his farm by making fences and clearing off the timber, preaching the gospel in the vicinity as he had the opportunity.

In the spring of 1844 he cultivated his farm, and in June, having heard of the imprisonment of his brothers in Carthage jail, he repaired thither on horseback to see them. While on the way he was pursued by the mobocrats; but in consequence of the fleetness of his horse, he was enabled to reach Carthage shortly after the tragedy. The following day he went to Nauvoo in company with the bodies of his martyred brothers.

About two weeks after the death of his brothers, Samuel suffered a severe illness and died on the 30th of July, 1844, aged 36 years.

The following extract is from his obituary notice, published in the Times and Seasons:

"The exit of this worthy man, so soon after the horrible butchery of his brothers, Joseph and Hyrum, in Carthage jail, is a matter of deep solemnity to the family, as well as a remediless loss to all. If ever there lived a good man upon the earth, Samuel H. Smith was that person. His labors in the Church from first to last, carrying glad tidings to the eastern cities, and finally his steadfastness as one of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and many saintly traits of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity, shall be given of him hereafter, as a man of God."

His wife Levira bore to him three daughters, viz., Levira A. C., Louisa C. and Lucy J. C. (From sketch written by Andrew Jenson.)

VI

EPHRAIM

(1810 - 1810)

The sixth child, Ephraim, died when he was ten days old, while the family still resided in Vermont.

VII

WILLIAM

(1811 - 1894)

William Smith was the fifth son of Joseph and Lucy Mack Smith; born in Royalton, Windsor county, Vermont, March 13, 1811. He was baptized at an early period, and was a Teacher in the Church in 1831. He took a mission to Erie county, Pennsylvania, in December, 1832, to preach the gospel and call the Elders to Kirtland to attend a school of the Prophets. He was ordained to the office of a High Priest, under the hands of Sidney Rigdon on the 21st day of June, 1833. During the winter of 1833 he worked on a farm and chopped cord wood near Kirtland. He was married to Caroline Grant, daughter of Joshua and Thalia Grant, February 14, 1833, by whom he had two daughters—Mary Jane and Caroline L. He went to Missouri in Zion's Camp in 1834, and returned to Kirtland the same fall. He was appointed one of the Twelve Apostles at the organization of that quorum, at Kirtland, February 15, 1835, under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris. He accompanied the Twelve on their first mission through the Eastern States and returned with them to Kirtland in the fall.

While Joseph Smith was presiding in a High Council, William rebelled against him in a very headstrong manner. At a debating school held in the house of Father Joseph Smith, December 16, 1835, the Prophet Joseph told the brethren he feared it would not result in good, whereupon William, in a rage, commanded Joseph to leave the house, attempted to put him out and inflicted upon him personal injury, the effects of which he occasionally felt until his death. After Hyrum and the Twelve had labored with William for several days, he made confession and was forgiven.

William removed to Far West with his family in the spring of 1838. After Joseph was taken prisoner and the mob began to drive out the Saints, William expressed himself in such a vindictive manner against Joseph that the Church suspended him from fellowship, May 4, 1839, at a general conference near Quincy. He went to Illinois and settled in Plymouth, Hancock county, keeping a tavern. William was restored to fellowship in the Church through the intercession of Joseph and Hyrum; but when the Twelve went to England, instead of accompanying them, according to the commandment of the Lord, he remained on his farm at Plymouth. He published a letter in the Times and Seasons, December 1, 1840, making an apology for neglecting to go on his mission on the ground of poverty, but it came with an ill grace as he was better situated to leave his family than any of the members of the quorum who went. In the spring of 1841 he visited the branches of the Church in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. He was elected a member of the House of Representatives of the Legislature of Illinois in the winter session of 1842-43. His acts as a member of the legislature were highly approved by the people; he displayed considerable energy in defending the Nauvoo charter and the rights of his constituents. He took a journey to the East on business in the spring of 1843, and spent his time among the churches. William returned to Nauvoo April 22, 1844, with about forty or fifty Saints from New Jersey. After staying a short time in Nauvoo, he had his last interview with his brother Joseph under the following circumstances: He asked Joseph to give him a city lot near the Temple. Joseph told him that he would do so with great pleasure if he would build a house and live upon it; but he would not give him a lot to sell. William replied he wanted it to build and live upon. The lot was well worth $1,000. In a few hours afterwards, an application was made by a certain Mr. Ivins to the city recorder to know if the lot was clear and belonged to Wm. Smith, for William had sold it to him for $500. Joseph, hearing of this, directed the clerk not to make a transfer, at which William was so offended that he threatened Joseph, who deemed it prudent to keep out of the way until William left on a steamboat for the East, accompanied by his family.

In a general conference of the Church held in Nauvoo Oct. 6, 1845, Wm. Smith was dropped as one of the Twelve Apostles and Patriarch of the Church, and on the following Sunday (Oct. 12th) he was excommunicated, as more of his inconsistent acts had come to light. Some time afterwards he associated himself with the apostate James J. Strang, who tried to organize a church of his own, but failed. Wm. Smith afterwards identified himself with the "Reorganized Church" and lived for a number of years in Elkader, Clayton county, Iowa. He died Nov. 13, 1894, at Osterdock, Clayton county, Iowa, as the last surviving brother of Joseph the Prophet. (Account written by Andrew Jenson.)

VIII

CATHERINE

(1812 - 1900)

Catherine was the second daughter in the Smith family, born July 28, 1812. She was a child of fifteen when her brother, Joseph, received the plates of the Book of Mormon. On January 8, 1831, prior to the removal of the Smith family from New York to Ohio, Catherine was married to Wilkins J. Salisbury.

Catherine and her husband followed the Saints in all their wanderings, to Ohio, to Missouri, and back to Illinois. At the time her brothers were murdered, in June, 1844, she was residing at Plymouth, Illinois, where her husband followed the occupation of a blacksmith.

Catherine did not follow the Latter-day Saints to Utah. She remained with her mother and sisters in Illinois where she died at Fountain Green, on February 1, 1900, the last survivor of the Smith children. She was the mother of four sons and four daughters.

IX

DON CARLOS

(1816 - 1841)

Don Carlos was the last of Mrs. Smith's seven sons. He was a noble young man with an unblemished character. Practically all that is known of him is contained within the pages of this volume, consequently it will not be necessary to repeat the information here. Don Carlos was twenty-five years old at the time of his death.

X

LUCY

(1821 - 1882)

Lucy was the last of the Smith children. She was born on July 18, 1821, in the log cabin which was the first home of the Smith family on the Manchester farm in New York. When eighteen years of age she was married, at Nauvoo, to Arthur Millikin. Lucy and her husband did not follow the Saints to Utah after the death of her brothers. She remained in Illinois, where she died near Colchester, on Dec. 9, 1882. She was the mother of four sons and five daughters. One of Lucy's daughters, Mrs. Clara Hendel, of Colchester, Illinois, is still living at the time of this writing (January, 1945). She is eighty-five years of age.

1853 1853
