During his April 2023 general conference address, Elder Gary E. Stevenson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles asked, “How do we model the teaching and celebration of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, the Easter story, with the same balance, fulness, and rich religious tradition of the birth of Jesus Christ, the Christmas story?”

Members worldwide now are focusing more on the Easter season. Here are some simple, wholesome activities to enrich and expand Easter—and worship of the Savior—for individuals, groups, and congregations.

1.  Create a paper chain with Christ-centered scriptures or quotes and reflect on one each morning in the month leading up to Easter.

2.  Objects can symbolize different aspects of Easter events in the scriptures. For example, some people fly colorful kites to remember Christ’s rising from the tomb. Look for objects that remind you of the Savior during the holiday season.

3.  Making Easter cards can be a creative way to share Jesus’s light. Consider delivering these creations to friends or neighbors you minister to.

4.  Christ’s followers used spices to honor Him during His burial (see John 19:39–40). Using spices in your Easter dishes can guide your thoughts to that sacred moment.

5.  Christ lived serving others, and we can remember Him this Easter by doing the same. Have each member in the family pick a name and spend Holy Week secretly serving that person.

6.  Some people use olive branches and olive oil as a reminder of peace and Christ’s atoning sacrifice. Church members might consider incorporating these elements in decor or meals to reflect the peace the Savior offers.

7.  Certain themes from Easter are more solemn, and taking time during Holy Week for quiet study and reflection is one way to remember those aspects.

8.  Easter is a celebration of gratitude for all that Jesus Christ did for us. Find time throughout the season to fill a wall or poster with ways you are grateful for the Savior.

9.  In some parts of the world, Easter is celebrated at a time of new life, so that the season itself serves as a visual reminder of Christ’s Resurrection. Look for space to walk through nature and appreciate this symbolism.

10. Lamb is a traditional Easter dish symbolizing Jesus Christ as the Lamb of God, fulfilling the Passover foreshadowing of deliverance through sacrifice (see Exodus 12; John 1:29). Serving lamb is one way families could remember the Savior’s role in freeing us from sin through His Atonement.

11. Fasting and prayer are powerful means of connecting with Christ. Consider scheduling a ward fast during Holy Week for a cause that is significant to the local community.

12. During Christmas, people enjoy reenacting the Nativity scene. Out of respect, we don’t reenact events from Easter, but wards could hold devotionals that highlight the Savior’s teachings from Holy Week and discuss the meaning of those scenes.

13. Because of Christ’s Resurrection, Easter is a time of renewal. Organizing a group to clean someone’s home or yard might be a helpful reminder of that theme.

14. In some areas of the world, bonfires are lit during Easter time to symbolize light overcoming darkness. Lighting a fire or candle can represent the Savior as the Light of the World who overcame death and sin.

15. As part of a lesson, share the lyrics of Easter hymns. Discuss the doctrine and testimony in each verse.

16. Invite members to display artwork or photography that reflects Easter themes.

17. Jesus has many names and titles, and each one reveals something different about His character. Coming together as a ward to make an art display about them could be a great way to focus on different aspects of Christ for Easter.

18. Consider creating a tradition of worshipping through music, using scripture and song to meditate on the Savior’s sacrifice and love. A ward or stake could gather to learn and sing Easter hymns and share Easter-related scriptures.

19. Through Jesus Christ, families can be eternal. Planning a family history activity or temple trip could remind members of this principle during Easter.

20. Chalk drawing is a fun activity for all ages, and an interfaith Easter chalk art event could be a creative way to share and receive testimonies of Christ.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170329385" id="p_xxs8G">“We should celebrate the Resurrection of our living Savior by studying His teachings and helping to establish Easter traditions in our society as a whole, especially within our own families. We challenge you to do so.”</p> <div class="citation-info"> <p data-aid="170329390" id="p_zQXBj">President Dallin H. Oaks, “<a class="cross-ref" href="/study/video/easter-videos/2025-he-is-risen-oaks?lang=eng&amp;id=title1#title1">He Is Risen! A Special 2025 Easter Season Message from the First Presidency</a>” (video), Gospel Library.</p> </div> [/SIDEBAR]
