[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170328829" id="p_lYkzq">Editors’ note: This Easter series explores what we can learn from individuals who knew the Savior during His earthly ministry and after His Resurrection. The series runs February through April.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

What comes to mind when you hear the name of the Savior’s disciple Thomas? Often we link his name with “doubter” or “doubting.”

But there’s much more to Thomas. In the Gospel of John, we see Thomas’s faith journey that may mirror our own: Faith can be strengthened over time as we believe and act to increase our faith.

Jesus Christ called Thomas to be one of His Twelve Apostles, and Thomas followed the Savior throughout His three-year ministry. He had a devoted love for the Savior. When Thomas feared for the Lord’s life, he urged the other Apostles, “Let us also go, that we may die with him” (John 11:16).

In his devotion, he still asked questions. Before Gethsemane, Jesus taught His disciples that He would be going away. Thomas asked, “Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?”

Jesus answered, “I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me” (John 14:5–6).

Like Thomas, we may not understand all of God’s teachings or every aspect of the plan of salvation. But asking righteous questions can reveal truth from the Lord. It’s necessary to grow our faith.

President Russell M. Nelson (1924–2025) taught:

“If you have questions—and I hope you do—seek answers with the fervent desire to believe. …

“… Your sincere questions, asked in faith, will always lead to greater faith and more knowledge.”

When the Apostles heard that Jesus had risen from the dead, it “seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not” (Luke 24:11). Thomas’s period of doubt may have lasted longer than the others because he wasn’t present when the resurrected Lord first appeared to them (see John 20:24).

After they told Thomas they had seen the Savior, he responded, “Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe” (John 20:25).

After eight days, the Lord appeared again and bade Thomas to feel His wounds. In response, Thomas declared, “My Lord and my God” (John 20:28). The Savior then taught an important truth: “Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed” (John 20:29).

Answers do come. Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taught, “Every sincere prayer is heard and answered by our Heavenly Father, but the answers we receive may not be what we expect or come to us when we want or in the way we anticipate.”

When we receive answers through endurance, prayer, and revelation, we also can gain a conviction—a testimony. If we continue to nourish our faith, that testimony can stay with us throughout life. As President Nelson taught: “As you patiently honor the Lord’s timetable, you will be given the knowledge and understanding you seek. Every blessing the Lord has for you—even miracles—will follow. That is what personal revelation will do for you”

Thomas’s experience shows us that faith is not a destination but a process. God honors that process and blesses us as we remain open to His guidance and seek the witness that speaks peace to our hearts (see Doctrine and Covenants 88:63).
