[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170329374" id="p_kp6as">Editors’ note: This Easter series explores what we can learn from individuals who knew the Savior during His earthly ministry and after His Resurrection. The series runs February through April.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Joseph of Arimathea played an important part in the Easter narrative, helping the Lord as He achieved the greatest triumph in human history. When Jesus Christ was crucified, Joseph “went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus” (Mark 15:43). After so many others abandoned the Lord in His hour of despair, what led Joseph to stay and take part in such a pivotal stage of the Savior’s sacrifice?

His loyalty might seem contradictory to his status as a wealthy counselor in the Sanhedrin, the Jewish assembly composed of Pharisees and Sadducees that condemned Christ to death (see Matthew 27:1, 57). Moreover, Joseph kept his discipleship of Christ secret “for fear of the Jews” (John 19:38).

Still, in the end, his devotion shone through. He “had not consented to the counsel and deed of them” who sought the Savior’s life (see Luke 23:50–51). And after the Savior died, Joseph wrapped the Master’s body in linen and placed it in his own new tomb (see Matthew 27:59–60; Luke 23:52–53). This was fulfillment of prophecy that Christ’s grave would be with the rich (see Isaiah 53:9).

In giving his tomb for the Savior’s burial, Joseph of Arimathea helped fulfill prophecy and prepared a way for the miraculous witness of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. On the third day after the Crucifixion, Christ’s followers found the tomb empty, and an angel’s voice declared, “He is not here: for he is risen” (Matthew 28:6).

“The Resurrection of Jesus Christ bears witness of His divinity and that He has overcome all things,” taught President D. Todd Christofferson, Second Counselor in the First Presidency. “His Resurrection bears witness that, bound to Him by covenant, we too may overcome all things and become one. His Resurrection bears witness that through Him, immortality and eternal life are realities.”

Joseph might not have known what he gave that first Easter beyond his desire to reverence Jesus Christ. But the Lord used Joseph’s righteous desires as part of His ultimate miracle to be “the firstfruits of them that slept” (1 Corinthians 15:20), the first to rise from the dead.

Just as Joseph had an important role to play, each of us can be an instrument in Heavenly Father’s hands. His plan is for everyone, and He will draw on our skills, experiences, and circumstances to further His great work. This Easter, we can remember this message and seek Jesus Christ, sacrificing what we can to help build His kingdom and letting His miracles come to pass in our lives.
