Gaining my testimony was like putting a puzzle together.

When I first noticed a friend in high school who didn’t drink alcohol or smoke and I learned about the Word of Wisdom, I found one piece of the puzzle. When I read the Book of Mormon, learned about Joseph Smith, and accepted that I needed a Savior, I collected more pieces.

But at the same time, the more pieces I found, the more I realized how many I was missing. I would find answers to my questions, but those answers often brought more questions. Some of these questions were simple and could be answered by the missionaries, but others required a lot of time and study.

I still have questions—I think I always will. But I’ve discovered a foundation that grounds me as I strengthen my testimony and continue learning from a place of faith:

My divine identity.

Here are three questions I had about the gospel that my divine identity helped answer:

When I was learning about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I wondered how to let go of my past. As I learned more about gospel standards, I started to understand that the way I’d been living before wasn’t in line with the teachings of Jesus Christ.

But as I learned about God’s love for me, His child, I felt that I could stop worrying about past sins. We learn in Isaiah 1:18 that “though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow.”

I loved learning that because of my Savior, I didn’t have to hold on to my sins anymore. I could repent, turn to Him, and put down that burden. And that was the most relieving, breathtaking truth I had ever heard.

Before they moved to Canada, my family was originally from Macedonia. I went back to Macedonia to live with my dad for a year and a half after I was baptized. Before I moved, I didn’t fully understand what the gathering of Israel was or what it meant when my patriarchal blessing explained my lineage in the house of Israel.

But as I started attending church in Macedonia and got to know the people there, I repeatedly received the impression that God knew and loved those people. This small country, where Church members were few and far between, was deeply important to Him.

I started to gain a testimony of President Russell M. Nelson’s (1924–2025) words: “The gospel net to gather scattered Israel is expansive. There is room for each person who will fully embrace the gospel of Jesus Christ.”

And after a friend of mine in Macedonia got baptized, I understood the incredibly sweet joy that comes from sharing the gospel and gathering Israel. It felt like everything was coming together as I started to see my lineage in the house of Israel as a beautiful and wonderful identity that would help me continue to share the gospel.

I have found answers to many of my questions—but not all of them.

Recently, while I was in the temple and thinking about my life, I couldn’t help the painful thought that rose up in my mind: “I really wish my mom could be here with me.”

I have a lot of questions about being the only member of the Church in my family. Being sealed to my family is one of the deepest yearnings of my heart, and I don’t know if it will happen in this life—or if I’ll find all the answers to my questions.

But I do know that I am a daughter of Heavenly Father who has a divine connection to Him. President Nelson has taught that “all those who have made a covenant with God have access to a special kind of love and mercy.”

As I continue to find new puzzle pieces of my testimony, I am comforted by the knowledge that being a child of God and having questions aren’t mutually exclusive. Questions are necessary for my growth as a disciple of Christ. And I know that having questions isn’t just something that new converts experience—it’s part of building my testimony throughout my life.

As we work through our tough questions, we can rely on a Savior who knows the tender questions of our hearts. Because of our divine heritage, we have access to Him and Heavenly Father and Their strength.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170126609" id="p_zFKBe">You can send your own article, ideas, or feedback to YAWeekly@ChurchofJesusChrist.org. We can’t wait to hear from you!</p> <p data-aid="170126612" id="p_pqqrG">Follow us on Instagram at @ya.weekly for more uplifting content!</p> [/SIDEBAR]
