Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

viiFOREWORD

viiContinuous revelation is the life-giving doctrine of the Church of Christ. It must be so, for constant human progress, with corresponding changes, forms the objective of the plan of salvation. Therefore, as need arises in an increasing Church, the Lord provides, through the duly chosen president, new revelation or further applications of truths already revealed. Communication with the Lord is always open. To supply such inspired guidance is a main function of the president of the Church.

viiThe reality of this doctrine is shown in the teachings of the presidents of the Church, from Joseph Smith to Heber J. Grant. Indeed, the history of the Church, the soul of it, may be read in these utterances. Each leader, under the spirit of revelation and inspiration, has fearlessly and wisely met the issues of the day. Additional organizations, such as the Mutual Improvement Associations, have been authorized; new procedures set forth; or increased emphasis has been placed on certain doctrines. New uses of unchanged truth have been made to fit changing times. Thus, the Church has kept step with progress, and indeed has led out in the field of improvement. The steady advancement and present condition of the Church are fruits of such leadership.

viiThe leadership of President Heber J. Grant conforms to that of his predecessors. It has probed the evils of the day, and set up safeguards against them; it has pointed the way to progress, and provided helps along the journey; it has sacredly preserved the fundamental truth and authority of the restored gospel, yet used them for the welfare of the Church. The response, through the goodness of the Lord, has been great. The Church has grown in every division and activity. This period of leadership has been notable, second to none in this dispensation. We who are part of it, so near to it, may not be able to evaluate it fully, but they of the future will acclaim its magnitude. However, one needs but read the published discourses of President Grant, to recognize the greatness of his service.

viiiThe approach of the eighty-fifth anniversary of President Grant's birthday, suggested to The Improvement Era staff that a compilation of his essential teachings would be a fitting tribute to President Grant's leadership, and an acceptable addition to Latter-day Saint libraries. The compilation has now been accomplished. A book of unusual merit and interest has resulted. Under the title Gospel Standards it covers the gospel field as we of this day have known it. Gospel themes are elaborated; practical questions of life discussed; wise suggestions made; and more than forty of President Grant's favorite, spell-binding stories are retold. It will hold the interest of all to the last. The book will come to occupy an important place in Mormon literature. It is "affectionately dedicated by The Improvement Era to President Heber J. Grant, one of its founders, senior editor, and constant friend." The whole Era family—subscribers, contributors, workers in field and office, and the General Era Committee, and the compiler—offer this volume to President Grant upon his eighty-fifth anniversary as a token of gratitude, loyalty, and love.

viiiWe, President Grant's associates in the editorship of The Improvement Era, have found joy in suggesting and supervising the preparation of this volume of eternal truth.

viiiJohn A. Widtsoe, Richard L. Evans, Marba C. Josephson.
