Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

xviiINTRODUCTION

xviiThe work of President Heber J. Grant cannot be adequately portrayed within the covers of one book, even when he speaks for himself, as in this volume. His life spans altogether too much of Mormon and American history to permit, at this time, adequate perspective in compiling and arranging the items which best reveal his character and his work. A man who has seen virtually every building erected in Salt Lake City, with the exception of a few temporary structures; who has dealt with the intimate problems of a great pioneer commonwealth; who has witnessed and for many years directed the expansion of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, from a driven, Utah-centered, persecuted group into a respected, far-flung, world organization; who has experienced the personal problems of manhood and parenthood; whose known public service, and little-known public and private service, rank uppermost in human annals—such a man's work can only be hinted at, when told in print.

xviiIn this work President Grant has been allowed, as is his frank and honest characteristic, to speak for himself. Four subdivisions, called "books," have been set up, the first dealing with more or less doctrinal materials, the second with materials which reveal the power of the Mormon faith when interpreted in terms of actual, living problems of men and women. The third section is an effort to set forth, in part, the unusual scope of President Grant's sixty-year ministry and the exemplary attitude with which his tasks have been approached. Without the fourth section, presenting a selection of his favorite stories, this work would be incomplete. These stories, including those reflecting intimate personal and Church history, give the opportunity to read, and read again reflectively, the incidents by which this prophet-teacher has fortified his people, striving always to teach "that which will be of benefit to them." The world's greatest teachers have used the medium of stories and parables to illustrate the truths they were inspired to convey. Heber J. Grant is no exception to this rule.

xviiiSince President Grant's call to the apostleship in 1882, The Deseret News has faithfully reported his major sermons. Beginning in 1897, the reports of the general conferences of the Church have contained his semi-annual messages. He wrote much for the old Contributor, and since 1897 for The Improvement Era, which he has fathered from the beginning. In addition, much of his material appears in The Young Woman's Journal, The Relief Society Magazine, The Utah Historical and Genealogical Magazine, the Church Section (since 1931) of the Deseret News, and other Church publications. These and other sources were all examined and materials selected for the purposes of this book.

xviiiAppreciation should be extended especially to Richard L. Evans, managing editor of The Improvement Era, for assistance in the preparation and editing of the manuscript, for directing publication, and for making available the monthly editorials by President Grant which have appeared since 1937 under the heading, "The Editor's Page," and which have been drawn upon freely in preparing this book. To Marba C. Josephson, also, appreciation is expressed for much able assistance generously given during the process of bringing forth this volume.

xviiiFor financial support, thanks and credit are due the executives and general boards of the Mutual Improvement Associations, represented on the Era staff by General Superintendent George Q. Morris, who is also general manager of The Improvement Era, and General President Lucy G. Cannon, who is also associate manager of The Improvement Era.

xviiiGratitude is also expressed to Rachel Grant Taylor for reading the manuscript; to members of the Era staff, John K. Orton, Marvin E. Smith, Albert L. Zobell, Jr., and others, for technical help; and also to the staff of the Church Historian's Office, which made available, through the remarkable Journal History of the Church, President Grant's addresses from 1882 to 1897.

xviiiFor suggesting this volume and urging it to completion, credit must go to Dr. John A. Widtsoe of the Council of the Twelve. The first work of this type, intended to present the teachings of a president of the Church, was Gospel Doctrine, the writings and sermons of President Joseph F. Smith, in 1919; that was followed in 1925 by Brigham Young's Discourses (the first under the partial and the other under the general editorship of John A. Widtsoe), and now this monument to Heber J. Grant appears under the title, Gospel Standards. Together, the three volumes form a remarkable and useful trilogy, a body of doctrine and practice based upon the teachings of Joseph Smith, without which Mormon literature would be less complete. In expressing appreciation to all who have contributed to this volume, and admiration for its contents, the compiler and The Improvement Era only mark another tribute to the genius of the restored gospel and to the many lives which have been faithful to its principles.

xixG. Homer Durham

xixUtah State Agricultural College

xixLogan, Utah November 22, 1941

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TPxix"It has ever been my desire in laboring among the Latter- day Saints, to inspire them with a desire to obey the commandments of God." —HEBER J. GRANT

xixDN, December 12, 1896.
