Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

xixBOOK ONE

RELIGION FOR THE MODERN WORLD

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP"Our aim and purpose is to carry the gospel of Jesus Christ to every nation under heaven." —HEBER J. GRANT, Estes Park, Colorado, Institute of Human Relations, August, 1936.

3CHAPTER I

3SOME FUNDAMENTALS OF MORMONISM

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP3SOME FUNDAMENTALS OF MORMONISM. In many places I have met people who have studied our faith. Some of them would say: "I could accept everything that you people teach were it not for this man Joseph Smith. If you would only eliminate him!"

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP3The day can never come when we will do that. As well might we undertake to leave out Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God. Either Joseph Smith did see God and did converse with Him, and God Himself did introduce Jesus Christ to the boy Joseph Smith, and Jesus Christ did tell Joseph Smith that he would be the instrument in the hands of God of establishing again upon the earth the true gospel of Jesus Christ—or Mormonism, so-called, is a myth. And Mormonism is not a myth! It is the power of God unto salvation. It is the Church of Jesus Christ, established under His direction, and all the disbelief of the world cannot change the fundamental facts connected with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP3Every Latter-day Saint believes that God appeared to the boy Joseph Smith, and every Latter-day Saint believes that God Himself did introduce Jesus Christ to the boy Joseph Smith as: "My beloved Son: hear Him."—Era, 41:519.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP3Mormonism is in very deed the plan of life and salvation, the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. The little stone has been cut out of the mountain. It shall roll forth until it fills the whole earth.—CR, October, 1919: 15.

THE ARTICLES OF FAITH

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TPWhen preaching to those not of our faith, in different parts of the world, I read, whenever I have the opportunity, the articles promulgated by Joseph Smith known as "The Articles of Faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." I rejoice in reading them and in testifying to those who know not the truth that in very deed those articles have been vindicated; that we believe in God the Eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ. And I testify to the world that we know that They live, because They appeared to Joseph; that we believe men must be called of God, and we know that they have been called of God in our day, because the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. We believe that men should receive the Holy Ghost, and we testify to all the world that they have received it in this Church. I rejoice that all the gifts and graces that were enjoyed in ancient days—the speaking in tongues, the interpretation of tongues, the healing of the sick, and kindred gifts as enumerated in the Articles of Faith, are enjoyed by the Latter-day Saints all over the world, wherever this gospel has gone.

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TP4I rejoice in the wonderful faith and knowledge of the Latter-day Saints regarding the divinity of this work. I am thankful beyond expression that wherever this gospel has gone, in answer to humble faithful prayers, God has given to individuals all over the world a knowledge for themselves concerning the divinity of this work.

Church Membersa-Grant, Heber J.TP4What kind of men and women should we be, as Latter-day Saints, in view of this wonderful knowledge that we possess, that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God? We should be the most honest, the most virtuous, the most charitable-minded, the best people upon the face of the earth.—CR, October, 1925: 9-10.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP4THE FIRST ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP4We believe God to be a person. We believe absolutely that we are made in the image of God. We believe that Jesus Christ was actually the Son of God, His Father, as I am the son of my father, and as you are of your father, and we believe They are Personages. Why? Because the boy Joseph Smith saw God, and God introduced Jesus Christ to him as His "beloved Son," and told this boy to listen to the Savior and the Savior gave him instructions.—CS, September 3, 1938.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP5We believe absolutely in God, that He is a personal Being. We believe absolutely that the scripture is true which says: "God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them."—Era, 41:519.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP5THE SECOND ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP5In other words, as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. We do not believe in what we consider a doctrine of devils, so to speak, that little children, dying in innocence, are going to be damned if they have not been baptized. We believe that through the atonement of Christ all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability will be saved.—CS, September 3, 1938: 1, 7.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP5We must save ourselves and stand for our own sins. We cannot blame our negligence upon somebody else.—JH, June 3, 1889: 8; Utah Enquirer, June 4, 1889.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP5THE THIRD ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP5In other words, we do not believe that the mere confession of faith, when a man is dying, is going to save him. I remember as a youngster, working in a bank, seeing some cartoons that illustrated the absurdity of that belief. They were in Puck magazine. A very villainous-looking man came into a room, stabbed a man, and stole some money that he was counting. In the next picture he was in jail and a priest said: "Believe in Jesus Christ and you will be saved." The criminal thought: "A mighty easy bargain! I believe." In the next picture he was tried and convicted; in the next, he was on his way to the gallows, with sentimental ladies throwing flowers in his path, "a soul going to Jesus." The next showed him hanging at the end of a rope by his neck; and in the next he was soaring up to heaven, escorted by angels. The final picture showed the good and benevolent man whose money had been stolen and who had been stabbed, down in hell being pitched from one fire to another. He said he did not have time to say he believed. He had been stabbed.—CS, September 3, 1938: 7.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP6THE FOURTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ—" and when I say "faith in the Lord Jesus Christ," we want it distinctly understood that we believe absolutely in Jesus Christ, that He was the Son of God, and that He did come to the earth with a divinely-appointed mission to die on the cross as the Redeemer of mankind. We do not believe that He was just a "great moral teacher," but that He is our Redeemer; "—second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost."—CS, September 3, 1938: 7.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP6Of what good are our faith, our repentance, our baptism, and all the sacred ordinances of the gospel by which we have been made ready to receive the blessings of the Lord, if we fail, on our part, to keep the commandments? All that we expect, or all that we are promised, is predicated on our own actions, and if we fail to act, or to do the work which God has required of us, we are little better than those who have not received the principles and ordinances of the gospel. We have only started, and when we rest there, we are not following our faith by our works, and are under condemnation; our salvation is not attained.—Era, 24:259.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP6FAITH IN THE LORD JESUS CHRIST. I rejoice beyond the power with which God has endowed me to express my feelings, in the knowledge I possess regarding the divinity of this great latter-day work in which we, as Latter-day Saints, are engaged. As I travel, I find a lack of belief in God, and in the divinity of Jesus Christ, even among the ministers of the gospel. I rejoice in the fact that every man and woman in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has an absolute faith in God, in His individuality, and an absolute faith that Christ is the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world; that He came to the earth with a divinely appointed mission to die for the sins of the world, and that He is in very deed the head of the Church of Christ.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP7On a recent trip, I cut from a newspaper a clipping. It was a recommendation by an English lord that people discard the "absurdity" of Jesus Christ as a God on earth and a Redeemer of the world, and that they accept the Mohammedan philosophy; suggesting that they could believe in all of the ethical teachings of the religion of Christ and Mohammed, but that they should get away from the absurdities of Christianity, and settle the various disputes and troubles that they were having in the Christian religion.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP7Whenever I have read that statement—and I have read it in a number of places—I have taken the trouble to state to the people in the various places where I preached, the position of the Latter-day Saints as to the gospel in which we believe.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP7I announced in those meetings, in some of which the majority of the audience were non-members of the Church, that every Latter-day Saint must subscribe to the doctrine that God Himself visited the boy Joseph Smith, and that God Himself introduced Jesus Christ to the boy as His beloved Son. I announced to these audiences that among the Latter-day Saints there is no evidence of "modernism" so-called, and that no man or woman will be fellowshipped in this Church who denies the individuality, the personality of God, or that Jesus Christ is in very deed the Son of the living God, the Redeemer of the world.—CR, April, 1925: 7-8.

Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP7There have been many things in my life, as I am sure there have been in the lives of you, one and all, that have been inexplicable to me; that it has been difficult for me to understand and comprehend. But I am a firm believer that faith is a gift of God, and I am grateful indeed for the gift of faith that has been with me. When I have not comprehended things, I have had faith that some day they would be made plain to me.—CR, October, 1935: 3.

Faith and Worksa-Grant, Heber J.TP7Faith is a gift of God, and faith comes to all of us who serve God and supplicate Him for the guidance of His Spirit. There is no danger of any man or woman losing his or her faith in this Church if he or she is humble and prayerful and obedient to duty. I have never known of such an individual losing his faith. By doing our duty faith increases until it becomes perfect knowledge.—CR, April, 1934: 131.

Repentancea-Grant, Heber J.TP8Salvation will come only to those who repent and have their sins washed away by baptism, and who thereafter show by a godly life that their repentance is genuine.—Era, 15:785.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP8THE FIFTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP8And we announce to all the world—(of course, we know the world does not believe it)—that we have that authority. We announce that the identical man who baptized the Savior of the world, known as John the Baptist, came to this earth, laid his hands on the heads of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and he gave them the Aaronic, or lesser Priesthood, which has the authority to baptize. After giving them this ordination, he told them to baptize each other, and he promised them that Peter, James, and John, the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, who stood at the head of the Church after the crucifixion, should visit them later and bestow upon them the apostleship, the Melchizedek, or higher Priesthood.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP8We announce to all the world that they did come and that we have received that authority, and all the disbelief of all the world cannot change the fact of those two visitations,—those two ordinations. If these things are a fact, disbelief cannot change them. And we announce that these are facts.—CS, September 3, 1938: 7.

Priesthooda-Grant, Heber J.TP8HONORING THE PRIESTHOOD. I say to you that it is not an insignificant thing to hold the Priesthood of God—to have the right to influence the powers of the heavens for good; and it is not a slight thing for us to neglect to honor the Priesthood of God in those who preside over us.—JH, October 4, 1895.

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TP9When I go into a house to administer to those who are afflicted, if I know that they have observed what is known as the Word of Wisdom, if I know they have fulfilled the law whereby they are entitled to the blessings of the Lord, I can administer to people of that kind with faith, knowing that if it is not the will of the Lord for them to pass away, He will hear and answer the prayer of faith, and they will be restored.—CR, October, 1919: 10.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP9THE SIXTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe in the same organization that existed in the Primitive Church, viz., apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP9I shall not take your time further than to refer to the Prophet Joseph Smith. We believe that he was a prophet of God, and we not only believe it but we know that he was. Why? He declared that he would be chosen, when he was a child, and he was chosen. He announced to the world that he would receive the Book of Mormon, and he did receive the Book of Mormon, which he translated from the plates, to which he was divinely directed. Eleven men, in addition to himself, bear witness that he had the plates. Eight of these men handled them and saw the engravings, and the plates were shown to three of these men by an angel of God who came down from heaven. "Oh, but," says one, "I don't believe it." But if eleven honest, reputable men testified that a man had committed murder, that man would hang all right. There is no one who can say that the statement of the witnesses regarding the Book of Mormon is not true, and there are tens of thousands who can say, by the witness of the Spirit of God, that these things are true. Joseph Smith proclaimed that he would yet be a prophet, before he was one, and he was chosen. He predicted that the Latter-day Saints would be driven from city to city, from county to county, from state to state, and finally driven from the confines of the United States to the Rocky Mountains, which was then Mexican territory. People laughed him to scorn for saying that he, whom they considered a miserable upstart, at the head of a deluded lot of people, would attract the attention of anybody to the extent that they would be driven out of a state, and particularly be driven beyond the confines of the United States. He also announced that the day would come when not only a city, not only a county, not only a state should be arrayed against the handful of Latter-day Saints, commonly called Mormons, but the day should come when the whole United States would be arrayed against them. People hooted at that statement, but the day did come when we were driven from city to city, from county to county, and state to state, and the day did come when we were driven to the Rocky Mountains, where he had said we should become a great and mighty people. And that is exactly what we have become, because in proportion to our numbers, we are a great and mighty people, and people are beginning to recognize it today. Finally the United States of America, on the statements of lying judges and others, sent an army against us—for doing what? For doing what we never did. Subsequently the government pardoned us for our sins that we had never committed, but they sent their army here all the same. And later, because of false statements made to Congress, the government confiscated all the property, both real and personal, belonging to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as if the Lord desired doubly to fulfill the prediction of Joseph Smith. I picked up the paper day after day myself, when the trial was going on here in the courts, and read in bold headlines, "The United States of America vs. the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" and laid the paper down and said: "Thanks be to Uncle Sam for putting the absolute stamp of divinity upon the utterances of the Prophet Joseph Smith!" This is one of the reasons why we believe in prophets—because their prophecies are fulfilled. It is only fair to say that this property was afterwards restored to the Church by acts of Congress.—CR, October, 1919: 29-30.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP10THE SEVENTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, etc."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP10Now, we have had many men who have had the gift of tongues, out in the world, preach this gospel in a language of which they had no knowledge. At one time, I was a ruined man, financially. I had too good a credit and was able to borrow too much money; and when the panic of 1893 came on, it wiped me off the earth, financially, with all I had and more too. I would work until midnight, one and two o'clock in the morning, many times, to maintain my credit and my honor. It was understood that the people at home should not wait up for me; but on one occasion when I came home my wife, whose body now lies in the tomb, was sitting up waiting for me, and she started to lecture me, saying that I was breaking the Word of Wisdom. She suddenly stopped, and by the gift of tongues she gave me a most remarkable and wonderful blessing and promised me that I should live to pay off all my debts, which I did live to do.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP11My mother always told me: "Behave yourself, Heber, and some day you will be an apostle. If you do not behave yourself, you will not be, because we have in a revelation, recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, the following statement: 'There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of the world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated.' " I said: "Mother, get it out of your head. I do not want to be an apostle. I do not want to be a bishop. I do not want to be anything but a business man. Just get it out of your head."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP11After I was called to be an apostle, she asked me about that meeting where this blessing was given, and whether I remembered it. I said, "No, I do not remember anything, only that when Aunt Zina was talking she said, 'You will become a great big man,' and since I have grown tall I have often thought of that." She said, "She did not promise you any such thing; she said that you should become a great big man in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and one of the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ. That is the reason I have told you to behave yourself. I knew it would not come true if you did not live worthily, but it has come true." Then she said: "Do you remember Heber C. Kimball's picking you up when you were a young boy, and putting you on a table and talking to you, at a great dinner he was having with a lot of his friends?"

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP12"Yes."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP12"Do you remember anything he said?"

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP12"No. I only remember he had the blackest eyes, I thought, I ever looked into, and I was frightened. That is all I can remember."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP12"He prophesied in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ that you should become an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ and become a greater man in the Church than your own father; and your own father, as you know, became one of the counselors to Brigham Young. That is why I told you to behave yourself."—CS, September 3, 1938: 7.

Tongues, Gift ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP12Unless the gift of tongues and the interpretation thereof are enjoyed by the Saints in our day, then we are lacking one of the evidences of the true faith.—YWJ, 16:128.

Evangelista-Grant, Heber J.TP12There is no need of believing in an evangelist unless he has the evangelical inspiration of his office. When I was a baby, my mother took me to the patriarch, or the evangelist, Brother Perkins, who afterwards moved to St. George and located there, and that patriarch put his hands upon my head and bestowed upon me a little blessing that would perhaps be about one-third of a typewritten page. That blessing foretold my life to the present moment. The promises made to that baby have been fulfilled. I went to Tooele as a boy not twenty-four years of age, to preside over that stake of Zion. I was without experience, and I felt mightily my weakness. Soon after I arrived there with my wife and two little babies, my youngest baby was taken very sick and came nigh to death's door. I did not know one single solitary soul in Tooele City when I went out there except John Rowberry and Francis M. Lyman. Brother Lyman lived next door to me, but he was not at home. Knowing that my little baby was in a dying condition, I sent for my friend, John Rowberry, the patriarch, the evangelist in that stake of Zion, asking him to come and assist me in blessing the baby. After blessing the little one he said: "Brother Grant, looking at it naturally, your baby is going to die." I said, "I have no doubt of it, unless the Lord hears and answers our prayers." He said, "Well, the Lord is going to hear and answer them. Go and get a table and a piece of paper, and sit down by the bed; I want to give this baby its patriarchal blessing." He laid his hands upon that baby and promised her that she should live; that she should grow to womanhood; that she should marry a servant of the living God; that she should become a mother in Israel; that she should become a leader among the sisters in the Church. A year or so ago, President Joseph F. Smith handed me the list of Church authorities to present to the people, as he quite frequently did. I read the names and presented them, and when I came to the last name, as one of the General Board of the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association, I had to read that name through tears of gratitude, because I was presenting the name of my daughter, who, I believe, but for the power of God, would have died when a baby. I was presenting her name to be one of those to preside among her sisters, over thirty or forty-odd thousand of the young women, in the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association.

Evangelista-Grant, Heber J.TP13Why do we believe in evangelists? Because they have the inspiration of God, the inspiration of their office, and they are able to foretell the lives of the men and women upon whom they place their hands.

Evangelista-Grant, Heber J.TP13While in Tooele, I received a patriarchal blessing myself from this same man, John Rowberry, and he promised me that I should be taken from that stake of Zion and become a leader in the Church of Christ; and I stand here today a witness of the inspiration of God to that man, John Rowberry. Not only did he promise me that, but many other things all of which have been fulfilled.—CR, October, 1919: 30-31.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP13THE EIGHTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP13THE NINTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP14THE TENTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes; that Zion will be built upon this [the American] continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and, that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP14THE ELEVENTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience; and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP14But we claim absolutely no right, no prerogative whatever, to interfere with any other people. We desire the good will of all mankind, and we pray God to bless every man that is striving for the betterment of humanity in any of the walks of life; and we say of every man who believes that Jesus is the Christ and who proclaims it: God, bless that man! But we cannot pray for those who pretend to preach the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ and deny the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, and who proclaim He was only a man. Jesus is the Redeemer of the world, the Savior of mankind, Who came to the earth with a divinely appointed mission to die for the redemption of mankind. Jesus Christ is literally the Son of God, the only begotten in the flesh. He is our Redeemer, and we worship Him, and we praise God for every individual upon the face of the earth who worships our Lord and Master as the Redeemer of the world.—CR, April, 1921: 203.

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP14THE TWELFTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law."

Articles of Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP14THE THIRTEENTH ARTICLE OF FAITH. "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul—We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things."

JOSEPH SMITH AND HIS SUCCESSORS

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TPJOSEPH SMITH AND MORMONISM. I have met hundreds of men who have said: "If it were not for Joseph Smith I could accept your religion." Any man who does not believe in Joseph Smith as a prophet of the true and the living God has no right to be in this Church. That revelation to Joseph Smith is the foundation stone. If Joseph Smith did not have that interview with God and Jesus Christ, the whole Mormon fabric is a failure and a fraud. It is not worth anything on earth. But God did come, God did introduce His Son; God did inspire that man to organize the Church of Jesus Christ, and all the opposition of the world is not able to withstand the truth. It is flourishing; it is growing, and it will grow more.—Era, 42:655, 685.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP15When we stop to think of the marvelous work that the Prophet Joseph did, sometimes I wonder how any man of intelligence can look into the life of that man, can know of his imprisonment, of the drivings, of the persecutions, of the tarring and feathering, of the sentence of death having been passed upon him, and then read the wonderful things that we have in the Doctrine and Covenants, without failing to acknowledge the inspiration of the Lord in his accomplishments.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP15I cannot understand how any intelligent man could think that anyone without the help of the Lord could have produced the Book of Mormon, which has been before us now for more than a hundred years and has stood the test during all that period of time, notwithstanding the ridicule that has been brought against it, for one reason and then another. Today that book, which was translated by Joseph Smith as the instrumentality of the Lord, stands out supreme. It is today the greatest missionary that we have for proclaiming this gospel; there is nothing else to compare with it.—Era, 42:655.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP15Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hands of the living God of restoring again to this earth the true plan of life and salvation. I know that much of the world disbelieves this, but every true, faithful Latter-day Saint, sooner or later, gets an individual testimony from God regarding the divinity of this work—that it is in very deed what it purports to be, namely, the plan of life and salvation,—the gospel of the Redeemer.—Era, 41:519.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP16The most glorious thing that has ever happened in the history of the world since the Savior Himself lived on earth, is that God Himself saw fit to visit the earth with His beloved, only begotten Son, our Redeemer and Savior, and to appear to the boy Joseph. It is the most wonderful and marvelous thing that ever happened, and no wonder that the good people of the world cannot and do not believe it. We not only believe it, but there are thousands and tens of thousands (counting those who have gone on before, hundreds of thousands) who have had a perfect and individual testimony and knowledge that this vision was given to the boy Joseph Smith.—Era, 42:393.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP16It was the most wonderful vision ever bestowed upon mortal man; for, while Jesus the Son had walked and talked with men both before and after His resurrection, I know of no record in which we are informed that both ever appeared together in a visit to the earth, as in this marvelous vision to Joseph Smith.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP16The event marks the beginning of "a marvelous work and a wonder," which was foretold by Isaiah the Prophet (29:13, 14) confirmed by Daniel (2:29-44), and further predicted by John the Revelator (14:6, 7). The personal visitation of the Father and the Son, choosing Joseph to be the leader of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, marked the beginning of this work, and this was supplemented by the visitation of angels and other holy messengers, conferring upon Joseph the powers of the Priesthood, the authority to act in the name of God—to introduce the gospel of Jesus Christ by divine authority to mankind, and by divine direction to organize and establish the true Church of Christ in the latter days.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP16The vision was a reality and direct. When Joseph received it, men were loath to believe that it was possible for God or holy beings to speak to man on the earth. But after he had declared his message, there followed, even up to this day, false "spiritist" communications in many directions all over the land. This was doubtless the design of Satan, done to deceive the people. But note the difference between the right and the genuine, the wrong and the spurious. As far as I am aware, there has not been a single case of direct revelation or visitation from the spirit world, except through the authority of the Priesthood restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Alleged communications have been received without number, but almost invariably, these have been made through mediums, or mechanical devices, and as invariably have resulted in little or no particular good or purpose. Joseph Smith received his divine message direct from the messengers sent of God, and was not dependent upon a medium of any kind, either through person or by mechanism; there was nothing that stood between him and the messenger who was sent of God to deliver, personally, the divine message which he had been entrusted to deliver to the Prophet, for the purpose of establishing the great work of the Lord and to further His purposes in the earth. Furthermore, each message delivered resulted in good to the human race. Joseph required no medium, but personally heard from the divine messengers the glorious tidings that God desired to intrust to him, and which were necessary for the founding and building of God's "marvelous work and a wonder" in the latter days.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP17The greatest evidences of the divinity of the first vision, as well as of the visitations of angels and other messengers to Joseph the Prophet that followed the first vision, are the practical results that have come from the messages that were delivered and the authority that was conferred. The gospel in its purity has been restored to the earth. The wonderful record of the ancient people of this continent, the Book of Mormon, was brought forth from its hiding place in the Hill Cumorah, containing a fulness of the gospel as taught by the Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, upon this continent of America. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized on the 6th of April, 1830, in the town of Fayette, Seneca County, New York, and has prospered in temporal and spiritual, in moral and economic affairs, from the day of its organization, regardless of the persecution and obstacles that it has persistently encountered and overcome in its career of practically one hundred years. This Church is built upon the rock of revelation, through which means the constituted authorities thereof receive authority from God direct, to act in their callings and to enjoy the gifts and powers of the gospel. The mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is one of peace. It aims to prepare the people of the world for the second coming of Christ, and for the inauguration of that blessed day when the millennium shall come and Christ shall reign as the King of kings, standing at the head of the universal brotherhood of man.—Era, 23:472-473.

18As I listened to the very wonderful tributes that were paid here this morning to the Pioneers, I thought of the fact that all that has been accomplished here is due to the faith of a boy who went out into the woods and supplicated God for light and knowledge. His prayer was answered, and he had the privilege of conversing with God and Jesus Christ.—CS, August 1, 1931: 1.

18BRIGHAM YOUNG AND JOSEPH SMITH. While we honor Brigham Young as the great statesman, the great pioneer and colonizer, we must not forget that Brigham Young built upon the foundation, and fulfilled the predictions, made by the Prophet Joseph Smith. And Brigham Young, great as he was, on all occasions magnified the Prophet Joseph. I honor and love him for the reverence he gave to the man who was the instrument in the hands of almighty God of restoring the gospel to the earth.—Era, 4:690-691.

18ASSOCIATION WITH PRESIDENTS OF THE CHURCH FROM BRIGHAM YOUNG TO JOSEPH F. SMITH. I thank the Lord for my intimate association, from a little child, with Presidents Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, and with President Joseph F. Smith. I thank the Lord that I have never known anything but good in all my association for fifty years with these men. I remember very distinctly when a child six years of age, a conversation with President Brigham Young; and for fifty years I have never heard in public or in private anything fall from the lips of the servants of God, who have been chosen to stand at the head of this work, but what was for the uplift and the betterment of the people of God.—CR, April, 1913: 113.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP19JOHN TAYLOR. I was called into the Council of the Twelve Apostles by a revelation of the Lord to President John Taylor. From the time that I entered the Council of the Twelve, two years after John Taylor was made President of the Church, until the day of his death, I met with him, week after week, in the Endowment House, and I know that he was a servant of the living God. I know that the inspiration of the Lord came to him; and I know that upon all occasions, whenever he said: "This is what the Lord desires," and his associates in the council of the apostles sustained his position, that upon every occasion he was vindicated and the inspiration of the Lord to him showed that his wisdom by the power of God had been superior to the wisdom of other men.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP19Several times I have gone to meetings in the old Endowment House, knowing that a certain matter was to be discussed, and my mind was as perfectly set upon a certain position on that question as it is possible for a man to have his mind set. I believe I am as decided in my opinions as the majority of people. (I have heard it said that there is nobody as stubborn as a Scotchman except a Dutchman: and I am Scotch on my father's side and Dutch on my mother's.) While I have gone to meetings in the old Endowment House determined in favor of a certain line of policy, I have willingly and freely voted for the exact opposite of that policy, because of the inspiration of the Lord that came to John Taylor. Upon every such occasion the servant of the Lord, President Taylor, was vindicated, and his superior judgment, by the inspiration of the Lord, asserted itself in favor of those things that were for the best good of the people.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP19I could relate circumstances when the apostles have been sent out to accomplish certain labors under the inspiration of the Lord to John Taylor, when they thought they could not accomplish the labors. They have returned and been able to bear testimony that by and with the help of the Lord they had been able to accomplish the labor placed upon them by President Taylor, the prophet of the Lord.—CR, June, 1919: 7-8.

Woodruff, Wilforda-Grant, Heber J.TP20WILFORD WOODRUFF. I can bear witness that Wilford Woodruff was in very deed a servant of the living God and a true prophet of God. Wilford Woodruff, a humble man, converted and baptized hundreds of people in a few months in Herefordshire, England. In eight months, as I now remember it, he baptized between fifteen hundred and two thousand souls. I believe that no other man who ever walked the face of the earth was a greater converter of souls to the gospel of Jesus Christ. He was a man of the most wonderful and marvelous humility; a man who had never been engaged in any great business affairs; a man who had devoted himself to farming, who had been engaged in raising fruits and cultivating the soil; a humble man, of whom I had heard many people say that he lacked the ability to preside over the Church of Christ. But I want to bear witness to you that, under the inspiration of the Lord, and because of the humility of the man, because of his Godlike life and because God loved him, he was blessed upon more than one occasion with wisdom that was superior to all the wisdom of the bright financial minds in the Church.—CR, June, 1919: 8.

Snow, Lorenzoa-Grant, Heber J.TP20LORENZO SNOW. I know that Lorenzo Snow was a prophet of God. By his testimony and by the testimony of my mother and hundreds of others who knew the Prophet Joseph, as well as by the revelations of the Spirit of God to me, I know that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God. I know of my own knowledge that Brigham Young and John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff were prophets of God.

Snow, Lorenzoa-Grant, Heber J.TP20It is stated that men do not amount to much after they pass fifty, and that when they are sixty you ought to get some kind of drug and put them to sleep, and that when they are seventy they are simply useless. But Lorenzo Snow came to the Presidency of the Church when he was eighty-five years of age, and what he accomplished during the next three years of his life is simply marvelous to contemplate.

Snow, Lorenzoa-Grant, Heber J.TP20He lifted the Church from the financial slough of despond, so to speak, from almost financial bankruptcy—when its credit was hardly good for a thousand dollars without security, when it was paying ten percent for money—he lifted the Church out of that condition and made its credit A-1, so that people solicited and asked for the privilege of buying the bonds of this Church at six percent. Ten percent is sixty-six and two-thirds percent more than six percent, and in three short years this man, beyond the age of ability in the estimation of the world, this man who had not been engaged in financial affairs, who had been devoting his life for years to labor in the temple, took hold of the finances of the Church of Christ under the inspiration of the living God, and in those three years changed everything, financially, from darkness to light.—CR, June, 1919: 9-10.

Smith, Joseph F.a-Grant, Heber J.TP21JOSEPH F. SMITH. I want to bear witness to you here today that during the . . . years . . . that I have been a member of the Council of the Twelve, that no power or influence has ever been exercised by the prophet of God . . . except exactly as taught in the Doctrine and Covenants; and that no one of all the men I have been associated with as president of the Church has had more charity, more love, and has exercised the Priesthood by the power of the living God in greater meekness and mercy and kindness, than the man who stands at the head of the Church today, Joseph F. Smith.—CR, October, 1918: 25.
