Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

21CHAPTER II

22SOME FUNDAMENTALS OF MORMONISM (Continued)

THE DIVINITY OF JESUS CHRIST

Jesus Christ, Mission ofa-Grant, Heber J.TPTHE MISSION OF JESUS CHRIST. We are not dependent upon the testimony of men who lived many hundreds of years ago. We have the testimony that is given to us from the Prophet Joseph Smith, and from Sidney Rigdon that they saw the Son, that they heard the voice declare from the heavens that He was the Only Begotten of the Father, that by Him and of Him the worlds were created, and that He lives, for they saw Him.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP22We rejoice in a knowledge of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. We rejoice in those who have been faithful and diligent in serving Him, and in knowing that each and every individual who keeps the commandments of God grows in the light and knowledge of the gospel. We rejoice in knowing that no man or woman who keeps the commandments of God ever loses the testimony of the divinity of this work in which we are engaged.—CR, April, 1912: 106.

Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP22It is a remarkable fact that we can never read or hear of the labors which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ performed, without taking pleasure in it, while, on the other hand, there is nothing so interesting in the life and history of any other individual but what by hearing or reading it time and time again we become tired of it. The story of Jesus the Christ is a story of old that ever remains new. The oftener I read of His life and labors the greater are the joy, the peace, the happiness, the satisfaction that fill my soul. There is ever a new charm comes to me in contemplating His words and the plan of life and salvation which He taught to men during His life upon the earth.

Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP22We all know that no one ever lived upon the earth that exerted the same influence upon the destinies of the world as did our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and yet He was born in obscurity, cradled in a manger. He chose for His apostles poor, unlettered fishermen. More than nineteen hundred years have passed and gone since His crucifixion, and yet all over the world, in spite of all strife and chaos, there is still burning in the hearts of millions of people a testimony of the divinity of the work that He accomplished.—Era, 43:713.

Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP23There are no revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants that have made such a profound impression upon my heart and my mind as the one known as The Vision, recorded in the seventy-sixth section, and the one known as Prayer and Prophecies, given in the Liberty Jail, and to be found in the one hundred twenty-first section. I rejoice every time I read the wonderful testimony of the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon as contained in The Vision. When bishops over large churches in England announce that Jesus was not the Son of God; that He was not divine, but merely a great moral teacher; when men who are ministers deny the divinity of Christ and are being tried for their lack of faith, I rejoice in reading the testimony of these two men, and never read it but my heart swells with gratitude to God:

Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP23And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him; That he lives!23For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—23That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (D. and C. 76:22-24.)

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Grant, Heber J.TP23I rejoice that the Church of Jesus Christ is founded upon the first great vision that was enjoyed by the boy Joseph Smith over one hundred years ago. He declared that he saw two Heavenly Beings, whose glory and grandeur were beyond the power of man to describe and that one of them addressed him and pointed to the other and said: "This is my beloved Son, hear Him." There cannot be any doubt in the heart of a Latter-day Saint regarding Jesus Christ's being the Son of the living God, because God Himself introduced Him to Joseph Smith. It is a fundamental truth of the Church of Jesus Christ in our day that Joseph Smith was and is and ever will be a prophet of God, and with the testimony in our hearts of that fact, there will never be schism, so to speak, in the Church of Christ.

Jesus Christ As Head of Churcha-Grant, Heber J.TP24Any individual who does not acknowledge Jesus Christ as the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, has no business to be associated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-Grant, Heber J.TP24This Church is . . . a marvelous work and a wonder. There is nothing like it in all the world, because Jesus Christ manifested Himself to the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery, and to others; and because God, in answer to prayer, has given to people all over the wide world where the gospel has gone, an individual knowledge and testimony regarding the divinity of the work in which we are engaged.—CR, October, 1924: 6-7.

GOSPEL TRUTH AND COMFORT

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TPTHE TRUTH OF THE GOSPEL. There is one thing that is true and that is the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the Lord gives to men and women if they keep His commandments, a knowledge that it is true.—CS, September 26, 1931.

Gospela-Grant, Heber J.TP24What is the gospel? It is the plan of life and salvation. It is that which is of more value than life itself. No wonder we are ready and willing to make sacrifices for the gospel, when we realize what it means if we live it.—Era, 41:455.

Gospela-Grant, Heber J.TP24There is nothing in all the world for which I am so grateful as an absolute knowledge that we, the Latter-day Saints, have the true gospel of Jesus Christ.—CR, October, 1940: 130-131.

Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TP24The gospel . . . takes the selfish, sordid man and makes of him a generous, noble, freehearted individual—one that we can love, one that God can love.—JH, October 4, 1895: 7; DN, November 30, 1895.

Plan of Salvationa-Grant, Heber J.TP24THE COMFORT OF THE GOSPEL. I never attend a funeral of a faithful member of the Church but I thank the Lord for the gospel of Jesus Christ, and for the comfort and consolation that it gives to us in the hour of sorrow and death. I am convinced that the Latter-day Saints do not suffer as other people do when they are called upon to part by death with their loved ones. I never think of my own beloved mother without thinking of her as associated with those whom she knew and loved in Nauvoo, and with those whom she knew and loved in these valleys of the mountains. I never think of her as in the grave, but I think of her as one who has earned the greatest of all God's gifts to man, namely: life eternal. When I attend the funeral of a faithful, true Latter-day Saint, as I did today, one who heard the sound of the gospel in a foreign land, and who came to this land for the gospel's sake and who lived all the days of her life faithful and true to its teachings, I am indeed thankful for the plan of life and salvation which finds earnest, true people all over the wide world who, when they have embraced it, are ready and willing to make any sacrifice in reason to fulfill the duties and obligations and the requirements that devolve upon them as members in the Church of Christ.—CR, October, 1916: 30.

PRAYER AND TESTIMONY

Prayera-Grant, Heber J.TPPRAYER. I am convinced that one of the greatest and one of the best things in all the world to keep a man true and faithful in the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, is to supplicate God secretly in the name of Jesus Christ, for the guidance of His Holy Spirit. I am convinced that one of the greatest things that can come into any home to cause the boys and girls in that home to grow up in a love of God, and in a love of the gospel of Jesus Christ, is to have family prayer. It is not for the father of the family alone to pray, but for the mother and for the children to do so also, that they may partake of the spirit of prayer, and be in harmony, be in tune, to have the radio, so to speak, in communication with the Spirit of the Lord. I believe that there are very few who go astray, that very few lose their faith, who have once had a knowledge of the gospel, and who never neglect their prayers in their families, and their secret supplications to God.—CR, October, 1923: 7-8.

Prayera-Grant, Heber J.TP26Now, the one thing above all others, that I want impressed on the heart and soul of the young people, is to pray to the Lord. Get faith. If you haven't knowledge, have faith. Cultivate that faith and sooner or later knowledge will come.—GM, 17:93.

Prayera-Grant, Heber J.TP26I have little or no fear for the boy or the girl, the young man or the young woman, who honestly and conscientiously supplicate God twice a day for the guidance of His Spirit. I am sure that when temptation comes they will have the strength to overcome it by the inspiration that shall be given to them. Supplicating the Lord for the guidance of His Spirit places around us a safeguard, and if we earnestly and honestly seek the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord, I can assure you that we will receive it.—GM, 17:90, 91.

26Let me say to all you young men and young women who have ever been to Brigham Young University, and those who haven't: Remember this one thing by Brother Maeser: "Oh, boys, pray, oh, pray to your Heavenly Father that you be not a scrub. Pray with all your heart that you be not a scrub. I hate a scrub."—CS, July 3, 1937: 5.

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TP26HOW TESTIMONY IS GAINED. Wherever the gospel of Christ has gone, men and women by the hundreds and thousands have embraced it and have been able to bear individual testimony that they received a witness of the divinity of the work in which we as Latter-day Saints are engaged after supplicating God for a testimony. This testimony has not come through their own study, nor through the natural intelligence with which God has endowed them, but in answer to earnest and sincere prayer, uttered in the name of Jesus Christ our Redeemer, for light and knowledge regarding the divinity of this work.—70th Birthday Pamphlet, November, 1926, pp. 14-15.

THE BOOK OF MORMON

Book of Mormon, Truth ofa-Grant, Heber J.TPExperimental knowledge is the very best knowledge in the world; and any man who will believe what he is told to believe, in one of the closing paragraphs of the Book of Mormon, and who, after reading it, will ask God for a knowledge of its divinity, and live worthy of that knowledge, will receive it.—CS, April 10, 1937: 1.

Book of Mormona-Grant, Heber J.TP27I am convinced in my own mind, my dear brethren and sisters, that this book is the greatest converter of men and women, as to the divinity of the gospel of Jesus Christ.—CS, November 28, 1931.

Book of Mormon, Witnesses ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP27The theme of this conference has been the Book of Mormon. I do not believe that in any court of justice in the world if a man were being tried for murder and twelve reputable citizens testified of their knowledge of the circumstances leading to the murder, and there were no one who could testify against what they said, there would be failure to convict the man. We have the testimony of Joseph Smith and the testimony of three witnesses to the effect that God gave them a knowledge regarding the Book of Mormon, that an angel of God declared from heaven that the book had been translated by the gift and power of God. These men were Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. They left the Church, but to the day of their death they maintained their testimony regarding the declaration of the angel, and that they were commanded to bear witness of the divinity of this book, and they did so. Eight men, some of whom were excommunicated from the Church, maintained their testimony that they had seen and handled the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, and they remained true to that testimony to the day of their death. The disbelief of all the world does not prove that those men did not tell the truth, because there are no witnesses on the other side.

Book of Mormon, Truth ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP27It has been said that the Book of Mormon has fraud written upon every page of it. The Book of Mormon is in absolute harmony from start to finish with other sacred scriptures. There is not a doctrine taught in it that does not harmonize with the teachings of Jesus Christ. There is not one single expression in the Book of Mormon that would wound in the slightest degree the sensitiveness of any individual. There is not a thing in it but what is for the benefit and uplift of mankind. It is in every way a true witness for God, and it sustains the Bible, and is in harmony with the Bible. No group of men can write a book of six or seven hundred pages that is a fraud and have it in harmony in every particular with the scriptures that were given to us by the prophets of God and by Jesus Christ and His apostles.

Book of Mormon, Truth ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP28A gentleman told me that he had read Joseph Smith's own story. He said that no liar ever told such a story. No liar could write such a book, and the evidences of the book's truthfulness are coming to light day by day.

Book of Mormon, Truth ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP28I have often said and desire to repeat here that when I was a young unmarried man, another young man who had received a doctor's degree ridiculed me for believing in the Book of Mormon. He said he could point out two lies in that book. One was that the people had built their homes out of cement and they were very skillful in the use of cement. He said there had never been found and never would be found, a house built of cement by the ancient inhabitants of this country, because the people in that early age knew nothing about cement. He said that should be enough to make one disbelieve the book. I said: "That does not affect my faith one particle. I read the Book of Mormon prayerfully and supplicated God for a testimony in my heart and soul of the divinity of it, and I have accepted it and believe it with all my heart." I also said to him, "If my children do not find cement houses, I expect that my grandchildren will." Now, since that time, houses made of cement and massive structures of the same material have been uncovered.

Book of Mormon, Truth ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP28Not very far from the City of Mexico there is a monument two hundred and ten feet high, built of cement, that was supposed to be a big hill. My first counselor [Anthony W. Ivins] has stood on that monument. You could put forty tabernacles like this one inside of it. It covers more than ten acres of ground and is two and a half times higher than this building. From the top of that monument one can see small mounds, and as these mounds are being uncovered they are found to be wonderfully built cement houses, with drain pipes of cement, showing skill and ability, superior almost to anything we have today so far as the use of cement is concerned.

Book of Mormon, Truth ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP29Another statement that this doctor made was this: that the voice of man can only carry a few hundred feet, and yet the Book of Mormon teaches that when Jesus Christ was resurrected and came to this country He spoke to the people and His voice was heard all over the land. "That is a lie," said he, "and you know it." I said, "That is no lie at all. Jesus Christ, under God, was the Creator of this earth, and if He had the power and ability to create the earth I believe that He could arrange for His voice to carry all over the world at one and the same time."

29The radio is doing what? I read the other day that a song had been heard nine thousand miles away, not only every word of it, but every note. (There are several notes in every word.) We had four letters from New Zealand or Australia, I have forgotten which, to the effect that people there had heard perfectly the programs that had been broadcast over the radio. . . . In that program the announcement was made that if anybody in a foreign land who heard the program would so indicate there would be sent to him a pound box of candy, and four people wrote for the boxes of candy. It takes the sun eighteen and one half hours to travel that far [with reference to the rotation of the earth], yet the voice carried that distance as quickly as you can snap your finger.

29I said to this man: "The voice of the Savior could go all over the world if He so arranged it." The radio has proved what I said.

Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP29Faith is a gift of God, and I thank God for the faith in and the knowledge of the divinity of the Book of Mormon which I had in my youthful days, and that these two alleged scientific facts, which are now known to be fallacies, did not destroy my faith.—CR, April, 1929: 128-130.

Book of Mormona-Grant, Heber J.TP29I rejoice in the wonderful spirit of the Book of Mormon. I believe that it is one of the greatest missionaries in the hands of the elder that it is possible for him to have. I believe that no man can open that book and read it with a prayerful heart, and ask God, in the name of Jesus Christ, for a testimony regarding its divinity, but what the Lord will manifest unto him by His Spirit the truth of the book itself. And God has performed it; He has done it in thousands of cases. There is a mark of divinity on this book; and I maintain that no man can read, for instance, the thirty-sixth chapter, the commandments of Alma to his son, Helaman, without receiving an impression of this kind. It is claimed by some that this book was written as a novel. I maintain that a man ought to have his head tapped for the simples who would undertake to say that any one would be idiotic enough to write a book like the Book of Mormon as a novel, hoping to sell it to the people.—CR, April, 1908: 57.

PROGRESSION AND OTHER THEMES

Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TPON PROGRESSION. In order to progress symmetrically, we must conform to all the requirements of the gospel. A man taking another course may develop in any one direction, but when the day of reckoning comes he will be found wanting—not having improved all his talents . . . . You cannot leave out any part in building a structure and have it complete—JH, October 4, 1889: 5; DN, October 5, 1889.

Revelationa-Grant, Heber J.TP30THE STILL SMALL VOICE OF REVELATION. The Lord gives to many of us the still, small voice of revelation. It comes as vividly and strongly as though it were with a great sound. It comes to each man, according to his needs and faithfulness, for guidance in matters that pertain to his own life. For the Church as a whole it comes to those who have been ordained to speak for the Church as a whole. This certain knowledge which we have that the guiding influence of the Lord may be felt in all the ways of life, according to our needs and faithfulness, is among the greatest blessings God grants unto men. With this blessing comes the responsibility to render obedience to the "still small voice."—Era, 41:712.

Honestya-Grant, Heber J.TP30SIGNIFICANT GOSPEL THEMES—HONESTY. The fundamental thing for a Latter-day Saint is to be honest. The fundamental thing for a Latter-day Saint is to value his word as faithfully as his bond; to make up his mind that under no circumstances, no matter how hard it may be, by and with the help of the Lord, he will dedicate his life and his best energies to making good his promise.—Era, 41:327.

Apostasy of Individualsa-Grant, Heber J.TP31CAUSES OF APOSTASY. Next to the committing of sin there is no more fruitful cause of apostasy among the Latter-day Saints than when we put our trust in the arm of flesh. I firmly believe that no man who honestly bows down every day of his life and supplicates God in sincerity for the light of His Holy Spirit to guide him will ever become proud and haughty. On the contrary, his heart will become filled with meekness, humility, and childlike simplicity.—JH, July 7, 1882: 2; DN, July 8, 1889.

31The time when our means and our talent will be subject to the Lord is near at hand, although when I come to examine the tithing books and find men holding important positions in Israel who do not pay one-tenth of an honest tithing, I am led to the conclusion that the day for the redemption of Zion is further off than we expect.—JH, June 3, 1889: 7; Utah Enquirer, June 4, 1889.

31TESTIMONY AND EXPERIENCE. Men have said to me: "If you know that you are engaged in the work of God explain it, so that we can know it as clearly as we know that two and two are four." Now I may tell such my experience and of the influence of the Holy Ghost. . . . But this may not bring conviction to them. I may tell a man that I have the toothache, and he may say he does not believe it, but he cannot change my experience. So no man's denial can change my conviction that I have heard tongues spoken and interpretations of the gift of God and that I have seen the sick raised.—JH, Sept. 9, 1888: 2; DN, Sept. 10, 1888.

31The saving of souls, including our own soul, is the one great labor of all others that is most valuable and important, and that will bring to us the blessings of our Father and the good will of our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ.—Era, 24:259.

Lovea-Grant, Heber J.TP31Let us cultivate the love of God, the love of our brothers and sisters, and the love of the gospel of Jesus Christ.—RSM, 24:629.

Wealtha-Grant, Heber J.TP31It seems to be the hardest thing in the world for people to grow in wealth and keep the spirit of the gospel.—RSM, 24:628.

Repentancea-Grant, Heber J.TP32REPENTANCE. There is nothing in the world that is more splendid than to have in our hearts a desire to forgive the sinner if he only repents. But I want to say, do not forgive the sinner if he does not repent. "By this ye shall know that a man has repented, that he confesses his sin and forsakes it, and is guilty no more." It is up to the Lord, however, and unless they confess their sins we are not obligated to forgive, but when they really and truly repent, it is one of the obligations that rest upon us to forgive those who have sinned.—RSM, 23:341.

Temptationa-Grant, Heber J.TP32The devil is ready to blind our eyes with the things of this world, and he would gladly rob us of eternal life, the greatest of all gifts. But it is not given to the devil, and no power will ever be given to him to overthrow any Latter-day Saint that is keeping the commandments of God. There is no power given to the adversary of men's souls to destroy us if we are doing our duty. If we are not absolutely honest with God, then we let the bars down, then we have destroyed part of the fortifications by which we are protected, and the devil may come in. But no man has ever lost the testimony of the gospel, no man has ever turned to the right or to the left, who had the knowledge of the truth, who was attending to his duties, who was keeping the Word of Wisdom, who was paying his tithing, who was responding to the calls and duties of his office and calling in the Church.—CR, October, 1900: 60.

Jerusalema-Grant, Heber J.TP32TIME OF THE GENTILES. When the British general with his army entered the City of Jerusalem I felt that the time of the gentiles was very close to being fulfilled.—CR, October, 1921: 106.

Jerusalema-Grant, Heber J.TP32THE GATHERING OF THE JEWS. One of the benefits of the great and terrible world war, through which the nations of the earth have recently passed, will be the opportunity for the Jews to return to the land of their fathers.—Era, 23:285.

Dispensation of the Fullness of Timesa-Grant, Heber J.TP32We are living in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, when all things are to be restored, and every gift and blessing of the gospel of our Master should be enjoyed by the Saints.—YWJ, 16:128.

TEMPLE AND GENEALOGICAL WORK

Dead, Salvation ofa-Grant, Heber J.TPGENEALOGICAL WORK. I am myself a firm believer that more people have been interested in the gospel on account of the restoration again to the Church of the work for the dead than through almost any other single thing. I know of a great many converts I have met who had no interest in the Church until the doctrine of redemption for the dead was taught to them.—GM, 23:9.

Dead, Salvation ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP33I am deeply interested in this work. I am anxious to encourage the people to press on in securing their genealogies and after doing so in laboring in our temples.—GM, 22:106.

Temple Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP33TEMPLE WORK. I rejoice in the temple work that is being done, and I wish to ask the Saints to try to shape their affairs so that they can occasionally go to the temple. For years I felt that I was too busy to find a day or an evening in which to go to the temple. A little over a year ago I made up my mind that by planning my affairs, by staying away from lectures or concerts or theatres or operas, I could go to the temple at least once every week and have ordinances performed in behalf of some of my loved ones who had passed away. By making up my mind that I could do this I had no difficulty whatever in going through the temple once a week during the entire year. Starting this year I had no difficulty in doing this. True, I have had to miss perhaps an opera or theatre or some other function at which I should have liked to be present, but I have had no difficulty whatever during the past three months in going to the temple twice a week. When I can do so I go more than twice a week, so as to make up for the time when I am absent from the city. Up to the first day of April I had endowments to my credit of more than two a week for this year.

Temple Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP33We can generally do that which we wish to do. A young man can find an immense amount of time to spend with his sweetheart. He can arrange affairs to do that. We can arrange our affairs to get exercise in the shape of golf and otherwise. We can arrange our affairs to have amusements. And if we make up our minds to do so we can arrange our affairs to do temple work, judging from my own experience of the last fifteen months.—CR, April, 1928: 8-9.

Temple Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP34WHY BUILD TEMPLES. Millions of dollars have been invested in the Salt Lake Temple. Month after month, as a boy, I contributed one dollar a month. As my wages increased I contributed two dollars a month, and later three dollars, four dollars, five dollars, and finally gave several thousands of dollars, towards the completion of that temple. Why? Because the Lord God Almighty had given me a knowledge that the hearts of the children have been turned to their fathers; that the keys held by Elijah the prophet were in very deed delivered to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. The very granite bears witness to the faith, the knowledge, and the testimony that God has given to the Latter-day Saints. Not only this temple, but in Logan, in Manti, in St. George, temples have been erected to the same effect. In Canada there is another temple . . . and one recently completed in the Hawaiian Islands, wherein ordinances for the dead can be performed. The temple still stands in Kirtland, Ohio, where these wonderful manifestations from God were given to the Latter-day Saints. By the revelations of the Spirit of God to them, they testify that these things did occur. There was also a temple at Nauvoo, Illinois, which was built under great stress—which our people built with the rifle in one hand, so to speak, and the trowel or the instruments used in building in the other. These temples, erected by the Saints in the days of their poverty, bear witness to all the world of the inspiration of God to those men and to the truthfulness of the visions in the Kirtland Temple. No men and women would spend their money by the millions of dollars for the erection of temples, and spend their time, year after year, laboring for the salvation of their dead, if they did not have the witness of the Holy Spirit that in very deed the promise has been fulfilled that was made to the boy Joseph Smith ninety-six years ago, that Elijah should come and restore these keys.—CR, October, 1919: 22-23.
