Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

34CHAPTER III

35LIVING OUR RELIGION

OBEDIENCE AND DISOBEDIENCE

a-Grant, Heber J.CommandmentsTPI say to all Latter-day Saints: Keep the commandments of God. That is my keynote speech, just those few words: Keep the commandments of God.—CR, October, 1920: 10.

Work of the Lorda-Grant, Heber J.Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TP35ON LIVING OUR RELIGION. I regret exceedingly that from my earliest recollections I have had to listen to the servants of the Lord pleading, with very little success, with the people to live their religion. My own counsel and advice to the Latter-day Saints have been to do their duties towards God and to keep the commandments that He has given them. Notwithstanding the brethren have labored hard to teach the Saints their duties, and have frequently repeated the commandments of the Lord unto this people, many of them have not yet learned the necessity of performing their duties. I believe if I were to call for those people here today who have been taught and believe all the revelations contained in the book of Doctrine and Covenants to be the inspired words of God, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, nearly all who are in this congregation would raise their hands and say they knew these things to be true. But if I were to call for all those who had been absolutely honest with God in keeping His commandments, I am afraid a majority of the congregation would not raise their hands. If I were to ask for those who observed the Word of Wisdom, and who did not spend a part of their means for tobacco and liquor, and who paid an honest tithing to the Lord, one-half of those here today would, I am afraid, fail to lift up their hands. A great majority would answer that they had received their endowments in the temple of God, that they had entered into covenants with the Lord. They know the covenants they have made with our Heavenly Father, and how many are there who carry out these covenants that they have entered into? I have heard a great many people, in my time, pray unto the Lord for blessings. And they would dedicate their time and strength and all that they possessed for the onward advancement of the Kingdom of God. But when they are called upon to help the Church in a financial way they are very careful to keep their means hid from the Lord—they keep it for their own advancement. We are not ready and willing to keep the commandments of God, but we are ready and willing to carry out our own wishes. We do not ask what it is desired that we should do, but generally suit ourselves as to what we would like to do. Is this right? No, it is not. I feel that there is plenty of room for improvement, and we should improve.—CR, April, 1898: 15.

a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP36When I look around and see the mistakes that I have made, and those that my brethren make from time to time; when I realize how many of those who have been wonderfully blessed of the Lord have fallen by the wayside, it fills me with humility. It fills me with the spirit of meekness and with an earnest desire that I may ever seek to know the mind and the will of God and to keep His commandments rather than to follow out my own desires.—CR, April, 1899: 26.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP36THE QUESTION OF OBEDIENCE. I know scores of Latter-day Saints who have been commanded of the Lord time and time again, but have failed to receive the blessings promised through the fulfillment of the commandments of God, because they have obeyed not. Yet they have accused the Lord of failing to fulfill His promises made to those who obey His commandments. I have ever known that those who do not pay their tithing are the ones who criticize the expenditure of tithing. Those who are approached for donations for laudable purposes, sometimes under the direction of the Presidency of the Church, and who refuse to contribute, are the ones who criticize the Presidency of the Church and the apostles for calling upon them for means. But I find that the men who obey are those who testify that the promises of God are fulfilled. Therefore, it behooves each and every one of us to be true and energetic.—CR, October, 1899: 17./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP36If we keep the commandments of God, He will love us, and the Savior will manifest Himself unto us. If we fail to keep the commandments of God, there is no promise made to us. The Savior said: "Not every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father, which is in heaven." It is the keeping of the commandments of God that causes men to grow and to become strong and powerful in the Church and Kingdom of God.—CR, October, 1900: 36./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP37THE QUESTION OF DISOBEDIENCE. One of the great testimonies, to me, of the divinity of the work in which you and I are engaged is the fact that those who have turned away from the truth, without one single, solitary exception that I can recall, have done so because they have failed to keep the commandments of God. To me it is little less than marvelous that no faithful man or woman, within my recollection, has ever lost the faith of the gospel. Only those who have neglected to serve God, only those who have not kept the light of the Holy Spirit burning within their hearts, by obeying the commandments of the living God—they are the only ones who have lost the faith and turned away. The gospel of Jesus Christ has been proclaimed all over the world, and from the day the Church was organized, not one single, solitary missionary, who was diligent and true in serving God, has ever lost the faith. And no missionary has come home with increased light and knowledge to tell us that the gospel is wrong, or that he has discovered the truth in some foreign land. But they have come home with increased faith, with increased knowledge, with greater love for the work of God than they had when they went away. I rejoice that in all the travelings of all the elders, wherever they go, in every land and clime, they are constantly gaining increased testimonies, and evidences, and knowledge regarding the divinity of the work in which we are engaged; and this is as it should be. I regret, however, that there should be any of the Latter-day Saints, that is, any of the product from the homes of the Latter-day Saints, who should go out into the world and become the enemies of this people. I regret that some of the sons and daughters of faithful men and women in the Church should turn away from the truth and should become the enemies of the people and be numbered among those who malign, and belie, and vilify the leaders of the Church and the people generally. But I am thankful that those who do this almost without an exception have made a record for wickedness, for corruption, for licentiousness. I thank God that by their fruits ye shall know them, and that the fruits of all those who have turned away from the gospel and are fighting against it today are unworthy. I confess freely and frankly that it would stagger me and the reasoning faculties with which God has endowed me, if I should discover that as men and women grew in good deeds, as they grew in virtue, as they grew in the love of their fellows, as they grew in ability to serve God, they lost the faith of the gospel of Jesus Christ; but I have never discovered one such individual.—CR, April, 1911: 21-22./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP38PRACTICAL RELIGION. I wish in my heart that all the members of the Church would have the loyalty in their souls, not only to believe the word of the Lord, but to put it into practice.—Era, 24:259./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP38Let our actions count. That is the thing of real value.—RSM, 24:629./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP38These duties and obligations are calculated to make us Godlike in our disposition. They are calculated to make Gods of us, and to fit and qualify us that we may become joint heirs with our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.—JH, October 4, 1895: 7; DN, November 30, 1895./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.TemptationTP38There are two spirits striving with all men—one telling them what to do that is right, and one telling them what to do that will please themselves, that will gratify their own pride and ambition. If we live as we ought to live, we will always follow that spirit that teaches us to do that which is right.—CR, April, 1938: 12./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP38THE PRIVILEGE OF OBEDIENCE. In the kind providences of the Lord every man who lives the gospel of Jesus Christ sooner or later receives that precious thing known as a testimony to the eternal part of his nature, a testimony regarding the divinity of the labor in which we are engaged./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP39 There are no people that make the sacrifices that we do, but for us it is not a sacrifice but a privilege—the privilege of obedience, the privilege of entering into a working partnership with our Father in Heaven and earning the choice blessings promised to those who love Him and keep His commandments.—Era, 42:457./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP39I promise you, as a servant of the living God, that every man and woman who obeys the commandments of God shall prosper, that every promise made of God shall be fulfilled upon their heads, and that they will grow and increase in wisdom, light, knowledge, intelligence, and, above all, in the testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ. May God help each and every one of us who has a knowledge of the gospel, to live it, that our lives may preach its truth.—Era, 42:585./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP39The Doctrine and Covenants is full of splendid things with which we ought to be familiar. But you can read this book through and through, and learn it off by heart, and it won't do you a particle of good unless you put into practice the teachings. To read a book through without carrying out any of the things that are taught in the book is of no value. It is the things that we read and learn and then put into practice that count.—Era, 42:585./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Work of the LordTP39We are told in this same Doctrine and Covenants that we should be anxiously engaged in laboring and bringing to pass many good works, of our own free will and accord. The power is in us wherein we are agents unto ourselves. We should not wait to be commanded in all things. He that is compelled in all things is a slothful and not a wise servant. We should have the ambition, we should have the desire, we should make up our minds that, so far as the Lord Almighty has given to us talent, we will do our full share in the battle of life. It should be a matter of pride that no man shall do more than you will do, in proportion to your ability, in forwarding the work of God here upon the earth. That has been my ambition all my life—to do my full share.—Era, 42:585./

Work of the Lorda-Grant, Heber J.TP39No man should want any blessing in this life unless he earns it. No man should want somebody else to carry his burdens. No man who has a testimony of the divinity of the work in which you and I are engaged should want some other man to pay the tithing. He should want to pay tithing himself; he should want to feel that he has done his part, and then that satisfaction that comes to every human being by doing what is right will come to him.—Era, 42:585.

Laws, Divinea-Grant, Heber J.TP40THE LAWS OF GOD. The Lord, knowing what is best for you and for me and for every individual, has given to us laws, which, if we obey, will make us more Godlike, will fit and qualify and prepare us to go back and dwell in the presence of our Heavenly Father and to receive that plaudit: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant."

Laws, Divinea-Grant, Heber J.TP40That is what we are laboring for.

Laws, Divinea-Grant, Heber J.TP40We are in a school, fitting, qualifying, and preparing ourselves that we may be worthy and capable of going back and dwelling in the presence of our Heavenly Father, and the man who claims that he knows the gospel is true and then does not live it, does not keep the commandments of God. Such a man will never attain to that strength, to that power, to that eminence, and to that capacity in the Church and Kingdom of God that he would attain if he obeyed the laws of God.—Era, 42:713.

Laws, Divinea-Grant, Heber J.TP40A great many people in the Church act as though the Presidency of the Church, or the presidency of the stake, or the bishopric of their ward are under obligation to them if they obey the Word of Wisdom or if they obey the law delivered to us regarding tithing. They feel that they have done something that places the Church, or the authorities of the Church locally, or the General Authorities, under obligation to them. Every law that is given to us in the Church is for our own individual benefit.

Laws, Divinea-Grant, Heber J.TP40Our children often feel that we are under obligation to them if they learn their lessons in school; they feel that they have done something that places the parents under obligation, while, as a matter of fact, they have done something, if they have learned their lessons, that for all time will be of benefit to them individually.—Era, 42:713.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Faith and WorksTP40The teachings in the Epistle of James have always impressed me forcibly. He lays down the law to us that we are to show our faith by our works, and I have always believed in the man that showed his faith by his works. Upon one occasion a large group of men were discussing another man who was in very great distress. A wonderful amount of sympathy was expressed for this man in his financial distress. One man said, "Well, I am sorry fifty dollars' worth," and laid the fifty dollars down. The other sympathizers disappeared immediately. No one else was sorry enough to do anything. This man showed his sorrow by his works, by doing something for the man who had met with a great accident and who needed assistance.—Era, 42:713./

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TP41TESTIMONY. God lives; Jesus is the Christ; Joseph Smith is a prophet of the living God; we have the truth; and may those who know it, so live that those who know it not may investigate the plan of life and salvation and obtain eternal life, the greatest of all the gifts of God to man.—Era, 43:457.

Salvationa-Grant, Heber J.TP41We find recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants that if we labor all the days of our life and save but one person, great shall be our joy with that person in the life to come. And if that one person is only our dear self, that is the thing that counts.—Era, 39:396.

DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.TestimonyTPThe people should study the gospel. But the greatest testimony we can receive is that of the voice of revelation—the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. No one can get this without living for it.—JH, September 30, 1888: 2; DN, October 1, 1888./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Card-PlayingTP41CARDS AND CARD-PLAYING. If you ever found people playing cards excessively that were getting any real, spiritual benefit out of it, I should like to have you bring them around and introduce them to me. I have never met any of that kind. Those that play their cards will say: "Oh, well, there is no particular harm. We are not going to be so straight that we lean over backwards." I don't want anybody ever to lean over backwards, for fear they might fall over, but I would like everybody to stand up straight.—CS, July 3, 1937: 5./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Card-PlayingTP42By the way, I hear that card playing is becoming very, very popular, and that the Church must be in favor of card playing because the Church authorities never say anything against it. From the time I was a child and read the Juvenile Instructor, published for the benefit of the people, I have read nothing except condemnation of card-playing and the wasting of your time in doing something that brings no good, bodily, intellectually, or in any way, and sometimes leads your children to become gamblers, because they become expert card-players. The Church as a Church requests its members not to play cards. I hope you understand me, and I want you to know that I am speaking for the Church when I ask the people to let cards alone.—CR, April, 1926: 10./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Apostasy of IndividualsTP42THE ROAD TO APOSTASY. I have seen men in high places start in by drinking tea and coffee, saying, "That doesn't amount to anything," then next using liquor, then next finding fault with the authorities of the Church, and the first thing I knew they left the Church. But I have never known a person, man or woman, who attended his meetings, and partook of the spirit and inspiration that are present in the meetings of true, faithful Latter-day Saints, who has ever apostatized.—CS, April 10, 1937: 1./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.CriticismTP42So far as I have been able to learn the duties devolving upon the Latter-day Saints, those duties consist in keeping the commandments of God and in setting examples before our fellow men which will be worthy of imitation. I do not discover among the duties devolving upon us that of undertaking to regulate, by finding fault, the conduct of any Latter-day Saint other than ourselves. Nor do I find that it is necessary for us . . . to devote a portion of our time to finding fault and seeking occasion against our brethren.—JH, October 30, 1892: 4; DN, December 17, 1892./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.RevelationTP42STUDY THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS. I wish that I had the ability to impress upon the Latter-day Saints the necessity of searching the commandments of God—the revelations from the Lord, the Creator of heaven and earth—as contained in the Doctrine and Covenants. If we as a people would live up to those wonderful revelations that have come to us, we would be a bright and shining light to all the world.—CR, October, 1927: 4./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Word of WisdomTP43ON "TEAS." I want to announce that I shall be glad if we will quit giving notices to the papers of what is termed "teas" that are being held in our homes. I read of a "tea" being given in the home of President Heber J. Grant, and of the "tea" table's being decorated. There is no tea table in the home of President Heber J. Grant. There has been no tea served either to our friends or visitors, in the home of Heber J. Grant. I would like us to change that name in our newspapers, at least so far as Latter-day Saints are concerned, and have it a "social gathering," or a lunch, or anything you have a mind to call it, and quit calling it a "tea" when every Latter-day Saint is asked by the Lord to leave tea, coffee, and tobacco alone.—CR, April, 1926: 8./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP43THE DUTY OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS. I maintain that it is the absolute duty of each and every member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to so order his life that his example will be worthy of the imitation of all men, thus bringing credit and blessings to himself and his posterity and also making friends for the work of the Lord. This should be the loftiest ambition of every Latter-day Saint.—Era, 3:192./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP43My brethren and sisters, if we will study the scriptures, the plan of life and salvation, keeping the commandments of the Lord, all the promises that have been made will be fulfilled upon our heads. And we will grow and increase in light, knowledge and intelligence.—CR, April, 1902: 80./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.TestimonyTP43SPIRITUAL GIFTS AND THE COMMON MAN. I rejoice with Brother Kimball, that every Latter-day Saint, every humble son and daughter of God that has embraced the gospel and become a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has received the witness of the Holy Spirit; that the gift of tongues, the gift of prophecy, of healing, and other gifts and blessings, are found in the Church, and are not confined to men that hold responsible positions in the Church. I have listened to some of the most spirited and able, and some of the finest sermons of my life from men who held no official position. I remember in the Thirteenth Ward listening to a very gifted sermon by a finely educated man who had a marvelous command of language. Afterwards Brother Millen Atwood, who at that time was not holding any position of an official character, stood up as a home missionary in that ward, and if that man had been hired to murder the Queen's English he couldn't have done it more perfectly. I had just been studying grammar, and, therefore, it grated on my ears. . . . But my heart was touched, and tears welled up in my eyes because of the rich outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon that man and there was an impression made upon my heart of the divinity of this work and the fact that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God that to this day I have not forgotten./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP44It is not position, it is not education that gives the Spirit of God; but it is keeping the commandments of Almighty God and being lowly in heart and desiring to fulfill the commandments of God in our daily walk and conversation. I bear witness to you here today that no man has ever fallen in this Church, and no man ever will fail in this Church, who is honest in his heart, honest in the payment of his tithes and offerings, who obeys the Word of Wisdom, who attends to his family prayers and his secret prayers, and who attends to his quorum meetings. No man will fail who is doing his duty in this Church. But Satan has power over those who become selfish and sordid and set their hearts upon the things of the earth and fail to render thanks in all things unto God.—CR, April, 1901: 64./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.TemptationTP44KEYNOTE TO THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS. Here is the keynote, Latter-day Saints. Let us realize that God is mightier than all the earth. Let us realize that if we are faithful in keeping the commandments of God His promises will be fulfilled to the very letter. For He has said that not one jot or tittle shall fall to the ground unfulfilled. The trouble is, the adversary of men's souls blinds their minds. He throws dust, so to speak, in their eyes, and they are blinded with the things of this world. Men do not lay up treasures in heaven, where moth and rust corrupt not, where thieves do not break through and steal, but they set their hearts upon the things of this world, and the adversary obtains power over them./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Eternal LifeTP45I say to you, Latter-day Saints, that the pearl of great price is life eternal. God has told us that the greatest of all the gifts He can bestow upon man is life eternal. We are laboring for that great gift, and it will be ours if we keep the commandments of God. But it will not profit us merely to make professions and to proclaim to the ends of the earth that this is the gospel, but it will profit us if we do the will of God.—CR, April, 1900: 24./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP45I cannot understand how people with a knowledge of the gospel. . . . that men, holding the holy Priesthood and possessing this knowledge, can, year after year, neglect the duties and the obligations that rest upon them. The Savior told His followers that they were the salt of the earth, but that if the salt lost its savor, it was henceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men. He told them also that they were the light of the world, a city set upon a hill which could not be hid. He told them that men did not light a candle and put it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it might give light to all that were in the room. And He admonished them to let their light so shine that men seeing their good deeds might glorify God./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP45This admonition applies to us. We are the light of the world. We have received the inspiration of Almighty God. We have received a testimony of the gospel, and we do know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. . . . Every true Latter-day Saint has this testimony burning within his or her heart. Now, are we so living that the good deeds that we perform bring credit to the work of God? Are our examples worthy of the imitation of all men? Do we by our example show that we have faith in the gospel?/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Faith and WorksTP45We are told that faith without works is dead; that as the body without the spirit is dead, so also is faith without works dead, and I am sorry to say that there are many professed Latter-day Saints who are spiritually dead./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP46We many times ask ourselves the question, why does this man progress in the plan of life and salvation, while his neighbor, of equal intelligence and ability, of apparently the same testimony and power, and perchance greater power, stands still?/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP46I will tell you why. One keeps the commandments of our Heavenly Father, and the other fails to keep them. The Savior says that he that keeps His commandments is the man that loves Him, and he that keeps the commandments of God shall be likened unto the wise man who built his house upon the rock, and when the rains descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. On the other hand, those who heard His sayings and did them not, the Savior likened unto a foolish man, who built his house on the sand, and when the rains descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; it fell; and great was the fall thereof. There are many Latter-day Saints who are building their houses upon the sand. They are failing to carry out the commandments of our Heavenly Father that come to us from time to time through His inspired servants./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP46Now, if we have the gospel (and we know we have), I say to each and every Latter-day Saint, who desires to grow and enlarge in the gospel, he must keep the commandments of God. As we keep the commandments of God and live God-like lives, we become full of charity, long-suffering, and love for our fellows, and we grow and increase in all those things that go to make us noble and God-like. We also gain the love and confidence of those by whom we are surrounded. It is by the performance of the plain, simple every-day duties that devolve upon us that we will grow in the Spirit of God. You find me a man that attends his quorum meetings, that performs his duties in the ward in which he lives, that honestly pays his tithing, and I will find you a man full of the Spirit of God and growing and increasing in the testimony of the gospel. On the other hand, you find me a man that has seen angels, that has had wonderful manifestations, that has seen devils cast out, that has gone to the ends of the earth and preached the gospel, and yet who is failing to keep the commandments of God, and I will find you a man that is criticizing the Lord's anointed, and finding fault with what the President does, with where he goes, what he engages in and how he administers the affairs of the Church.—CR, April, 1900: 21-22./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.CriticismTP47I have given much advice to the Latter-day Saints in my time, and one of the principal items was never to criticize anyone but ourselves. I believe in fault-finding for breakfast, dinner and supper, but only with our own dear selves.—CR, April, 1902: 60./

47We cannot say that we do not know what our duties are, because they are so often and so forcibly brought to our minds by those who speak to us.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP47I realize that it requires a constant effort on the part of each and every one of us to make a success of our lives. It requires no effort at all to roll down the hill, but it does require an effort to climb the hill to the summit. It needs no effort to walk in the broad way that leads to destruction; but it needs an effort to keep in the straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal, and we are told that but few there are who find this path. The all-important thing for you and me is to discover whether we are walking in the straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal, and if we are not, wherein have we allowed the adversary to blind our minds and to cause us to depart from that path which will lead us back into the presence of God? Each one should search his own heart to find out wherein he has failed, and then he should diligently seek our Heavenly Father for the assistance of His Holy Spirit, that he may come back into the straight path. By the assistance of our Heavenly Father there is no obligation and no law in the Church that we cannot fulfill. The Lord will give us the strength and the ability to accomplish every duty and labor that rests upon us in an acceptable manner in his sight. The only question is, have we the disposition? I heard yesterday of a bishop who said that he could not give up drinking coffee. I do not believe that that man tells the truth. I think he lacks the disposition to try and give up the habit.—CR, October, 1900: 33./
