Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

58CHAPTER V

58TITHING—LAW OF FINANCIAL SECURITY

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP58THE LAW OF FINANCIAL PROSPERITY. The law of financial prosperity to the Latter-day Saints, under covenant with God, is to be an honest tithe payer, and not to rob the Lord in tithes and offerings. Prosperity comes to those who observe the law of tithing. When I say prosperity I am not thinking of it in terms of dollars and cents alone, although as a rule the Latter-day Saints who are the best tithe payers are the most prosperous men, financially. But what I count as real prosperity, as the one thing of all others that is of great value to every man and woman living, is the growth in a knowledge of God, and in a testimony, and in the power to live the gospel and to inspire our families to do the same. That is prosperity of the truest kind.

Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TP58I would rather die in poverty knowing that my family could testify that, to the best of my ability with which God had endowed me, I had observed His laws and kept His commandments, and by my example, had proclaimed the gospel, than to have all the wealth of the world.—CR, April, 1925: 10.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP58I say when the Latter-day Saints will pay an honest tithing unto the Lord there will be no need of talking about debts and of being in the bondage of debt. But the trouble is we do not do it. Scores of men compromise with the Lord on the basis of ten cents on the dollar, and they rob Him of the other ninety cents. Some discount their debts to the Lord twenty-five percent. Why, a man would be ashamed of himself to go into Z. C. M. I. and ask them to knock off twenty-five percent from his bill. But with God they discount their bills ten cents, twenty-five cents, and fifty cents on the dollar, and then call themselves honest. I wish the Lord would inspire us with a determination to be honest, and that the brethren could inspire this feeling among the Latter-day Saints, so that we would all try to be upright with the Lord.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP59A man will say, "I owe my neighbor and must pay him before I can settle my tithing." Well, I know I owe lots of my neighbors, and they try to collect from me. But I owe God an honest tithing. He has given me a testimony of Jesus and a hope of eternal life, and I intend to pay Him first, and my neighbors afterwards. It is our duty to settle with the Lord first, and I intend to do it, with the help of my Heavenly Father. And I want to say to you, if you will be honest with the Lord, paying your tithing and keeping His commandments, He will not only bless you with the light and inspiration of His holy Spirit, but you will be blessed in dollars and cents; you will be enabled to pay your debts, and the Lord will pour out temporal blessings upon you in great abundance.—CR, April, 1898: 15-16.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP59TITHING AND DEBT. I have never made a dollar on which I did not pay tithing. A president of the stake begged and pleaded with me to quit paying tithing. He said I did not owe any tithing until I got out of debt. Would not that have been a fine record for a man who now stands as president of the Church, not to have paid tithing for thirty-two years? I have had friends beg and plead with me to take bankruptcy, saying that I would never live long enough to pay my debts.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP59If there is any man living who is entitled to say, "Keep out of debt," his name is Heber J. Grant. Thank the Lord that I was able to pay it all, and pay it all without asking a dollar discount from anyone.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP59I do not believe I ever would have paid it if I had not been absolutely honest with the Lord. When I made any money, the first debt I paid was to the Lord. And I believe beyond a shadow of a doubt, that if the Latter-day Saints as a people, had taken the advice of the prophet of the Lord, and had been efficient tithe payers they would not be in the condition they are today. If they were honest and conscientious in the payment of the equivalent of two meals for themselves and their families once a month, the amount of money actually saved (and they would benefit physically by fasting two meals) would take care of every person in distressed circumstances in this Church—with the fast day donations alone. There would be means also in the hands of the Church, to furnish employment for every Latter-day Saint needing it. I believe what I have heard Bishop Partridge say, "Pay your tithing and be blest." I believe that had the Latter-day Saints on an average been honest and conscientious with the Lord in the payment of tithing, and had they followed the advice of President Joseph F. Smith, they would not be in distress today.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP60. . . . I am a firm believer that faith without works is dead, and I am a firm believer that the Lord meant what He said when He promised to open the windows of heaven and pour down a blessing on us if we would pay our tithing.—RSM, 19:302-303.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP60I believe, and believe it firmly, that among all the people of the Latter-day Saints who are in financial distress there are hardly any who have been honest tithe payers. Somehow or other God enlarges the capacity and ability of those who are liberal. "It is more blessed to give than to receive," and we want to cultivate the spirit of giving.—RSM, 24:629.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP60TITHING AND HONESTY. Tithing is a law of God and the payment of tithes brings peace and joy to the Latter-day Saint who does it. There is a satisfaction that comes into the heart of the man who is absolutely honest with the Lord, in contributing of his means to the building up of the Church of Christ, and into the heart of every true, full tithe payer. Each and every blessing that you and I enjoy comes from God. We are under obligations to Him for the very breath of life, and He gives us everything that we have. He asks us to show our appreciation and acknowledge to Him His goodness, by returning to the Church for its benefit and for the spreading of the gospel at home and abroad, one-tenth of that which we receive, all of which comes from Him.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP60Again I say it is beyond my comprehension how any man who is absolutely honest in his dealings with his fellow men and would not think of such a thing as compromising his store bill if he were able to pay, would compromise his obligations with God. I can speak upon the payment of tithing because from my childhood every dollar that has come into my hands has been tithed. And I have endeavored in addition to be as liberal as any of my associates have been in contributing to the various public enterprises that have been required of us—the erection of ward houses, school houses, etc., etc.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP61I appeal to the Latter-day Saints to be honest with the Lord and I promise them that peace, prosperity, and financial success will attend those who are honest with our Heavenly Father, because they are fulfilling the law and an obligation. He will bless them for doing so. And being strictly honest with the Lord is the most splendid way to teach your children faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ. The most tender portion of the human anatomy of the male variety is the pocket . . . . When we set our hearts upon the things of this world and fail to be strictly honest with the Lord, we do not grow in the light and power and strength of the gospel as we otherwise would do.—CR, October, 1929: 4-5.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP61TITHES AND OFFERINGS. The dime or the fifteen cents that is given as the equivalent of a meal, the twenty cents or the thirty cents given for the two meals, if the widow can give it, will be greater in the sight of the Lord than the donation of a dollar by the man who has abundant means. If we give in proportion to our means, if we pay our tithing, no matter how small the income, I believe as firmly as that I am standing before you here today that God our Heavenly Father will magnify the remaining nine dollars out of ten, or the remaining forty-five cents out of every fifty and you will have sufficient wisdom to utilize it to advantage so that you will lose nothing in being honest. In doing what? In obeying the law. Not an exhortation, not a pleading from me, but obeying the law of tithing. If we had lived up to the teachings of the Prophet Lorenzo Snow regarding tithing, again let me say that there would be no distress among the people.—CS, June 18, 1932.

61I recollect one man's boasting that he had consecrated his property and all that he had to the Lord. My subsequent relations with that man led me to the conclusion that he had indeed consecrated it so that no one save him or the Lord could touch it.—JH, June 3, 1889: 7; Utah Enquirer, June 4, 1889.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP62TITHING AND ECONOMIC DISTRESS. So far as we have investigated in some of the wards—and we have investigated carefully—more than eighty percent of those who are in distress have not lived the law of the Lord (tithing).—CS, June 25, 1932.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP62Some people have found it very hard to pay their tithing. The harder it is for an individual to comply with requirements of the Lord in the payment of his tithing, the greater the benefit when he finally does pay it. The Lord loves a generous giver. No man living upon the earth can pay donations for the poor, can pay for building meetinghouses and temples, academies, and universities, can take of his means and send his boys and girls to proclaim this gospel, without removing selfishness from his soul, no matter how selfish he was when he started in. That is one of the finest things in all the world for men—to get to that point where the selfishness in their natures is cured. When it is eradicated from their dispositions, they are glad and anxious and willing and seeking the opportunity to do good with the means that the Lord places in their hands, instead of trying to get more of it.—Era, 43:713.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP62THE SETTLEMENT OF TITHES. I heard a very splendid illustration given by a Sunday School teacher of the primary class. She brought to her school ten beautiful red apples. She explained that everything we have in the world came to us from the Lord, and she said, "Now, children, if I give one of you these ten apples, will you give me one back again? Now, any one of you children that will do that, hold up your hand."

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP62Of course, they all held up their hands. Then she said, "That is what the Lord does for us. He gives us the ten apples, but He requests that we return one to Him to show our appreciation of that gift."

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP62The great trouble with the majority of people is that when they get the ten apples, they eat up nine of them and then they cut the other in two and give the Lord half of what is left. Some of them cut the apple in two and eat up one-half of it and then hold up the other half and ask the Lord to take a bite. That is about as near as they see fit to share properly and show their gratitude to the Lord.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP63The payment of our tithing in the season thereof—when we get our income—makes it come easy. I find that those who pay tithing every month have very much less difficulty in paying it than those who postpone payment to the end of the year, when they have eaten the nine apples, so to speak. But if they pay the minute they get the apples in their possession, there is no hardship. Their hearts are full of gratitude, and they are willing to express their gratitude. But after the nine apples are eaten, they think the Lord is very hard to want all they have left.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP63One great trouble with tithing is that men, because of their natural selfishness, become blinded and they cannot see straight. They cannot calculate properly. If we can only have the proper vision, the more we make, the easier it is to pay our tithing because of the greater amount that is left.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP63Now, I can talk tithing, because from the time I was a little boy earning money, I have paid my tithing. I have been honest with the Lord, and I am willing to be and have been all the days of my life—that is, to be honest with the Lord first. The Lord, you know, does not send collectors around once a month to collect bills. He does not send us our account once a month. We are trusted by the Lord. We are agents. We have our free will. And when the battle of life is over, we have had the ability and the power and the capacity to have done those things which the Lord required us to do and we cannot blame anybody else.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP63There are a great many people who say, "I do not pay my tithing because I do not think it is expended right. I do not think they use the proper wisdom in the expenditure of tithing."

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP63Well, you know that if someone steals a calf, the Lord will never charge it up to my account, and He will never charge it up to yours. If the Authorities of the Church and the wards and the stakes do not make a proper use of the tithing, you will never have to account for it. But if you keep that which belongs to the Lord, you may read from one of the ancient prophets and find that the Lord says, "You have robbed me," in plain English. "Wherein have we robbed you?" "In your tithes and your offerings." That is the way it was laid down. The Lord, as a rule, in nearly everything He says, says it plain enough that a wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP64I have found a great many people who do not know what their tithing is. I have never met people of that kind but that I believe if I were in partnership with them and they had a tenth interest in that partnership, they would know pretty well what part their tenth was. I do not think they would have any difficulty whatever in finding how much I owed them. So, I am inclined to think that if we wanted to, we would have no difficulty in finding out what is one-tenth of our income, and that is what we owe the Lord—no difficulty whatever.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP64Now, I believe that people are blessed in proportion to their liberality. I am not saying that they always make more dollars, perhaps, than the other man. But so far as an increase in the faith and in the testimony and the knowledge of the divinity of the work in which we are engaged, men that are honest with the Lord in the payment of their tithing grow as men never grow that are not honest. There is no question in my mind. Moreover, I am just foolish enough to believe that the Lord magnifies those who do pay their tithing and that they are more prosperous, on the average, than the men who do not. I believe that to those who are liberal the Lord gives ideas, and they grow in capacity and ability more rapidly than those that are stingy. I have that faith, and I have had it from the time I was a boy.—Era, 44:9, 56.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP64TITHING, WEALTH, AND GROWTH. I know people of my own personal acquaintance that were honest, conscientious tithe payers when they were making three thousand, four thousand, five thousand, six thousand a year. But when, in the providences of the Lord, they made ten thousand or twenty thousand, they never grew an inch above that $600.00 a year tithing. They were just like grandfather's clock, stopped, never to go again.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP65What was the matter?

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP65Prosperity distorted their vision. They could see what they were giving the Lord, but not what the Lord had given them.

65I know one man who paid $600.00 a year tithing. Being in the banking business and having available financial statements of many people, I knew that he made a little more than $45,000 that year, instead of the $6,000.00 which his tithing indicated. If he made $45,000.00 and paid $4,500.00 tithing, what would he have left? Over $40,000.00. If he had the right vision his heart should almost have burst with gratitude to God for the difference, rather than dwell upon the amount of tithing to be paid. When he paid the $600.00 originally, what did he have left? $5,400.00. The more he made, the easier it should have been to pay his tithing. But no, he had set his heart on accumulating money.

65How many of his children are laboring for the Church today? To my knowledge, but one of them. The best example in the world to set our children is to be honest with God ourselves.—Era, 41:585.

65There is absolutely no doubt in my mind that the statement, "It is more blessed to give than to receive," is from God our Heavenly Father. There is no doubt in my mind that the giver shall be had in remembrance before the Lord.—RSM, 25:12.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP65I believe it is acknowledged that the average man is born with a capacity to stand on his tiptoes and reach out just as far as he can to gather in all that he can get and hold it tight. But it requires a great deal of exertion to open the arms and give out something. Now we are giving away several millions of dollars a year of our time and money in proclaiming the gospel. In addition to that, the Latter-day Saints give to the Church ten percent of all they make. They also contribute of their means for the erection of meetinghouses. They contribute for the support of the poor, for the erection of stake houses and school buildings, as well as for the maintenance of our Church schools. And they have contributed millions of dollars for the erection of temples, in which vicarious labor for the dead is performed. . . . The honest payment of tithes is one reliable guide to a man's faith and spiritual condition.—Era, 41:585.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP66And there is one thing about contributing our money for meetinghouses, temples, and other things—we grow in the spirit and testimony of the gospel, and I do not believe that we are ever poorer financially. I am a firm believer that the Lord opens up the windows of heaven when we do our duty financially and pours our blessings upon us of a spiritual nature which are of far greater value than temporal things. But I believe He also gives us blessings of a temporal nature. I know in my heart that we grow financially, spiritually, and in every way as Latter-day Saints by doing our duty.—Era, 41:455.

66I have heard some of my own acquaintances preach remarkably fine sermons on tithing, and I have taken the opportunity to look up their records, because I knew they were neglecting their duty, and I found there was no credit on the tithing record. The record is what counts. Faith without works, we are told, is dead, and we all know how valuable the body is when it is dead.—Era, 41:327.
