Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

66CHAPTER VI

66CHURCH ADMINISTRATION

DIRECTION AND GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF THE CHURCH

THE PEOPLE AND THEIR LEADERS. I rejoice that a love has always existed in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints for all the prophets of God since the organization of the Church down to the present time. I rejoice in the love and confidence the Latter-day Saints have for the First Presidency of the Church, and for the apostles. I rejoice in the testimony that is borne in my heart that all of the authorities of the Church—the First Presidency, apostles, seventies, stake presidents and ward authorities, as well as the presidents of the various auxiliary organizations—are seeking for and desiring the advancement of God's work.—CR, April, 1902: 60-61.

Church Governmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP66AUTHORITY AND DIRECTION IN THE CHURCH. As long as the Lord sees fit to allow any man to stand at the head of this Church by and with the vote of the people, all of these men who pretend to have authority and who are in opposition to the mind and the will of the Lord as given through the man that stands at the head of the Church and that has the absolute support of his counselors and the perfect and absolute support of all of the Twelve Apostles, all of these persons who criticize and find fault with that which is declared by that man, are not in the straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal.—GM, 27:102.

Church Governmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP66I tell you it is the duty of the Presidency of this Church to ask the people to do anything and everything that the inspiration of God tells them to do.—CR, October, 1903: 10.

Church Governmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP66I wish to bear witness here today that every man who is chosen to be one of the General Authorities, or to preside over a stake or a ward, or in the Improvement Associations, and every woman who is chosen to preside in the Primary Association, or in the Relief Society, and those chosen for the Sunday School work—we aim to get the very best that there is. The offscourings of the earth can go on howling as long as they like and as loud as they will, it will not make any difference.—CR, April, 1935: 8.

Church Governmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP68You need have no fear, my dear brothers and sisters, that any man will ever stand at the head of the Church of Jesus Christ unless our Heavenly Father wants him to be there.—Era, 40:735.

Church Governmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP68You need have no fear that when one of the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ delivers a prophecy in the name of Jesus Christ, because he is inspired to do that, that it will fall by the wayside. I know of more than one prophecy, which, looking at it naturally, seemed as though it would fall to the ground as year after year passed. But lo and behold, in the providences of the Lord, that prophecy was fulfilled.—Era, 40:735.

Priesthood Powera-Grant, Heber J.TP68THE MEANING AND SIGNIFICANCE OF SECTION 121. In talking to the Latter-day Saints, there is no revelation in all the Doctrine and Covenants that I have quoted from so often as that contained in Section 121 . . . that "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned."

Priesthood Powera-Grant, Heber J.TP68There is no danger of a Priesthood of this kind—gentleness, and meekness, and love unfeigned. But when we exercise control, or domination, or compulsion, upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves. The Spirit of the Lord is grieved. And when it is withdrawn, "Amen to the Priesthood or the authority of that man." These are the words of God.

Priesthood Powera-Grant, Heber J.TP68I am reminded of a man that lost the apostleship. Time and time again he quoted the above to himself. But he failed to sustain the Priesthood and exercised unrighteous dominion over those under him.—CR, April, 1902: 80.

Priesthood Powera-Grant, Heber J.TP68I desire to read part of the wonderful revelation given to the Prophet Joseph in Liberty Jail. Remember, though he was chained in that prison, the Lord Almighty could and did speak to him, and gave to him a revelation that I commend here today to every Latter-day Saint. I particularly commend it to every man presiding in the stakes and wards of Zion, and in the various missions throughout the world. If we exercise the power of the Priesthood of the living God as He tells us in this wonderful revelation to exercise it, then there never can be and there never will be any just complaint made against the Church of Jesus Christ, because of the use of the Priesthood that has been restored again to the earth. It is when men do not follow the teachings and the revelations given of God to us through His prophet that mistakes are made.—CR, October, 1924: 8.

Priesthood Powera-Grant, Heber J.TP69The following inspired words should never be forgotten by any bishop or any president of a stake or any apostle, or any president of the Church as long as he holds office in the Church:

Priesthood Powera-Grant, Heber J.TPNo power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

Priesthood Powera-Grant, Heber J.TPBy kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile 69That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death. 69Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.—CR, October, 1923: 159.—(D. and C. 121:41-45)

Priesthood Powera-Grant, Heber J.TP69I rejoice in knowing that all these charges of tyranny and oppression and of a dictatorial management of the Church are absolutely false. There is not a man of the General Authorities of the Church but that desires to do—what? To exercise the Priesthood exactly as the Lord says it should be exercised.—CR, April, 1931: 13.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP69I know of nothing that I feel is of so great value in life as to be obedient to the counsel and advice of the Lord, and of His servants in this our day.—RSM, 20:301.

Church Governmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP70ON MANAGEMENT OF THE CHURCH. I had a letter when I, as a young man, was made an apostle, from a nonmember of the Church. . . . Of prominence in the world so far as business affairs are concerned, he was the manager of a great corporation. . . . He said: "I never thought very much of the leaders of the Mormon people, in fact I thought they were a very bright, keen, designing lot of fellows, getting rich from the tithes that they gathered in from a lot of ignorant, superstitious, and over-zealous religious people. But now that you are one of the fifteen men at the head of the Mormon Church, I apologize to the other fourteen. I know that if there were anything crooked in the management of the Mormon Church you would give it all away."—RSM, 24:625-626.

70Many an elder in Israel today owns one hundred sixty acres of beautiful land that he owes to the foresight, inspiration, and determination of President Young. Why? Because they themselves lacked faith to settle the very places they now occupy.—JH, October 6, 1894: 12; DN, December 15, 1894.

70The idea that businesses have been established by the Church for the individual profit of men who are connected with the leadership of the Church is absolutely false. Many of us borrowed money and put it into the sugar factory at the request of President Wilford Woodruff and lost the money that we invested.

70I know something about it individually because I personally borrowed a large sum of money, bought stock, paid interest on it for five years and then sold the stock for less than one-half of what it cost. I gained a whole lot of experience financially out of it and have never recovered, so far as the sugar company is concerned. I thought I would make this much of an explanation.—CR, October, 1931: 4.

70PRIESTHOOD AND COMPULSION. We hear a great deal about compulsion in this Church. Read section 121 in the Doctrine and Covenants. I bear witness to you here today, that the men holding the Priesthood of God, the leaders of this people, the prophets of God from Joseph Smith to Joseph F. Smith, every one of them, have exercised that Priesthood exactly as indicated in that section.

71"No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned"; and it has been exercised that way.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Grant, Heber J.TP71Talk about compulsion in obeying the law of tithing! I bear witness—and I know that the witness I bear is true—that the men and women who have been absolutely honest with God, who have paid their tithing as religiously and as correctly as though God were their partner, and when they settled up their accounts at the end of the year that they had made a just division, and they paid their one-tenth—I bear witness that those men and those women testify to all the world of the blessings of God that have come to them by the fulfillment of this law. God has given them wisdom whereby they have been able to utilize the remaining nine-tenths, and it has been of greater value to them. They have accomplished more with it than they would if they had not been honest with the Lord. I bear witness that the people who have fulfilled this law of God have been blessed, and have rejoiced in the privilege of showing their gratitude to God in a substantial way, for His blessings to them.—CR, April, 1912: 30.

71TITHING AND CHURCH ADMINISTRATION. There are many non-tithe payers among the Latter-day Saints, and many of them say that the reason they don't pay tithing is because the tithing is not properly administered. Seeing, however, that they do not pay a dollar, it is none of their business how it is administered. But you will find that those who do not do their duty, are always complaining about somebody that does, and making excuses for themselves. I have never found a man who was keeping the commandments of God that had any criticism to offer concerning any administration of the affairs of the Church.—CR, April, 1900: 22.

72

COUNSEL TO CHURCH OFFICERS

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TPWe expect all the general officers of the Church, each and every one of them, from this very day, to be absolute, full tithe payers, to really and truly observe the Word of Wisdom. And we ask all of the officers of the Church and all members of the general boards, and all stake and ward officers, if they are not living the gospel and honestly and conscientiously paying their tithing, to kindly step aside unless from this day they live up to these provisions.—CR, October, 1937: 129.

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TP72I ask every man and woman occupying a place of responsibility whose duty it is to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ to live it and keep the commandments of God, so that their example will teach it. And if they cannot live it, we will go on loving them. We will go on putting our arms around them. We will go on praying for them that they may become strong enough to live it. But unless they are able to live it we ask them to please step aside so that those who are living it can teach it.

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TP72No man can teach the gospel of Jesus Christ under the inspiration of the living God and with power from on high unless he is living it. He can go on as a member and we will pray for him, no matter how many years it may require, and we will never put a block in his way, because the gospel is one of love and of forgiveness, but we want true men and women as our officers in the Priesthood and in the Relief Society.—Era, 44:267.

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TP72A man has no right to be in a high council who can not stand up and say that he knows the gospel is true and that he is living it.—Era, 41:263.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP72I have seen men, even in high places—as high as it is possible to reach in this Church. I have seen them fall and gradually die spiritually. In every case it has been because of neglect of duty. It has been because of failing to live up to the requirements of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. There is no one thing that has made a more profound impression upon my mind than the statement that "Obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." Those who are obedient to the commandments of the Lord, those who live up to the requirements of the gospel, grow from day to day and year to year in a testimony and a knowledge of the gospel, and a determination to encourage others to investigate the plan of life and salvation.—Era, 39: 396.

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TP73There is nothing that will count so much with you officers who are directing these great Improvement Associations—every superintendent, every president of the Young Men's and Young Women's Associations, and every ward and stake board member—as living the gospel in very deed. By so doing you will have a power and influence that will even enable you to bring some of the wayward back into that straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal.—Era, 39: 396.

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TP73LABORING FOR THE CHILDREN OF THE CHURCH. There is no labor in which any of us can be engaged that is more acceptable in the sight of our Heavenly Father than laboring for the children in the Church of Jesus Christ. There is no question but that impressions made upon the minds of little innocent children and young boys and girls have a more lasting effect upon their future lives than impressions made at any other time. It is like writing, figuratively speaking, upon a white piece of paper, with nothing on it to obscure or confuse what you may write.—Era, 42: 135.

Teaching, Gospela-Grant, Heber J.TP73THE SPIRIT AND THE LETTER IN TEACHING. In our Sunday School Union conference in this building last Sunday night, we had one of the most glorious meetings I have ever attended. Several of the speakers were given four minutes each, and they were four minutes of gem thoughts, every one of them. The great burden of the remarks of all the superintendents who spoke to the subject, "The Needs of Our Sunday Schools," was not the need of more system, more of this, that or the other. But the great need is more of the Spirit of the Lord in the hearts of the teachers, to give that spirit to the children. One of the speakers likened this Church, and the people working in it, to an electric monument, with lights all over it. And he asked the question, "Is each allowing his light to shine?" and it came home to me. It has been said here, by some who have spoken, that we are not doing all we can.—CR, April, 1909, 110-111.

Teaching, Gospela-Grant, Heber J.TP74It is of very great importance from the time children come to us in the Sunday Schools, in the Primary Association, in the Mutual Improvement Associations and in the Church seminaries, that impressions for good shall be made upon their minds. The feeling of gratitude and thanksgiving that I have in my heart for the teachers that I had as a child in the Thirteenth Ward Sunday School will last, I am sure, through time and all eternity.—Era, 42:135.

CHURCH PROGRAM, PUBLICATIONS, AND INSTITUTIONS

Church Programsa-Grant, Heber J.TPCHURCH PROGRAM AND ORGANIZATIONS. I have always enjoyed my labors in the Sabbath school and the Mutual Improvement Association, and I rejoice in the wonderful growth of the Sunday school interest among the Latter-day Saints, and in the remarkable advancement that has been made. I feel that there is nothing in which we can take more pride and satisfaction than the increased knowledge, as to the principles of the gospel, and the plan of life and salvation, that our children have today, in comparison with what many of us had when we were children.

Church Programsa-Grant, Heber J.TP74With our Church schools, religion classes, Sabbath schools, and Mutual Improvement Associations, it would be a very difficult matter to find, among the intelligent young men and women that have attended these institutions, one who could not stand up and speak intelligently for fifteen minutes or a half hour on the principles of the gospel. I rejoice when I realize that this is the case, and that there has been such an advancement among our children in the knowledge of the gospel and their ability to explain the same and to give a reason for the hope that is within them.

Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TP74The destiny of the Latter-day Saints is very great. I realize that the prophecies that have been made with reference to this people will all have to be fulfilled. The little stone cut from the mountain without hands is to roll forth and fill the whole earth. I realize that it will be necessary that our children be fitted, qualified, and prepared by education, by study, and also by faith in God, our Heavenly Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ, if they successfully fulfill their destiny. That the Saints will fulfill their destiny, that they will accomplish all that God desires them to accomplish, I have no doubt. Whether we, as individuals, shall do all that is possible for us to do is a personal matter. I have often said in my remarks to the Saints, that each and every one of us are the architects of our own lives; that God will bless us in proportion to our faithfulness and diligence.—CR, April, 1902: 92-94.

75COTTAGE SUNDAY SCHOOLS AND RELIGIOUS EDUCATION. I have been appointed tonight to speak on cottage Sunday schools. I wish to say to the Latter-day Saints that wherever there is opportunity to have cottage Sunday schools, and get our young people to attend who are not attending our regular Sunday schools, we want them organized.

75We want all the young people to have the benefits of attending school. We don't want a single, solitary one of our children neglected. We understand that people who are not of us are establishing schools in private homes. It is said that the Catholics boast that if they can have the children to educate until they are thirteen years of age, they will defy the world to turn them away from Catholicism. If they can make this boast, then if we as fathers and mothers and teachers in the Sabbath schools do our duty, we can defy the world to turn our little ones away from the gospel of Jesus Christ.

75Let the Latter-day Saints be alive and looking after every one of their children, and then there is no danger of their being stolen; and one of the best ways is to have these cottage Sunday schools where there is no opportunity for our children to get to the regular Sunday schools.—CR, October, 1900: 74 (Sunday School Section).

75CONCERNING THE MISSION OF THE IMPROVEMENT ERA. The Lord states in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery:

And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great will be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!" (D. and C. 18:15.)

76Every subscriber to the Era has done something in this line. I have no doubt whatever but that many souls have been brought to a knowledge of the gospel in a large measure through the instrumentality of the Era, because its contents have always been of a missionary character.

76The Era has no excuse for living, only as it shall be able to go as an instrument to preach, sustain and uphold the truths of the gospel of the Master as revealed to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith. . . . It has been true to this calling.—Era, 15:650.

76Personally, I would not do without the valuable instructions in the Era for ten times the price of the subscription. Many complain that they can get a larger eastern paper for less, but this only shows that they do not know how to estimate real value. Life eternal is the pearl of great price that we are after, and little if anything to aid us in securing it is to be found in the eastern magazines, if they do print more matter; but much is printed that will cause us to lose this, the greatest of all God's gifts to man. If the Era had done nothing but supply the elders in the mission fields with the magazine free, it is worthy of the support of all of the Saints.—Letter from Liverpool to Edward H. Anderson, October 10, 1906.

76The Era gives pleasure and profit to every faithful member of the Church who reads it; and it has a tendency to inspire every reader with a desire to have his friends share the same pleasure, and partake of the spirit of the gospel breathed from every page.—Era, 15:648.

Relief Societya-Grant, Heber J.TP76TRIBUTE TO WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS. To my mind, there is no gathering among the Latter-day Saints where the company is any finer and where there is a more intelligent and greater desire for the welfare of the people than when our Relief Society sisters meet together and when our Young Women [of the M.I.A.] meet together.—RSM, 24:626.

Relief Societya-Grant, Heber J.TP77The spirit of the Relief Society is one of charity, long suffering, forgiveness, and that is the finest spirit in the world.—RSM, 23:340.

77ADVICE ON BUILDING MEETINGHOUSES. The Latter-day Saints as a people have been "Keeping Up With Lizzie" in building meetinghouses . . . and running into debt, notwithstanding the letter that was sent from the president's office, telling the people not to run in debt one dollar for their meetinghouses. Today there are meetinghouses in the Church on which the people do not even pay the interest on the money they have borrowed . . . . It is a heavy burden on their shoulders, and they are threatened with suit, or foreclosure, on the meetinghouses of the Church, just because somebody had a little better meetinghouse than they had. . . . We used to take from two to five years to build a meetinghouse; now we rush them through, run into debt; and we are reaping the harvest. We reap what we sow.—RSM, 19:300-301.

Church Governmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP77LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE CHURCH. I thoroughly enjoy my labors, as one of the General Authorities of the Church, in visiting the various stakes of Zion. I find, as a rule, integrity and devotion and love of the work of the Lord in the hearts of those who preside and a desire on their part to labor. This is very pleasing indeed to me. I regret, however, that there is a growing tendency, as was referred to here by the President this morning, for many who occupy places of responsibility to desire to step down and out. I believe that the spirit which possessed the people thirty-six years ago to remain in office was stronger then than now. When, as a young man, I was made the president of the Tooele Stake, although I considered it quite a financial sacrifice to be president, and to have to leave my business here which was reasonably prosperous—it never entered my head but what I was to stay there all the days of my life. I never thought of anything else. I remember, however, saying to President Lyman: "Brother Lyman, I am willing to have you send me on a mission for ten years, with the understanding that when the ten years are up, I may go back to Salt Lake City where my business, my mother, my relatives, and my natural associations are." The thought of asking for a release at the end of ten years or twenty years, provided I was wanted and possessed the ability to continue as president of the stake, never entered my head. I felt this way because of the training I got in listening, in this tabernacle, to President Brigham Young, and others in my early days. Also in listening to my own bishop, the late Edwin D. Woolley and associates, in the Thirteenth Ward. I felt that when the Lord honored any man with a place or position in this Church, that the first thing to which he should be loyal was the magnifying of that position.—CR, October, 1916: 31.

Sustaininga-Grant, Heber J.TP78SUSTAIN THE INSTITUTIONS OF ZION. I say, what doth it profit to go to the ends of the earth and proclaim the gospel of Jesus Christ, and yet fail to do your duty here in laboring for the advancement of God's kingdom? I say to the Latter-day Saints, be honest with God, pay your tithes and your offerings, support every institution of Zion, build up the Church of Christ, pray for the authorities of the Church, and then sustain them in every labor and in all that they undertake to do.

78I see that my time has expired, but I want to make just one suggestion. I rejoice in the financial growth of the Church organ; I rejoice in the increase of seven thousand subscribers to our paper, which belongs to the Latter-day Saints. I say, continue the good work. Subscribe to The Deseret News. Have it in your homes. Read the sermons that are published there; read the teachings of our Heavenly Father that come to us through His servants, that are published in that paper. Do not allow your selfishness and your penuriousness to cause you, in order to save a few dollars, to not have the inspiration of the Lord through His servants, as published in that paper. Sustain this paper. Why? Because it is yours. Because the prophet of God desires its success; because it is fighting for Zion, and because it desires the triumph of Zion. Sustain every other good institution and God will bless you.—CR, April, 1900: 24.

78ON THE DESERET NEWS. Again I am speaking for the Church when I ask Latter-day Saints to sustain the newspaper published by the Church. I have gone into the homes of bishops and other leading families in this Church, and have failed to find The Deseret News. We desire the support of The Deseret News because it is your paper. We are the Church and the Church owns The Deseret News, and if you make it a great financial success you will be sharing in that success because it is your paper. And I want to say to the Latter-day Saints that there have been a score or more of speeches published in The News in the past year, nearly every one of which to my mind was worth the price of The Deseret News.—CR, April, 1925: 10-11.

Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TP79PREACHING AND LIVING. No man can teach the gospel of Jesus Christ under the inspiration of the living God and with power from on high unless he is living it.—Era, 41:263.

Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TP79Preaching and talking mean but very little unless our lives are lived in perfect harmony with our teachings.—RSM, 23:339.

Work of the Lorda-Grant, Heber J.TP79In all the work that we do let us not lose sight of the spiritual part of it.—RSM, 24:628.
