Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

79BOOK TWO

THE CHURCH AND SOCIETY

Mission of the Churcha-Grant, Heber J.TP"The mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is one of peace. It aims to prepare the peoples of the world for the second coming of Christ, and for the inauguration of that blessed day when the millennium shall come and Christ shall reign as King of kings, standing at the head of the universal brotherhood of man. —HEBER J. GRANT, The Improvement Era, Volume 23:473.

79CHAPTER VII

83THE MORMON CHURCH AND PEOPLE

THE CHURCH AND ITS DESTINY

Revelationa-Grant, Heber J.TPThe whole foundation of this Church rests firmly upon the inspiration of the living God through Joseph Smith the Prophet.—CR, October, 1931: 7.

83The Church is growing in power and ability and strength along all lines.—Era, 39:131.

83This gospel has been proclaimed now for over one hundred years all over the world, in every land and every clime where religious liberty has been granted, and it has gathered out people from every denomination under heaven.—CR, October, 1931: 8-9.

83AN APPRECIATION OF THE CHURCH. It is a wonderful thing to be connected with any institution that is built upon service, upon giving, and not receiving.—RSM, 24:624.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP83PROGRESS OF THE CHURCH. There is no such thing as standing still. The Church is not standing still. We have the evidence today of its growth, of its increased tithes, the increased results of the missionary work all over the world, and the increased efficiency of the work in the colleges, the Latter-day Saints' University, and academies. There has also been a wonderful growth in the Sabbath schools. The work of God is progressing, and the power and influence of the adversary and those who are working against us are waning. We find, for instance, that the forces that used to work against us in Washington, seeking to take from us our rights and liberty, have disappeared; and many of the men that were active and full of bitterness toward the Latter-day Saints have learned to respect and honor them, and are willing to speak a good word for them. I want to say to you that I never enjoyed a little speech more in all my life than that of Robert N. Baskin, one of the supreme court judges, at Saltair, on the birthday of our late President Brigham Young, last June [1901]. I rejoiced exceedingly to hear Judge Baskin paying a high tribute to the Pioneers and to President Brigham Young. He is not the only honest, straight-forward man who was once very much opposed to the Latter-day Saints, who today takes pleasure in bearing testimony as to the honor and integrity of the Mormon people.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP84I rejoice in the great growth of the Church, in fulfillment of the prophecy of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that the Latter-day Saints should be driven, and many put to death by their persecutors, and others lose their lives in consequence of exposure and disease; and that some should live to go to the Rocky Mountains and assist in building settlements and cities, live to see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains. I rejoice that we have become a mighty people. The growth of the Latter-day Saints, in view of all the opposition and persecution against the people, is simply marvelous, and we are being looked upon in wonder and amazement by intelligent people.—CR, April, 1902: 80-81.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP84I rejoice in the growth and in the advancement of the work of God here on earth. In hearing the remarks that have been made in this conference of the great growth of the people I was reminded of being with President Wilford Woodruff, standing in a wagon in Idaho, some fifteen years ago next May, and talking to a half a dozen, or a dozen young people that were located there, and I was also very forcibly reminded of the remarks of that prophet of God who made them. I remember that the young people were somewhat discouraged on Sand Creek, as they looked around over land without a tree, without a shrub except sagebrush, without so much as a log cabin. Brother Woodruff said to the young people: "Be not discouraged; be not disheartened, because God's blessing is upon this land. It will only be a little time before there will be prosperous and happy settlements of the Latter-day Saints here. You feel that you have gone away from your friends, that you are almost out of the world, but it will be only a short time when you will have a meetinghouse, and a schoolhouse and all of the facilities here that you had at home before you came here. God will bless and multiply the land." What is the result today? On that spot of ground stands the town of Iona, the headquarters of one of the stakes of Zion, with about five thousand people instead of six or seven young people; the words of the Prophet Wilford Woodruff have been fulfilled to the very letter.—CR, April, 1899: 28.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP85GROWTH OF THE GENERAL CONFERENCES. The gatherings here today . . . are an evidence to me that the Latter-day Saints are interested in the gospel, that they are anxious to hear what may be said to them by those who shall speak during the conference. If there is any one thing more than another that is not calculated to inspire a speaker, it is the privilege of talking to empty benches. I have had that privilege, in years gone by, when speaking in the first meeting of our conference. The gallery was not often opened, and the body of the house more than held the congregation, years ago. Therefore, I am very happy indeed to see this large gathering. To me it is an evidence of improvement among the Latter-day Saints; it indicates a growth of their faith, and of their interest in the teachings of the servants of the Lord.—CR, April, 1908: 26.

Persecutiona-Grant, Heber J.TP85ENEMIES CANNOT HURT US. Our enemies have never done anything that has injured this work of God, and they never will. I look around, I read, I reflect, and I ask the question, Where are the men of influence, of power and prestige, who have worked against the Latter-day Saints? Where is the reputation, for honor and courage, of the governors of Missouri and Illinois, the judges, and all others who have come here to Utah on special missions against the Latter-day Saints? Where are there people to do them honor? They cannot be found. Where are the people to do honor to T. B. H. Stenhouse, who wrote a book purporting to tell all about the Mormons, and who did not have the courage to sign his name to the book, but hid behind the petticoats of his wife, by attaching her name to the book. (Laughter.) Where are the men who have assailed this work? Where is their influence? They have faded away like dew before the sun. We need have no fears, we Latter-day Saints. God will continue to sustain this work; He will sustain the right. If we are loyal, if we are true, if we are worthy of this gospel, of which God has given us a testimony, there is no danger that the world can ever injure us. We can never be injured, my brethren and sisters, by any mortals, except ourselves. If we fail to serve God, if we fail to do right, then we rob ourselves of the ability and power to grow, to increase in faith and knowledge, to have power with God, and with the righteous.—CR, April, 1909: 110.

86We as a people are set upon a hill, so to speak. We have a great work to perform, and we are performing it splendidly.—RSM, 24:627.

86GROWTH OF THE ORGANIZED STAKES. I recall that we did not have thirty stakes when, fifty-two years ago, I was made a member of the Council of the Twelve [October, 1882]. I recall that when visiting Rexburg, then a branch of a ward in Cache Valley, we had but thirteen hundred people north of Cache Valley. We now have, I am sure, more than one hundred thousand in that section, counting those that are in Canada.

86Just before becoming one of the apostles I traveled from Tooele to Salt Lake City, then through Salt Lake, Davis, Weber, and Box Elder stakes to Brigham City, and two days and a fraction west, sleeping on the ground two nights, to visit a branch of the Grantsville Ward of the Tooele Stake of Zion. We now have half a dozen stakes west of Brigham City.

86I rejoice in the organization of new stakes in California, and of one in New York. When I think of the opposition toward the Church in early days by the people of New York; of the opposition toward our people in Ohio, and in Far West; of their expulsion from Missouri under an exterminating order of the governor of the state; when I think that Joseph Smith and others of his companions were condemned to be shot by order of a court martial, I am grateful for a change in sentiment toward our people.—CR, April, 1935: 6.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP86THE "CONSTITUTION" OF THE CHURCH. We hear a great deal about obeying the constitution of the United States. What is the matter with our obeying the constitution of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? What is the matter with our being honest in obeying the laws of the Almighty God by paying our tithing? There are a great many people who are very active in preaching this Gospel who fail to obey it themselves. Let us obey, and then we shall find that there is no power on earth or beneath the earth that can stop us in good works.—CR, April, 1931: 130.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP87THE DESTINY OF THE CHURCH. I am very sorry indeed that some remarks that I made at the close of our June conference were not taken down in shorthand. There was some indication by some of the speakers that unless this Church grew and "progressed" with the present age, so to speak, like other churches, it would be doomed to failure. Any Latter-day Saint that thinks for one minute that this Church is going to fail is not a really converted Latter-day Saint. There will be no failure in this Church. It has been established for the last time, never to be given to another people and never to be thrown down.—CS, September 8, 1934: 1.

87INCREASE OF CHURCH BUILDINGS. Nothing short of this perfect and absolute knowledge that we possess as a people would enable us to accomplish anywhere near the things that we are accomplishing. To think that in these days of depression and trouble we are able to spend millions of dollars of money to build meetinghouses! Nearly every Sunday, for weeks at a stretch, I have had to dedicate meetinghouses and every time the buildings have been full to overflowing with those who have attended these meetings. People have labored in some cases for ten long years in raising their share of the money to build their meetinghouse.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP87We are growing splendidly. There is a feeling of absolute confidence. There is no fear on our part of the final triumph of the work of God.—CR, April, 1939: 15.

87APPRECIATION FOR THE TESTIMONIES OF CHURCH OFFICERS. I am grateful when I think of the men who have stood at the head of this Church, and the other leading officials, giving their time and their talents, making sacrifices (that is, sacrifices so far as the things of this world are concerned), and having a perfect and abiding knowledge that God lives, that He hears and answers our prayers; having a knowledge, beyond a shadow of doubt, that God did appear to Joseph Smith and did introduce His Son to him; having a perfect knowledge that the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods were restored to the earth by the men who held the keys in the meridian of time.—Era, 42:267.

Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saintsa-Grant, Heber J.TP88THE REORGANIZED CHURCH. Never have I rejoiced more in my life, that my lot has been cast among the Latter-day Saints, that I have been born in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, than I did in my recent visit to the east, when I came in contact with members of the Reorganized Church. When I visited Kirtland, Ohio, and saw there the temple, and realized the fact that at the time it was erected by the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother, that it was a mighty work; when I considered the ordinances that are being performed in our temples here in Utah; when I reflected that we have the gospel in its fulness; when I thought that they have the temple but know not how to put it to use; when I realized that they are absolutely devoid of the inspiration of God, I rejoiced that my lot had been cast among the Latter-day Saints.

Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saintsa-Grant, Heber J.TP88I have often been surprised that so much of the time of our elders had been wasted in the world in discussing with members of the Reorganized Church as to which Church was in very deed the Church of Christ. I have been astonished at this for the reason that it seems to me an utter waste of time to undertake to discuss with a man, after you have knocked him down, as to who holds the ground. We read that in heaven there was a rebellion and that God, our Heavenly Father, cast out one-third of the hosts of heaven with Lucifer at their head. We have no account after they were cast out that God stopped to argue the question with those that had been cast out as to who held the ground. In the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, about one-half, if not more, of its members are those who have been cast out of the real Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They do not begin to have one-tenth the number we have, and why should we waste our time in arguing with them as to who holds the situation, and as to which is the Church of Christ? If the prophecies of Daniel and other prophecies concerning this latter-day work are true, and we know they are true, then is the mountain of the Lord's house to be established in the tops of the mountains? Here it is, and here it is rolling forth and will fill the whole earth. Can any of these claims be made by this shadow, so to speak, of a reorganized church? We know that Joseph Smith prophesied that the Latter-day Saints should be driven from city to city; that they should be driven from county to county; and that they should be driven from state to state; and finally, that they should be driven out of the confines of the United States to these Rocky Mountains and become a great, a prosperous, a mighty people. We know that this has been fulfilled to the letter. The Reorganized Church can lay no claims to being persecuted and driven from city to city, from county to county, from state to state, or of being driven to the Rocky Mountains. Not only did Joseph Smith proclaim that the day should come when a city, a county, and a state should be arrayed against this people called Latter-day Saints, but he said, "The time shall come when the whole United States shall be arrayed against this people." Not a state militia, but "the army of the United States shall be arrayed against the Mormons." And the day did come. I remember in my childhood days when the army of the United States came against this people—not a state militia, but the army of the United States of America. Every one of these predictions of the Prophet Joseph Smith has utterly failed if there is one claim that amounts to anything in the claims of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, because the United States of America has never lifted its hand nor sent its army against or confiscated the property of the Reorganized Church. Never has one thing been done by the United States of America against that church.—CR, April, 1899: 27-28.

THE CHURCH AND ITS PUBLIC RELATIONS

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Non-Mormons, Social Relations withTPGOVERNMENTAL AND PUBLIC RELATIONS OF THE CHURCH. When I realize that for years and years not a single person from Utah was ever able to secure employment in Washington, and that today we have several hundred of our people employed there, and when I realize that the delegates from Utah were expelled years ago, and today [1930] one of the apostles of the Church [Reed Smoot] is recognized as one of the foremost and one of the most outstanding senators in the United States and respected by the president and his colleagues. I rejoice in this wonderful change./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Non-Mormons, Social Relations withTP90I rejoice in having had ex-President Taft say to me when I met him upon a trip to Washington: "Mr. Grant, you did not call on me the last time you were here. Now I want it understood that you are never to come to Washington without coming to see me. There is in my heart a warm feeling for your people. I have great respect for them, and I want you to call on me whenever you are here."/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Non-Mormons, Social Relations withTP90He was in such a condition of ill health that I couldn't call upon him the last time I was in Washington. I rejoice in the friendship for our people of every president of the United States from President Theodore Roosevelt down to the present time./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Non-Mormons, Social Relations withTP90I rejoice in the friendship of Ulysses S. Grant. He sent out many officials whose work and only object seemed to be to destroy our people politically and to take away from us the franchise, and to do everything against us that they possibly could. But he came here himself and met the people. He saw twenty thousand vigorous, fine children on the side hill out near where the Catholic cathedral now stands, waving American flags, and young girls all dressed in white, singing a song. And as his carriage stopped and they welcomed the president of the United States, he said: "Whose children are those? Are they Mormons?" When he was told that they were, he said: "I have been lied to outrageously." He went home and chopped off the heads of the officials, figuratively speaking, whom he had sent out here, and then sent us some good men. To everybody who undertook to tell him untruths about us, he said: "I have been there. I have met them. I know."—CR, April, 1930: 186-187./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Non-Mormons, Social Relations withTP91I have just returned from a trip to the east, and I rejoiced as I mingled among the people to find the good feeling there regarding the Latter-day Saints. I was impressed with the contrast between the feeling now and what it was some twenty years ago, when it fell to my lot to travel a good deal, and to mingle with business men. The change in sentiment toward the Latter-day Saints is very marked indeed, and I thank the Lord that the prejudice and the hatred that there used to be in the hearts of the people, from New York to San Francisco, has disappeared, and I will thank the Lord when it disappears at home. This is about the only place today, thank the Lord, that there is any hatred toward the Latter-day Saints.—CR, October, 1909: 28./

91CENTENNIAL RELATIONS OF THE CHURCH. We rejoice in the marvelous [centennial] conference that was held here six months ago [April, 1930]. We think of this building being filled for thirty evenings by people who attended the wonderful pageant that was presented. It is another marvel to contemplate the fact that publicity was given to millions of people regarding that great pageant. I have here on exhibit and I wish to show you what is merely a collection of newspaper clippings regarding our centennial celebration. Over three thousand newspapers gave us favorable notices. The great change that has come about since the days of my boyhood in the general attitude toward this people is almost beyond contemplation or expectation.

91I can remember when I was the junior member of the Council of the Twelve, forty-eight years ago this month, that during my first trips away from home, almost invariably, wherever I went I found opposition. I found ill-will toward the Latter-day Saints. I found men so full of bitterness toward us that they said if they had their own way the Mormons would be shut up in their tabernacle and the guns of Fort Douglas be turned upon them. Today, wherever I go I find the opposite feeling. I find good-will. I find kindness. I find readiness and willingness on the part of newspapers to give us favorable public notices.—CR, October, 1930: 2-3.

92ANTI-MORMON PROPAGANDA. While I was in Japan, articles were published against us. One was an extract from a sermon of the late President Brigham Young, in which he said, "We have in our midst the biggest liars, the meanest devils that ever walked on the face of the earth"; so on and so forth. That was quoted in the paper. When I sent home and secured a copy of the sermon in full, I went to the editor of that paper and showed him the sequence to those words—"But with God's help we will cast them out." Do you think I could get that paper to publish it? Not a bit of it. Tracts against the Latter-day Saints are circulated all over the world, clear to Japan, with this extract from the sermon of Brigham Young, (and those circulating them know they are misleading,) without the following qualifications: "God knows that we have never sustained them, that I have never sustained them, that I do not approve of them, and that we will cast them out." And yet, this is one of the weapons that is used against us. But it will fail. It will fail as such weapons always do fail.

92Accusations like this, that are published all over the world, must fail when the truth is known.

92I called on an editor in London, who had published about ten columns of the vilest kind of matter against the Latter-day Saints, and asked him to take one single column in refutation, and he refused it. I presented letters of introduction from leading influential men in America, stating that I was a gentleman of unquestioned integrity, and that my word was as good as my bond; but he would not take a word from me. He said, "We have published all we care to publish on the Mormon question." I said, "But all you have published is lies, and I know it, and I now ask you to publish one-tenth as much truth." He declined again. His name was Robinson. I arose and started as if to leave the office—I did not intend to go, but I put my hat on and pretended that I was going. I stopped, when I got to the door, turned around, and again took off my two-story hat, and said to him:

93"My friend, if I remember correctly, your name is Robinson?"

93"Yes," he said, "that is my name."

93"Did you ever hear tell of Phil Robinson?"

93"Yes."

93"Is he an honest and honorable man?"

93"Yes."

93"At the time of the first great Boer war, was he the correspondent of the London Daily Telegraph, one of your greatest newspapers?"

93"Yes."

93"Anything he wrote, would you accept as truth?"

93"Certainly."

93Then I said, "Spend a couple of shillings and buy his book, Sinners and Saints. Then you will find that everything you have published in your paper about the Mormons is a lie."

93He said, "You surprise me."

93I said, "You are not the first newspaper man who has been surprised, when it comes to the Mormon question."

93Then he said, "Maybe you'd better write us something, Mr. Grant; make it brief; don't make it more than a half a column."

93Think of the liberality of a great newspaper, one of the great newspapers of London, that had published from seven to a dozen columns of lies, and then would give only a half column to answer! I wrote it—or to be frank, I suggested the ideas to Brother Richard Shipp, and he wrote it for me. I sent the communication to them, and I got it back—as has been the case with many newspapers—with a printed circular stating that the editor was very sorry, but he did not have room for it. Whenever I get one of these circulars I always think of the little saying that, "Polite lying is a gentlemanly accomplishment; it lubricates business, varnishes unpleasant facts, and promotes friendship."—CR, April, 1909: 114-115.

THE MORMON PEOPLE

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ConversionTPWe have converted people from the midnight-sun country of Scandinavia down to South Africa; we have converted people from Canada to South America, in the countries and islands of the Pacific, and in many other lands. I have met many people who have belonged to as many as four churches, and who never found peace, contentment, joy, and satisfaction, until they found the gospel of Jesus Christ, as established again upon the earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith.—Era, 41:519./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Mission of the ChurchTP94THE MISSION OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS. The mission of the Latter-day Saints is a great one. We not only proclaim the gospel to all nations, kindreds, and peoples, but we also have a work to perform for the dead. We are not, as we are accused of being, narrow-minded. We believe that even our enemies will be saved in the Lord's own due time. Read the revelations given upon the subject and you will find that all mankind, except those who have had the testimony of Christ and rejected it, denying the blood of Christ, will ultimately be saved.—JH, September 9, 1888: 2./

94I have an abiding and perfect faith in the Latter-day Saints, and a perfect and abiding faith in the triumph of this great country of ours. It is a land choice above all other lands, so the Lord has declared. I am thoroughly converted to the fact that in no other part of the world except America could the Church of Jesus Christ have been again established on the earth.—RSM, 25:12.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Church GrowthTP94THE LATTER-DAY SAINT PEOPLE AND THEIR DESTINY. The Latter-day Saints are indeed, as the Prophet Joseph said they should be, a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains, and we are simply in our infancy. We are beginning to grow and to become a mighty people, but we are as nothing to what we will be. There is no question in my mind but what the Lord is going to multiply the Latter-day Saints and bless them more abundantly in the future than He has ever done in the past, provided of course we are humble and diligent; provided we seek for the advancement of God's kingdom, and not to do our own mind and will. We have the gospel of Jesus Christ restored to us; we have the plan of life and salvation; we have the ordinances of the gospel not only for the living but also for the dead. We have all that is necessary, not only for our own salvation, but that we may be in very deed "Saviors upon Mount Zion," and enter into the temples of our God and save our ancestors who have died without a knowledge of the gospel.—CR, April, 1899: 28./

95THE STRENGTH OF THE SAINTS. Now, it is tithing, donations of all kinds, one eternal round of calls, one eternal labor, that the Latter-day Saints are performing, that bring to them a strength, power, and force that the people of the world know nothing of. The Saints develop by the very exercise that they have.—YWJ, 30:354.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Church MembersTP95In the faithfulness of this people, and in their liberality, there are no other people like them. With all our faults and failings there are no other people so devoted to the Lord, there are no other people who make such an impression on those not of our faith, because we live nearer to the Lord and nearer to our professions than most people.—Era, 41:327./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Church Membersa-Grant, Heber J.TP95Every Latter-day Saint who is loyal to the principles of the gospel is not seeking wealth; he is not asking himself the question, "What have I?" and "What can I gain?" The true Latter-day Saint is asking, "What can I do to better myself, to encourage those with whom I am associated, and to uplift the children of God?" That is the inspiration that comes to every Latter-day Saint who realizes the force of this gospel that we have espoused.—CR, October, 1909: 30./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Church MembersTP95OUR HERITAGE OF VIGOR AND HEALTH. We should be proud of our heritage, and each of us should be proud beyond our power of expression that God has seen fit to give to us the gospel of His Son Jesus Christ—the plan of life and salvation—not only the plan of life and salvation in the great hereafter, but that which gives us the laws that if observed in this life will bring health and vigor of body and of mind to us.—RSM, 25:12./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Faith and WorksTP95LATTER-DAY SAINT STANDARDS. The Latter-day Saints, as a people, have the greatest number of preachers in all the world, for the reason that nearly every lay member has been on one or more missions of from two to five years, proclaiming the gospel, without money and without price. We are a nation—small nation, so to speak—of preachers. But the greatest and the most wonderful preacher among the Latter-day Saints is the man or the woman who lives the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. "Show me thy faith by thy works" is the thing that counts. James said that he would show his faith by his works, and that faith without works is dead. It is like the body without the spirit. . . . It is by our works, our diligence, our faithfulness, our energy, that we can preach this gospel. The people of the world are beginning to recognize, to know and to comprehend the fact that the fruits of the gospel of Jesus Christ, as taught by the Latter-day Saints, are good fruits. . . . The one great standard laid down by the Savior of the world, was, "By their fruits ye shall know them." For happiness in their homes, for contentment, prosperity, business integrity, sobriety, for observance of the laws of God and of man, I am at the defiance of the world to find any people superior to the Latter-day Saints. I am not speaking now of Mormons who do not keep the commandments of God.—CR, October, 1922: 185-186./

96MOBILITY OF CHURCH MEMBERSHIP. I would like to appeal to the Latter-day Saints who are thinking of moving from one place to another, from Canada on the north to Mexico on the south . . . that before moving they do some consulting with or writing to the presidents of stakes and others in the section where they contemplate going. It should be ascertained if they can identify themselves with some of the regular organizations of the Church instead of going beyond the bounds of the Church, and then writing and asking us to please send some missionaries to hunt them up. They really do belong to the Church, but . . . they have gotten so far away everybody seems to have forgotten them.

96Move where you cannot be forgotten and where there is an organized stake or ward of the Church. There is plenty of opportunity in the organized stakes of Zion for those who want to change their location here in the United States and in Canada.—CR, April, 1926: 162.

96THE AMERICAN INDIANS. We have assisted the Indians in Arizona and in different parts of Utah and Montana, and have done everything within our power for the benefit of this people, and we look forward to the day when hundreds and thousands of them will be abundantly blessed of the Lord, and when they shall eventually become a white and a delightsome people.—CR, April, 1926: 138.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.UnityTP97WE MUST BE UNITED. Unless we as a people are united in our faith and in our labors, we cannot be acceptable in the sight of our Heavenly Father.—JH, 1892, October 30: 4; DN, December 17, 1892./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.UnityTP97There is a lack of unity among the Saints. There is a disposition among the people to think more of their own interests than those of the work of God. It is our duty to follow the counsel given us by the leaders of the Church—to seek first the Kingdom of God.—JH, October 4, 1889: 5; DN, October 5, 1889./

97THE FIBRE OF THE PEOPLE. Never be found among the number that try to see how little they can do; but always be found among the number that try to see how much they can do.—JH, 1892, October 30: 5; DN, 1892, December 17.

97And if any man shall seek to build up himself, and seeketh not my counsel, he shall have no power, and his folly shall be made manifest.97Seek ye; and keep all your pledges one with another; and covet not that which is thy brother's. (D. and C. 136:19-20.)

#%%#97I cannot think of anything that appeals to me as being the mind and the will of the Lord stronger than the last words that I have read, namely: "Covet not that which is thy brother's."/

97I want to impress upon the minds of the Latter-day Saints not to covet that which belongs to any public institution, or that which belongs to any city, or county, or the government of the United States. Unless I have been misinformed, many people have said, speaking of the distribution by the government of supplies to the people: "Well, others are getting some, why should not I get some of it?"

97I believe that there is a growing disposition among the people to try to get something from the government of the United States with little hope of ever paying it back. I think this is all wrong. I believe that there is not that same moral sense among the people today that there was forty-five years ago.—CR, October, 1933: 4-5.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsTP98MORMONS AS CHRISTIANS. I remember delivering a sermon nearly a year ago—perhaps it was longer ago than that, I do not remember the exact date—in which I referred to the fact that some people had said that if the Mormons would only do away with their belief in Joseph Smith and his prophecies they might now really, with the progress they are making and the changes they are making, etc., be counted in the Christian family./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsTP98Inasmuch as the Church to which you and I belong is the Church of Jesus Christ, established by the Savior Himself through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith, I do not think we need to worry about being admitted into the various Christian denominations. The one thing that you and I need to worry about, and the only thing, is with regard to keeping the commandments of the Lord, living our religion as Latter-day Saints.—CR, October, 1931: 4-5./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Meetings, ChurchTP98ON ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. We should go to meeting to learn. We should ask God to strengthen us to overcome evil.—JH, September 30, 1888: 2; DN, October 1, 1888./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Meetings, ChurchTP98There are some who say they will not go to meeting because they know just who will talk and what they will say. I realize that such persons are becoming indifferent to the spiritual things of the kingdom. I know people, who, in the old world, would go many miles to a meeting because they were in love with the gospel. They will not cross the street now because they have lost that love. Just as surely as failing to eat will cause our physical frames to shrink and die, just so sure neglect to supply our spiritual natures will bring death to them.—JH, September 30, 1888: 2; DN, October 1, 1888./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP98A CERTIFICATE OF CHARACTER. I rejoice, as I say, beyond all my ability to express my feelings in language, in the wonderful change that has come about; for the friendship that exists for our people. I say it, and I say it without fear of contradiction, that today the word Mormon is a certificate of character in all parts of the United States and in many other parts of the world where we are known./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP99When I say Mormons, I mean those who are living their religion. No man, woman, or child, who lives up to the teachings that have come to us through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith and who is keeping the commandments of the gospel—there is no such person whose character is not above reproach.—CS, November 11, 1933: 5./

99I am reminded of an incident wherein a young man applied for a prominent position for which his predecessor had received a salary and commission of a little over thirty thousand dollars a year. This was in one of the outlying states where the Mormons have but few members in comparison with others. In this particular state I do not think we have five percent of the entire population. The man who had the position to offer said to the young man: "You are a Mormon?"

99"Oh no," said the young man. "I have outgrown that."

99The gentleman said: "Well, we are considering your application with others. Come around at a later date."

99In the meantime he sent for the president of the stake and said: "What is the matter with that young man?" (He thought that by announcing that he had outgrown Mormonism he would get the job.) "Unless you can vouch for his honesty," said this gentleman to the stake president, "he will not get the job. What has he done?"

99The stake president said: "Well, he has been studying psychology, and he thinks he has outgrown Mormonism. But I can say to you that I think he is an honorable and energetic young man."

99"Then," said the gentleman, "we will give him the position."—CR, April, 1930: 188.

99I call to mind that upon one occasion a man ridiculed the Latter-day Saints, saying, "You people are always happy. If a man hits a Mormon and knocks him down, the Mormon thanks the Lord because he needed a little chastisement; and if you hit at a Mormon and miss him, he thanks the Lord for not getting hit."—CR, April, 1933: 12.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP100We have now become known for what we are—upright, God-fearing people; and just in proportion as we live the gospel, knowing that it is the truth, will we continue to break down prejudice, build good will, and draw other men to us./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP100This condition has been brought about by the fact that we have knowledge, and that so many of our people have lived up to it. Every man among us carries on his shoulders the reputation of his Church, and as you and I live the gospel of Jesus Christ, we bring credit to the work of the Lord that has been established again upon the earth in this dispensation.—Era, 41:327./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP100THE TESTIMONIES OF THE PEOPLE AND THE WORK OF THE CHURCH. My heart goes out in gratitude to all those who are working at home and abroad for the spread of the gospel. I am very thankful indeed that we have the truth. I am very grateful that the Latter-day Saints all over the world have a personal, individual, and abiding testimony of the divinity of the work in which we are engaged. But for that testimony men would not think, or women either, of making the marvelous sacrifices that they do make at home and abroad, for the advancement of the work of the Lord.—Era, 42:267./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Church GrowthTP100I rejoice in the advancement in art, in literature, and in science, and in everything that tends to the progress and accomplishments of our people. I believe that anybody who would stop to reflect that the Latter-day Saints come from every nation in the world and that they bring the culture and advancement of those nations with them, as well as the blood of the various nations, will agree that the mingling of the blood of these nations of the world is bound to bring forth a people, if they remain true to the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, that are going to be at the head and not at the tail, figuratively speaking.—70th Birthday Pamphlet, November, 1926: 16./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP100Many have said that the Mormon people were better than their religion. I heard a magnificent talk from this stand a few Sundays ago by Brother Joseph S. Wells, in which he repudiated this statement. He told how utterly impossible it is for a people to be better than the gospel of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ. I don't know that I ever listened to remarks that impressed me more profoundly than his did upon that occasion, and I endorse them with all my heart. No man lives today, in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who is fully living up to the teachings of the gospel of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ. By and with the help of the Lord, we are trying to do it; but there is no man in the Church of Christ who claims infallibility. We acknowledge our weaknesses, but while we acknowledge them we can also proclaim to the world our strength, strength in the knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God, and that we have the truth to proclaim to the world.—CR, October, 1907: 25./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP101WORLD USEFULNESS AND INFLUENCE. What a wonderful power we shall have with the Lord in the furtherance of His mighty purposes in the earth, if we keep His commandments. Our influence will be not only with the world, but with our own young people. Their strength and power will be multiplied if we shall succeed in having them feel the necessity of observing the commandments of God and particularly these instructions concerning the Word of Wisdom and the principles of clean and righteous living.—Era, 24:261./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP101It is not out of place to predict that the people of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will continue to thrive and prosper, spiritually and temporally, as long as they (1) keep the commandments of God and (2) walk in the way which He shall point out through His inspired servants holding the Holy Priesthood. They are a people whose faith, teachings, thrift, and temporal and spiritual progress will be a blessing and an advantage to the whole nation. A people whom none need to fear, but on the contrary, bless and welcome, because they seek to do the will of the Lord, to treat all people in conformity with the principles of justice and righteousness, themselves loyal and law-abiding, obedient to the rules and regulations of the just governments of the earth, and the vitalizing gospel of Jesus Christ, established and restored through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith by visitation of God and His Son, Jesus the Christ, who stands at the head of the great and marvelous work in which we are engaged. Their motto is "Truth and Liberty," and they would extend these to all mankind, and make all mankind partakers of the influence of peace and righteousness which accompany the true gospel of Jesus Christ—the only means by which peace and the brotherhood of man may be established in all the world.—Era, 23:474./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Gospel LivingTP102There is nothing in all the world that is of more value than so to order our lives that those who know us best shall love us; and, above all, the one thing that is of greater value than life itself is to so live that God loves us. And I can say to you that every man, woman, and child that has lived the gospel of Jesus Christ and continues to do so has the love of God Almighty, our Father in Heaven and of His Son Jesus Christ, our Redeemer.—70th Birthday Pamphlet, November, 1926: 18./

MISSIONARY WORK

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTPON CONVERTING PEOPLE TO MORMONISM. Do the elders of Israel when they go out into the world to preach the gospel hold out flattering inducements to those whom they meet to become Latter-day Saints? No. On the contrary, they tell them that if they embrace the gospel they may expect that their friends and associates will turn against them, and that their names will be cast out as evil. That is the kind of promise they make to them.—JH, July 7, 1888; DN, July 8, 1889./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP102The missionary work of the Latter-day Saints is the greatest of all the great works in all the world. We find recorded in the eighteenth section of the Doctrine and Covenants:/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP102Remember the worth of a soul is great in the sight of God; For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance. 103And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth!Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people. And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father! And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me! Behold, you have my gospel before you, and my rock, and my salvation. Ask the Father in my name, in faith believing that you shall receive, and you shall have the Holy Ghost, which manifesteth all things which are expedient unto the children of men. (D. and C. 18:10-18.)/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP103And if we have not faith we cannot please the Lord, the revelation goes on to say. We should have faith in God and not only have faith, but works also, and exhibit our works by supporting those who are in the missionary field.—CR, October, 1921: 5-6./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP103The Spirit of the Lord accompanies the elders. God blesses those who go forth to preach the gospel. If this gospel were not the truth, honest, prayerful, diligent, humble men would discover that fact. But I have yet to hear of one man in all the years that this gospel has been preached, who has gone forth to proclaim it and who has been a diligent, faithful man, who has returned and announced that he has discovered that they have the gospel of Christ in some other land or some other clime. But I have heard of thousands who have studied other gospels, tens of thousands; I have known many who have been members of many different denominations, who never found peace and joy and perfect contentment until they embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ.—CR, October, 1912: 49./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP103PARENTS AND MISSIONARY WORK. There is nothing in all the world that fathers and mothers in the Church desire so much as to have their sons go out and proclaim the gospel, and if the fathers and mothers did not have an absolute testimony of the divinity of this work they would be unwilling to send their boys out for fear some other faith or some other religion would capture them, and they would never come home.—YWJ, 30:359./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP104MISSIONARY SPIRIT. I feel sorry for the man or the woman who has never experienced the sweet joy which comes to the missionary who proclaims the gospel of Jesus Christ, who brings honest souls to a knowledge of the truth, and who hears the expressions of gratitude and thanksgiving that come from the hearts of those who have been brought by his labor to a comprehension of life eternal. So also do I feel sorrow for those who have never experienced the sweet joy resulting from reaching out their hands and helping those who were needy. Assuredly there is more blessing comes to us from giving than in accumulating; there is no question of this in my mind. There is also more blessing comes to us in going forth to proclaim the gospel of Jesus Christ, and laboring for the salvation of the souls of men, than can possibly come to us by merely having a knowledge of the truth of our religion, and then remaining at home to mingle and labor in the ordinary affairs of life, and accumulate the wealth of this world that perishes with the using. One great trouble is that we ofttimes lose sight of what is the most valuable labor for us to perform, the labor that will be most pleasing in the sight of our Heavenly Father.—CR, October, 1907: 23-24./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP104Why is it that Latter-day Saints are enabled to convert people? It is because they have the truth to offer, because they have no doubt in their minds regarding the divinity of the work in which we are engaged.—Era, 41:519./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP104I rejoice in seeing the barriers broken down whereby the gospel may be carried to all the nations of the earth.—CR, April, 1902: 61./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Missionary WorkTP104THE SUPREME OBLIGATION OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS. I want to emphasize that we as a people have one supreme thing to do, and that is to call upon the world to repent of sin, to come to God. And it is our duty above all others to go forth and proclaim the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, the restoration again to the earth of the plan of life and salvation. Appeals are coming from all over the world for more missionaries. The Latter-day Saints should so organize their affairs, and so shape their finances, that more will be ready and willing, especially those of age and experience, with a testimony and knowledge of the divinity of this work, to go forth, not only on short, but on long missions. Too many of us are gradually setting our hearts upon the things of this world. We have so much to look after, so many business interests, so many important things, so far as dollars and cents are concerned, that we are neglecting the one great thing of all; namely, the proclaiming of the gospel, and making (instead) what people call sacrifices but what actually are the exact opposite. We have in very deed the pearl of great price. We have that which is of more value than all the wealth and scientific information which the world possesses. We have the plan of life and salvation. The first great commandment was to love the Lord our God with all our hearts, might, mind, and strength; and the second was like unto it, to love our neighbors as ourselves. And the best way in the world to show our love for our neighbors is to go forth and proclaim the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, of which He has given us an absolute knowledge concerning its divinity.—CR, April, 1927: 175-176./
