Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

104CHAPTER VIII

106MORMON ECONOMICS

ELEMENTS OF PROSPERITY

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTPHOW TO ACHIEVE PROSPERITY. I wish to bear my testimony to the Latter-day Saints that all of us who will obey the commandments of God will be prospered in the land. Sacrifice doth bring the blessings of heaven. I bear my testimony . . . that if the people will pay their tithes and offerings, they will not only be blessed in their material affairs, but they will be abundantly blessed with increased outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord. We find recorded in section 130 of the book of Doctrine and Covenants, the following:/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP106There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—106And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (D. and C. 130:20-21.)/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP106I bear witness to you, as an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, that material and spiritual prosperity is predicated upon the fulfillment of the duties and responsibilities that rest upon us as Latter-day Saints. . . ./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP106I propose with the help of the Lord to be true to my fellow men in fulfilling every obligation that I have entered into with them. But above all and beyond all, I propose to fulfill my obligation, to the best of my ability to God, my Heavenly Father./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP106I have been ridiculed in the public prints because I said that a man's duty was to pay his debts to the Lord if he did not pay his debts to his fellow man. I repeat that. God, my Heavenly Father, has blessed me with a knowledge of the gospel. I do know that God lives; I do know that Jesus is the Christ; I do know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God; I do know that Lorenzo Snow is a prophet of God; I know that God loves me; that He blessed me; that I am one of His children; that I am under obligations to Him; and that all I have on earth, all that I will ever receive here or hereafter, I am indebted to Him for it. Therefore, I say, shall I not fulfill the duties and obligations that I owe to my Creator and loving Parent before I fulfill my obligations to my fellow man? Has any man ever lent me money because he loved me? No; he has lent it to me because he wanted his interest. With the help of the Lord I propose to keep the commandments of the Lord, and then I do know that I shall be able to pay all that I owe; because I know that God blesses those who keep His commandments./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP107I know that I never made a sacrifice of a financial nature in my life to help the advancement of God's work, without being abundantly rewarded therefor. Not only materially, but I grew in the knowledge of the gospel and in the Spirit of God, which is worth more than all the wealth and honors of men. I desire never to allow my heart to wither up, so to speak, but rather to have it grow and expand. I desire to seek first the Kingdom of God. I do know and bear witness to you that if I do it, all other things for my good will be added unto me. And what I bear witness to pertaining to myself, I bear witness to for all the Latter-day Saints. If you desire the Spirit of God, be honest in keeping the commandments of God. If you desire prosperity, and at the same time the testimony of the gospel, pay all your obligations to the Lord and you shall have it. If you are not honest with God, you may prosper, and you may be blessed with the things of this world, but they will crowd out from your heart the spirit of the gospel; you will become covetous of your own means and lose the inspiration of Almighty God. The Savior told us that if we gained the whole world and lost our own souls, it would profit us nothing./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP107We have started out for life eternal, the greatest of all gifts of God to man, and keeping the commandments of God will bring it to us.—CR, October, 1899: 19-20./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.ObedienceTP107It annoys me when men whom the Lord blesses with great abundance are not willing to do their full duty.—RSM, 24:629./

108I am very grateful indeed that you good sisters are going to try to educate people to take care of themselves. But it is only fair for me to say to you that there are a number of people you are not going to be able to change. There are many people who are born tired and never get rested. There are any number of people who just naturally have no conception of self-independence. Our country today is in a terrible condition on that account principally.—RSM, 24:626.

108WORK AND HAPPINESS. We are told we have to earn our bread "by the sweat of the brow."

108I believe there may be a disposition on the part of some Latter-day Saints to say, "Well, after we get to be sixty-five, we will not have to work any more." I want this body of good sisters to know that I have done just as much work for the past sixteen years, since I passed sixty-five, as I ever did before. And with the blessings of the Lord, if He will let me stay here another fifteen or sixteen years—which I doubt—I want to do just as much if not a little more than I have done in the last sixteen years. I am a firm believer that work does not kill anyone, but that laziness does kill a man at an early age.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Work of the LordTP108There should be in the heart of every man and woman, the cry, "I am going to live." There is nothing given to me but time in which to live, and I am going to endeavor each day of my life to do some labor which will be acceptable in the sight of my Heavenly Father, and if it is possible, do a little better today than I did yesterday.—RSM, 25: 12-13./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Work of the LordTP108I have never seen the day when I was not willing to do the meanest work, (if there is such a thing as mean work, which I doubt) rather than be idle.—Era, 3:197./

108ON MONEY AND ITS USES. Dollars and cents are not blessings from God. Only so far as we are blessed with intelligence, with wisdom, and with the Spirit of God to use them in a wise and proper manner, and to advance God's kingdom on the earth are they such. If we are blessed with an abundance of this world's goods and it shall blind our eyes . . . then instead of being a blessing from God it is a blessing from the opposite direction.—JH, 1892, October 30: 5; DN, 1892, December 17.

109A CLUE TO STABILITY. Our records show that in years gone by over seventy-five percent of the people owned their own homes. There is a spiritual growth always when people own their own homes. This owning of a home creates a spirit of loyalty to the Church and also, really, to the government. It is illustrated somewhat in an incident that I heard regarding a nobleman in France who was very wealthy. His butler, who drew a large salary, attended socialistic meetings. When the nobleman noticed that the butler had discontinued attending these meetings he asked for the reason.

109Said he: "At the last meeting a report was made of how much per capita everybody would receive when all of the wealth was appropriated and distributed, and already I have more in the savings bank than would come to me."

109It cured him completely.—CR, April, 1932: 4.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.WorkTP109THE "SLOW-UP SYSTEM"—A PREVALENT ABUSE. There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven, upon which all blessings are predicated, and no man will get the blessing without fulfilling the law. I wish to impress upon the Latter-day Saints that we get in this life what we work for, and I want to urge every Latter-day Saint to be a worker./

109Men should have a pride in doing their full share and never want to be paid for that which they have not earned. Men should be rewarded for doing the best that they can. There is a practice in some quarters, in the working world today, to tell a man how much he may do, regardless of his ability to do more, and to penalize and criticize the man who is able and willing to do more than his indolent or incompetent neighbors. If one man has the ability and the power to do three or four times as much work and is willing to do it, he should get the pay for it, and this idea of saying, "Don't you do any more than you are told or you will lose your job, or your standing," is fundamentally wrong.—Era, 42:585.

DEBT, PERSONAL FINANCE, AND THRIFT

CAUTION AGAINST SPECULATING ON BORROWED MONEY. I can remember very distinctly that I was heavily involved myself when President Smith made that remarkable talk, one of the strongest I ever heard him make. [^1] I made a pledge to myself that no matter what the price might be, I would not borrow a dollar to invest in anything, but I would go along quietly until I was free from debt. I have kept that pledge, although I had some very tempting offers. I had one very dear friend offer to sell me fifty thousand dollars worth of stock in a certain company and take my note for the entire purchase price at six percent. The person who offered me was paying twelve percent, so I would make six percent on it, a wonderful offer. But I said "No." The final result was that that stock that I would have paid seven dollars for finally went down to twenty-five cents, and of course it would have required more cheek than I have, and they say insurance agents live by their cheek, to have asked the party who made this wonderful offer to me, to take some of that stock back at seven dollars.—RSM, 19:299-300.

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.DebtTP110If the people known as Latter-day Saints had listened to the advice given from this stand by my predecessor, under the inspiration of the Lord, calling and urging upon the Latter-day Saints not to run in debt, this great depression [1932] would have hurt the Latter-day Saints very, very little./

110Nearly every livestock man that I know who has gone broke, has done so because he borrowed all the money he could get on the sheep or cattle, in order to get more sheep or cattle. When the depression came all that he had was not enough to pay the debt.

110To my mind, the main reason for the depression in the United States as a whole, is the bondage of debt and the spirit of speculation among the people.—RSM, 19:299.

110Notwithstanding the great trouble financially all over the world, I believe that as a people we are suffering less than are those in other sections of the country, for which I am very grateful to the Lord.—CR, October, 1931: 2.

Debta-Grant, Heber J.TP111LIVING WITHIN OUR MEANS. Right here let me warn the Latter-day Saints to buy automobiles and to buy the ordinary necessities of life when they have the money to buy them, and not to mortgage their future. I have heard of people over in England who regularly mortgage their Sunday clothes Monday morning and take them out of "hock" the next Saturday night. I want to say to you that those who discount their future, who run into debt for the ordinary necessities of life and for the luxuries of life, are laying burdens upon themselves that will come back with compound interest to cause them great trouble and humiliation.—CR, April, 1926: 7.

Debta-Grant, Heber J.TP111There is a peace and a contentment which comes into the heart when we live within our means. There is no question about it.—RSM, 19:301.

Debta-Grant, Heber J.TP111If there is any one thing that will bring peace and contentment into the human heart, and into the family, it is to live within our means. And if there is any one thing that is grinding and discouraging and disheartening, it is to have debts and obligations that one cannot meet.—RSM, 19:302.

111INSTALMENT BUYING AND PERSONAL FINANCE. I would be very happy if the remarks that have been made, with regard to buying on instalment would be heeded. I have talked with officers of banks where men have come in and desired to borrow three or four hundred dollars, and have been very much annoyed that their credit was not good for this amount. The officers have asked them how much they are paying for rent, how much they are paying on the radio and the automobile, and other things, and find that they are actually obligated over their entire income. With not sufficient margin to feed their family, they are annoyed because the bankers will not lend the money which belongs to some depositor, when there is practically no chance of the person's paying it back.

111Of course you all know that depositors, when they get excited, want all their money, and want it in a hurry, and of course they cannot always get it. I have advocated since 1893 that no savings bank under any circumstances should allow anybody to have his money without giving the proper notice. The people get excited and sometimes break banks. About nine times out of ten the banks would not need to break. It is ridiculous for people to expect a bank to pay interest for money, and then have it on hand all the time.—RSM, 19:299.

112PAYING AS YOU GO. If a person owned what he had and did not have to pay interest, and only bought as he had the money to buy, the majority of people would be in reasonably comfortable circumstances. No matter what the price of potatoes or wheat or anything else was, they would have just as much of it. They would have just as many sacks of flour to take care of themselves, as though the wheat cost more. It has been due to debt, I think, that the main part of this suffering has come. We have mortgaged our future without taking into account the incidents that may happen—sickness, operations, etc.—RSM, 19:299.

112I find a great many people run into debt to buy stock in corporations that I have happened to be president of. When they received good dividends they were glad that they were in the company. But when they were struck financially, I had a great many of them come to me and say, "You are president of this company; I want you to buy my stock." Of course I was not in a position to buy it.

Debta-Grant, Heber J.TP112We cannot tell all that is coming in the future. But there is one thing that we can tell, and that is if we have the money in our hands to buy a radio, automobile, or anything else, and we buy it, no matter how much it comes down in value it is ours.

112The majority of automobiles that are purchased are purchased on time, and not on time with ordinary interest. But they are purchased on time with a tremendously high interest, interest that no legitimate business could afford to pay. The result is that people lose their automobiles. There is nothing more true than that we have tried to live beyond our means as a people, and any person who does that gets into trouble.

113There are one hundred thousand cars in Utah [1932]. One hundred thousand cars at three hundred dollars a year, to keep them up, and the actual wear and tear and interest on the instalment plan, and so on, will work out to two or three times as much as all the agricultural products of our state. It runs way up into the millions.

113I think the whole country is mortgaged. You know it is bad enough to have a mortgage on a house, without having a mortgage on something which is considered about twenty cents on the dollar at the end of four or five years of depression.—RSM, 19:300.

113THRIFT, HARD TIMES, AND EXPENSIVE TASTES. We talk about hard times. I wish to say that I have read more than once the wise sayings of Benjamin Franklin on thrift and economy, and his reference to the people's complaint against the tax burdens laid upon them. He says that the luxuries in which people indulge and the wasteful expenditure of their money is a far greater burden, many times over, than the taxes and the public burdens the people have to meet. Today, the great majority of all the money put into automobiles is for pleasure. In the state of Utah we have about fifty thousand automobiles [1923]. I think we have a few more than that. I do not believe the depreciation, wear and tear, the oil, gasoline, and the tires will cost less than fifty dollars a month per car on the average; fifty thousand cars at fifty dollars each a month is $2,500,000; multiplied by twelve, it is $30,000,000 a year, principally an unnecessary expense. I believe that this figure could be cut squarely in two, if the people made up their minds. I believe that nearly all of the hardships of a majority of the people would disappear if they were willing to forego the habit of wearing silk stockings, so to speak, and get back to the ordinary manner of dressing in a rather quiet, unassuming way; stay away from about nine-tenths of the picture shows that they attend; return to the ways of thrift and economy that I have heard preached from this stand from the days of President Brigham Young until today.—CR, April, 1923: 8.

HOME INDUSTRY AND MANUFACTURING

HOME MANUFACTURING. I know that the policy of President Brigham Young in advocating to the people that they support home manufacture and keep their money at home to build up the country, is the true policy for the Latter-day Saints to follow. . . .

114I heard Bishop Farrell some years ago in the Assembly Hall tell a very good story on home manufacture. He said he believed in home manufacture because it benefited him as well as other people. He said that when he was coming down to conference he met at the depot a brother to whom he owed five dollars for making some shoes for his children. He gave this brother the five dollars, and he turned around and handed the money to another brother whom he owed, and he handed it to another, and he handed it to another, and the fourth brother came up and handed it back to Brother Farrell, saying, "I owe you six dollars, here is five of it," and Brother Farrell put the money back into his pocket. That money paid five hundred percent in debt there in just about the same length of time that it takes me to tell the story. But if the bishop had bought the imported goods it would not have paid the five hundred percent, because it would have gone out of the country.—CR, October, 1900: 35-36.

114The first money that I ever made I put into a vinegar factory, and lost it. Why? Because the people and the merchants would not patronize it. I remember I said to one merchant, "I have had your vinegar analyzed by a chemist, and there is about one-quarter of it that is mineral—it is acetic acid—and you are burning people's insides up."

114He said, "It sells well."

114I said to him, "I will sell you a barrel two-thirds full of vinegar, at a much less price than you are paying. Then you can go to the drug-store and for seventy-five cents you can buy that mineral poison and put it into the barrel; then fill it up with water."

114Oh, no—he would not do that. He thought that would be wrong. But he went on selling the stuff manufactured that way. I could not get the patronage.

115At one time I also went into the business of manufacturing soap. The only people who patronized the soap I made were the Chinese. They bought it almost exclusively. They discovered it was the best they could get in the city. There were, also, a few of the good sisters who patronized it. I know of one lady—I won't mention her name, but she is the wife of one of the General Authorities who is quite cranky on the question of having first class washing in her house—she looks after it herself, and sees that the linen is in mighty good shape. She always believed in Beehive soap.

115The reason we closed up was because the people would not patronize us. I had about twenty thousand dollars to add to experience on account of soap-making. I have a bigger experience account than all the money I am worth. And I have had a lot of this sad experience in trying to build up and establish home institutions and home manufacture. If I ever get any money, I will put some of it into home manufacturing institutions again; and, perhaps, I will lose it. They say I am a crank on home manufacture. Perhaps I am, and I am proud of the appellation, if it means that I am an enthusiast in that direction. I do not believe we accomplish very much in life unless we are enthusiastic, unless we are in earnest, and unless we practice what we preach.—CR, April, 1910: 39-40.

115From the time that I was a boy of sixteen until the factory closed, with only two or three exceptions, I never wore a suit of clothes that was not made of cloth manufactured at Provo. I purchased a suit, once, while in California for six months, as my clothes became the least little bit shabby. I paid more than twice as much for it as I would have paid for a Provo Woolen Mills suit, and I was ashamed of it at the end of four months and gave it away. I have worn many a suit of Provo goods continuously for three years, barring the time that it was at the tailor's being cleaned and pressed, and then I did not wear it out. And it didn't get shiny either. But I can't get a suit of clothes today, for ten dollars a suit more than I used to pay for a Provo suit, that does not shine, and shine like everything, in three months, instead of three years. I remember when the Wyoming legislature was here, that I was wearing a light-colored suit. I happened to be a member of the Utah legislature. They gave a ball in the theater so I had to buy a black suit, so as not to be the only "white sheep" in the crowd at that ball. But I gave the suit away the next day for fear I might want to preach home manufacture when I had it on and that the chips would fly back in my own face. Subsequently, when in New York for over six months at one time, I bought a suit there. But as that was in the panic of 1893, which wiped me off the earth financially, I could not afford to give that suit away. So I wore it out. With these exceptions, I wore nothing but Provo goods until the factory closed down.

116The way I figure, the wool that would have made a suit of clothes, if shipped out of our country, will bring back about one dollar to help enrich the community. But if that wool were put into cloth, and the cloth into a suit of clothes, at least twenty-five dollars of the value of that suit would remain here and would be received by somebody for labor or in the increased value.—CR, April, 1910: 37-38.

116I know that it is beneficial to any community to raise and manufacture those things which they use. I believe it is a disgrace to us, as a people, that we are importing chickens, turkeys, and butter by the carload. This community ought to produce all of these things, and it is a reflection on us that we bring them from abroad. I believe that no greater benefit, or moral uplift, can come to a people than the establishment of industries whereby the young can have employment.—CR, October, 1909: 26.

116WOMEN AND HOME INDUSTRIES. We are told it is more blessed to give than to receive, and it is our duty to give to those in distress.

116I would like to impress upon the minds of the members of the Relief Society the wonderful amount of good that they can do, in so far as such a thing is possible, if they spend their money for that which is made in our state, or in our states, I might say, because I may remark we have 100,000 people in Idaho [1931].

116People get fads into their minds and imagine that goods that come from London, Paris, Italy, and other places, are superior to those which we can get at home. I am first for Utah and Idaho, or where our stakes are. I am next for the United States. And I think that every one of us can contribute very materially to the success of our communities, and of our state and our nation if we are careful to, as far as possible, patronize homemade goods and articles. We have the capacity and ability ourselves to help change the condition financially. There is a little prejudice in the minds of people because they spend their money for things which oftentimes are not one iota better, just because they are foreign, and because they are advertised as being better.—RSM, 18: 343-344.

TRADE OR PROFESSION—WHICH?

[The following significant questions for our time, in which vocational education comes increasingly to the fore, were put to President Grant in 1894.—Editor.]

117I. As a foundation for future success would you advise the young men of the west to acquire a trade or a profession? II. What class of artisans or professional men do you think the west will most need during the next twenty-five years? III. What special natural qualifications should a young man possess to acquire the trade or the profession you think most needed?

117Answering the three questions propounded, I will say:

117I. As a rule I think that it is better for a young man to acquire a trade rather than a profession.

117II. Those skilled in manufacturing, as in my opinion the west must be built up by the establishment and success of its manufacturing institutions. I do not think that it will make much difference which branch a young man shall learn, provided he is careful to master the same thoroughly, after having first made sure that there will be an ample demand for that class of articles which he may engage in manufacturing.

117III. A firm determination to succeed, and prompt and faithful attention to business are sure to bring success, provided the young man is strictly honest and has the ordinary ability which falls to mortals.

118(Signed) Heber J. Grant

March 7, 1894,

The Contributor, 15:358, 360.

LAND UTILIZATION AND AGRICULTURE

We should unitedly study to create improvements whereby the land will produce more, instead of trying to see where we can go to get a big piece of land. There are many men who, with a few acres of property, looked after and cultivated, produce more than the men with large farms which they simply scratch over. Chickens should do the scratching, but men should thoroughly cultivate their land.

118I call to mind a man who lives at Lehi, a little more than a stone's throw from the railroad station. One year that man raised, on a little less than four acres of ground, one hundred twenty-eight tons of beets. He was a very honest man, and he realized that many of those beets were not good for sugar. You know, in the early history of the Lehi sugar factory, we had to take everything in the shape of beets that the farmer raised. It was not like wheat; if the farmer raised some wheat and it got frost-bitten, and was no good, the miller did not have to buy it. But when we started the sugar industry we figuratively got down on our knees to the farmer. If that would not do, we almost lay down and crawled to him, and begged him to raise beets. We had to take all the beets they brought us, and pay five dollars a ton for them, and then had to feed some of them to the pigs, because they were no earthly good, not having any saccharine matter in them. The man of whom I speak, however, realizing that the large beets which had grown on the edge of his little garden farm, close to where the water ran, had but little sugar in them and that they were not worth five dollars a ton, picked out about eight tons of the large beets and kept them to feed his own stock. The rest he brought to us, and he got six hundred dollars in cash for them—from four acres. (I was rather sorry he did not have four hundred acres.)

118I asked another man how much he had raised that year. He said about five hundred dollars worth. He had scratched and worked, plowed and harrowed his big farm and had raised that little. Whereas, my friend with the four acres (by the way, he had a flower garden and raised vegetables for his family, so he did not have the entire four acres in beets) made six hundred dollars in cash. He also had the pleasure of living right there with his friends, having the benefit of schools and other advantages for his children, instead of living away off on a ranch, with no educational advantages, no society, no improvement associations, no Sunday schools, and where he would have to scratch, walk, harrow, plow, and wear himself out. . . .

119President Young tried to establish the silk industry, when I was a boy, and some of the people pooh-poohed and laughed at it. They also pooh-poohed and laughed at the sugar industry. I remember that every farmer I talked with said we could not afford to raise beets; that it would cost more to plant them, dig them up, and take the tops off than they were actually worth. They have found out better now. A whole lot of them have discovered that it pays reasonably well to plant beets. . . .

119I find there are many opportunities, if we will but take advantage of them, and constantly study to improve and increase the production of the soil, as well as make the best possible use of our means. I am told that much of the land in some sections of Cache Valley, which was considered of but very little value, is today very valuable, because of the creamery industry. I rejoice to hear of this increase in values because of the establishment of manufactures. . . .

119I believe that if the Latter-day Saints would more generally practice economy, frugality, and increase the production of the soil, there would be greater opportunities for not only the people who are here, but for many times the number. We do not need to go to Mexico, Canada, Wyoming, or any other place to improve our condition, as a rule. Mind you, there are exceptions, and I do not want anybody to think I am not willing to see Canada, Wyoming, Colorado, and Mexico built up. I rejoice to realize that Zion is spreading. But, in spreading, let the people try to improve. Do not get so much land that you will work yourself to death, and leave your children to quarrel over it. Be satisfied with a moderate sized farm—one that you can cultivate, and make it produce to the fullest extent.—CR, October, 1903: 7-9.

120I believe that we are making a very great mistake, many of us, especially those who are farmers, in disposing of our land. Much of the land on the Provo bench and in other sections of the country, adapted to fruit raising, is being sold to people who are coming in here from Colorado. The same identical class of land which they are buying here for two hundred dollars and three hundred dollars an acre, they have sold in Colorado for two, three, and four thousand dollars an acre. They have sold their orchards in the east, and are coming here and buying just as good land for much less than they got for their lands in the east.

120Let us keep our own lands, which are really gold mines. The great trouble with us is that we do not know their value. We do not know how much they will produce. We have not learned that by intense cultivation, by raising fruits, and by being careful to see that we get rid of the worms, and do our full duty by the soil, we can make it worth three and four times its present value.—CR, October, 1909: 28-29.

120FARMING AND SECURITY. Now, I absolutely know if some people would farm their land they could live, and live well. But they will not farm it, because they can get more if they remain on the farming dole.

120The story has been told of a banker who was approached by one of these good people for a loan. He said: "Certainly, I have often lent you money, and will be glad to do so again, if you will give me a mortgage on your crop."

120The man replied: "Oh, I am not raising any crops, but I will give you an order on 'Uncle Sam.' I get more money by being on the dole."

120That kind of spirit is not the spirit that should belong to a Latter-day Saint. I hope that it is just a story. It seems almost incredible to me that anybody could make such a statement. But I have it from the mouths of presidents of stakes that there are individuals in their stakes and communities who are "lying down" when, if they would farm their land, they could take care of themselves [1938].—RSM, 25:14.

121At the present time there is quite a feeling that it is not worth while to stay on the farm, that the thing to do is to sell the farm. Or, if it is mortgaged for a large amount, to say, "Well, we will let the man who owns the mortgage cultivate it. It does not pay us to cultivate it."

121This is wrong. I believe that with the blessings of the Lord and with economy and the raising of products from the ground, and utilizing those products to feed cattle, sheep, and hogs, and to increase your income by producing butter, eggs, cheese, and in other ways, that the farms can be made profitably productive.

121I remember that when I was in the far-off land of Japan, I ate butter from Scandinavia. And I know that while I was in England the great majority of the time I ate butter from Scandinavia. If butter can be shipped all the way from Scandinavia to Japan, I believe that butter can be raised and shipped at a profit out of this intermountain country. There are no finer farms to be found anywhere than can be found in this intermountain country. It is the best dairy country. There is no stronger, more substantial and splendid soil that will produce year after year if it is only treated right, than that of this intermountain country.—CR, April, 1923: 7-8.

121I want again to assure you that the best place in the world to rear Latter-day Saints is on the soil.—CR, April, 1923: 9.

121So far as farming is concerned I want to tell you that it is the splendid blood from the farm that keeps the cities from dying with their immoral weight.

121Fifty-two percent of all of the missionaries that have been sent out into the world by our Church, as high as twenty-two hundred at a time, at their own expense and the expense of their families, come from the farm. [^2] —Era 39:526.

122Please, every Latter-day Saint farmer, farm your land. If you do not, you will lose your inheritance, and some one else will get possession of it sooner or later. Do not take anything which you are capable of producing yourself.—CR, October, 1936: 16.

THE WELFARE PLAN

If we inspire in the hearts of the people a desire to do their duty, it will be the easiest thing in the world to take care of all those who are in distress among this people. The fast day donation alone, if we were absolutely honest with the Lord, would take care of the poor among us. You cannot get a good meal for less than ten cents, and twenty cents a month for every man, woman, and child in the Church would take care of those who need care and who are not chronic beggars. I am in favor of Bishop Hunter's way with such people, of just wearing them out. I am in favor of Brigham Young's statement, "It is against my policy to give anything to a person unless he works for it."

122Why do we find great walls of cobblestones picked up from the hills? Because Brigham Young would say, "Go and dig up some rocks and build a wall." In other words, I believe he would tell them to dig a hole and then fill it up rather than have nothing to do.—RSM, 24:630.

122I do not think that we need to worry the least bit about any of the Latter-day Saints suffering on account of lack of food or shelter during these hard times. I am confident beyond the shadow of a doubt that with our system of fast day donations and the work that is being done by our Relief Society, the bishops in all the various wards, with the help of the auxiliary officers, will be able to look after those who are in real distress.

Fast Offeringa-Grant, Heber J.TP122I am converted to the fact that if the Latter-day Saints as a people would actually do without two or three meals once a month, as prescribed, on fast days, and give the full equivalent to the bishop, thus benefiting their own individual health and that of their families—if they conscientiously paid a full fast day donation, each and every person giving the equivalent of two or three meals one Sunday in each month—it would fully take care of those who are in distressed circumstances.—CR, October, 1931: 2-3.

Fast Offeringa-Grant, Heber J.TP123FAST DAY AND CHURCH WELFARE. Let me promise you here today that if the Latter-day Saints will honestly and conscientiously from this day forth, as a people, keep the monthly fast and pay into the hands of their bishops the actual amount that they would have spent for food for the two meals from which they have refrained; and if in addition to that they will pay their honest tithing, it will solve all of the problems in connection with taking care of the Latter-day Saints. We would have all the money necessary to take care of all the idle and all the poor.

Fastinga-Grant, Heber J.TP123Every living soul among the Latter-day Saints that fasts two meals once a month will be benefited spiritually and be built up in the faith of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ—benefited spiritually in a wonderful way—and sufficient means will be in the hands of the bishops to take care of all the poor.—CS, June 18, 1932.

123PHYSICAL AND MATERIAL BENEFITS OF THE FAST DAY. I believe that if every dollar of money that is expended in Utah for liquor and for beer, tea, coffee, were saved, Utah would need no help from the United States government to take care of the poor, but that peace, prosperity, happiness, and abundance would be given to the people of our fair state, and of every other state in the Union. If in addition we observed the suggestion by the Lord, which is a very wise one, that once a month we refrain from eating two meals (which would be physically beneficial to every living soul), and give the equivalent to help those who are poor, it would go far towards solving our financial problems.—CR, October, 1935: 9.

123THE GUIDING PRINCIPLE OF THE WELFARE PLAN. Our primary purpose was to set up, in so far as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift, and self-respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership.—CR, October, 1936: 3.

124PUBLIC AGENCIES AND CHURCH WELFARE. The Church aims to help provide for the care and sustenance of those on direct relief—federal, state, and county, as also for those for whom the Church has heretofore cared. The exact number of such persons cannot now be certainly given but there may be as many as fifteen thousand. We have strongest reasons for believing we shall be able to give these the aid they need.—CR, October, 1936: 3.

124WELFARE PUBLICITY. Now the Church is receiving worldwide publicity. This has not only been complimentary and laudatory, but to tell you the truth it has been far, far overdone. We have been given more credit by far than we deserve. We are attempting to get our people not to be satisfied to take charity, if it is possible for them to earn their own living, and even to be ready and willing to make some sacrifice, even though they might be offered a little more in charity than they could earn themselves; we do want them to earn what they receive.—RSM, 25:12.

124I am delighted with the wonderful publicity that has been given and the favorable reports that are being made about our Security [Welfare] Program. At the same time we have to work, and work hard, and more and more diligently, and do our duty better, or we are not going to live up to the reputation that we now have. Our reputation has been so bad in the past that many people felt we were worthy of the same treatment as the Savior, that we ought to be crucified. Today our reputation is getting to be fine, and perhaps better than some of us deserve to have. The Presidency are very anxious indeed, as are all the General Authorities, that to the very best of our ability we live up to our reputation.—RSM, 25:13.

Cf. Gospel Doctrine (4th edition), p. 325.

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Chapter Six, "Church Administration" for charges to Church officers and teachers.
[^2] This statistic is most significant when it is recalled that the cash income of farms is considerably lower, per capita, than the cash income of city workers, and it takes cash to send missionaries into the field.
