Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

124CHAPTER IX

125GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS

CHURCH AND STATE

Patriotisma-Grant, Heber J.TPMORMONS' LOVE FOR COUNTRY. You may kick us and cuff us but somehow or other we Mormons love our country still.—CS, July 17, 1937: 5.

125As we respect the authorities in the nation of which we form a part, and uphold and sustain the government, just in that proportion are we legal citizens, and our government will respect and uphold us.—JH, Oct. 4, 1895.

125ON PUBLIC AFFAIRS AND THE PRIESTHOOD. It has been said that the elders of the Mormon Church not only lead in ecclesiastical matters but control all the civil and political affairs of the people. It has been asserted against the Latter-day Saints that no man can obtain a political office of any kind except he is chosen by the leaders of the Church. Many people say, "We have no objection to your religion. But it is the mixing of your civil government with your religious government that we are opposed to. We think that by doing so you threaten the welfare of the state, and that your actions are contrary and in direct opposition to the fundamental principles of liberty and freedom upon which this government stands at the present time."

125These claims are made against us because there are none of the Latter-day Saints who have arrived at manhood and have been married but who have received—provided they were married properly in the temple—the higher Priesthood. We are all members of the Priesthood. And if you undertake to separate the Priesthood, so-called, from the people, you cast out the entire people from taking any interest whatever in politics. While I deny emphatically that there is any mingling in the sense in which the world puts it of church and state among the Latter-day Saints, I do not deny for a moment that if I, as a member of this Church, have any power or influence which I can wield in the endeavor to get the best man to serve the people, I shall exercise it as long as I live.—JH, July 7, 1888; DN, July 8, 1889.

126Because of oneness of purpose and action amongst the Latter-day Saints at large, the accusation is made that they are priest-ridden and have no mind of their own. . . .

126It is a surprise to me that any intelligent man can make a claim that the Latter-day Saints are an ignorant and deluded people, without minds of their own—that they are led and directed by men who are cunning and shrewd, and who preside over them because of the advantages which they (the leaders) hope to gain. It seems to me that if any man of candid mind would examine the history of the Latter-day Saints . . . he would find them to be the most independent people on the face of the earth. . . . The moment they embraced the gospel . . . what did these men and women do?

126They asserted their manhood and womanhood, and showed that they were possessed of force of character; that they had the courage of their convictions. Than this there is no greater courage. . . .

Politicsa-Grant, Heber J.TP126Go where you will, from one end of this nation to another. Seek for the men with moral courage in the halls of Congress, in the legislatures, and what do you find? Men almost without number, voting time and time again against their honest convictions because they fear they might not be returned to office.

126How different is the case of the Latter-day Saints. Instead of, in many instances, caring for affluence and wealth, keeping to family and friends, and the comforts of this life, they gathered to Utah and suffered hardships, poverty, and privations, because of the testimony they had received. . . .

126The Latter-day Saints by their acts, by their history, have shown to the world that they have an independence of character and the manhood and womanhood to follow their convictions. . . .—JH, July 7, 1888; DN, July 8, 1889.

Selfishnessa-Grant, Heber J.TP126Now I generally endeavor, to the best of my ability, to seek to know the mind and will of God as it comes through the man who stands at the head of this Church—who either is a prophet of God or the whole structure of Mormonism is false. . . . I discover that he desires the onward advancement of God's kingdom more than anything else, and that is what every Latter-day Saint should desire. But I find that there are many of us who desire, above all things else on earth, our own advancement, our own financial welfare, or our own political welfare. We do not seek first the kingdom of God and then expect all things else will be added. But we seek first for our own personal aggrandizement.—JH, Oct. 30, 1892: 4; DN, Dec. 17, 1892.

Constitution of the United Statesa-Grant, Heber J.TP127THE CHURCH AND AMERICAN GOVERNMENT. There has never been any defiance of the political system of the United States by the Latter-day Saints. Joseph Smith, the first prophet of the Church . . . proclaimed that the constitution of our country was inspired by God. I ask if intelligent people are going to believe that the Latter-day Saints, guided by a prophet who proclaimed that the constitution of our country was inspired, are in rebellion against the political system of our country?—JH, April 30, 1899: 10; DN, May 13, 1899.

127Some people write . . . that we would like to set up a republic of our own; that we are a great financial combine of people who are arranging to eventually conquer our country. Our boys who gave their lives in France; our boys who went forth in far greater number than the government had requested, according to our population; our money so freely given for Liberty and Victory bonds; our declaration to all the world, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, that the men who wrote the constitution of this country were inspired of the living God—all of these things give the lie to all the liars who are perpetually saying that we are opposed to this country.

Patriotisma-Grant, Heber J.TP127When the Latter-day Saints were being driven to these Rocky Mountains from their homes, when they were coming to these Rocky Mountains in fulfillment of the prediction of Joseph Smith—they were being expatriated. They were driven from the confines of the United States and were coming to Mexican soil. Our country was then in trouble with Mexico, and the government called on Brigham Young for five hundred men to help fight Mexico. To this call President Young replied: "You shall have your men, and if we have not enough men we will furnish you women." And within three days the men were ready. . . . Show to me, if you can, in all the history of the world another case of a people being expatriated, being driven from their own country, from their own lands which they had purchased; being driven out from a beautiful city, the last remnant of them crossing the Mississippi River in the dead of winter on the ice; nine babies being born during the night of that terrible expulsion, with no shelter but their mother's breasts; going forth on their journey of a thousand miles in the wilderness after having appealed to the president of their republic who could only say: "Your cause is just, but we can do nothing for you"—show me another people, I say, who under like circumstances would have furnished five hundred men to fight their country's battles! Show me greater patriotism and loyalty to country than this! It can't be done.

Patriotisma-Grant, Heber J.TP128Allow me to announce that from the day of Joseph Smith to this identical day, the leaders of this people have had absolute respect, love, and reverence for their country. Allow me to announce further that we are patriotic Americans to the core and that we have learned it, many of us, at our mother's knees where we said our prayers. We believe absolutely in the inspiration of God to the men who framed our constitution.—CR, October, 1919: 33.

128I know that any ruler who claims to be the representative of Almighty God who would take away the liberties of his fellow men, is not a representative from God. You can draw your own conclusions whom he does represent.—CR, April, 1918: 24.

Constitution of the United Statesa-Grant, Heber J.TP128From my childhood days I have understood that we believe absolutely that the constitution of our country is an inspired instrument, and that God directed those who created it and those who defended the independence of this nation. Concerning this matter it is my frequent pleasure to quote the statement by Joseph Smith, regarding the constitution:

Constitution of the United Statesa-Grant, Heber J.TP128"The constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is, to all those who are privileged with the sweets of liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a weary and thirsty land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun."

Constitution of the United Statesa-Grant, Heber J.TP129And such the constitution of the United States must be to every faithful Latter-day Saint who lives under its protection.—Era, 43:127.

United States of Americaa-Grant, Heber J.TP129We have been taught by the Prophet Joseph and by every leader who has stood at the head of the Mormon Church that this is a land—as taught in the Book of Mormon—choice above all other lands, and that no king shall ever rule here.—CS, August 6, 1938: 6.

Laws, Civica-Grant, Heber J.TP129When any law is enacted and becomes a constitutional law, no man who spends his money to help men break that law can truthfully say that he is a loyal citizen.—CR, October, 1927: 5.

129I pray for our country and ask the Lord to bless those who preside in the nation; in the states, in the cities, and in the counties. I pray God to inspire the people that they will obey His commands, and elect good men to office; that they will bury their political differences and seek for good men to hold office, and not men who connive with those who are breaking the laws of our country. It is one of the Articles of our Faith to obey and uphold the laws of the land. May God help us to do it.—CR, April, 1928: 121.

Separation of Church and Statea-Grant, Heber J.TP129I wish to emphasize that "We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government."—CR, October, 1928: 10.

THE PEOPLE AND POLITICS

Politicsa-Grant, Heber J.TPPOLITICAL DIFFERENCES AMONG THE PEOPLE. I am anxious to see the Latter-day Saints devoted to the work of God above everything else in the world. I have never been so pained in my life as I have been during the past few months over the conditions—political, financial, and otherwise—that we find among the people. The spirit of bitterness that seems to exist in the hearts of some true, faithful, and honest Latter-day Saints, because of their difference of ideas and opinions on business matters and political matters is very painful to me. I do hope and pray, with all my heart, that the Spirit of the Lord may come to the Latter-day Saints in great abundance; that this spirit of almost hatred and animosity, that seems to be existing today among the people may disappear.—CR, October, 1920: 4.

Politicsa-Grant, Heber J.TP130I am sure we all love America. I am sure there are no more patriotic people on the face of the earth than the Latter-day Saints; in fact, our belief is that the men who established this country were blessed of God, that they were inspired of God, and as we depart from those things we are not doing that which is pleasing to our Heavenly Father. I think that without doubt we are getting just about as far away as we can at the present time—shall I say, politically. I do not care how you put it. We are starting on the broad path that leads to destruction, and had we stayed in the straight and narrow path we would not need to be arranging to be in a war. The Lord points out the way, and if we walk in it all will be well.

130Many of the Latter-day Saints have surrendered their independence; they have surrendered their free thought, politically, and we have got to get back to where we are not surrendering the right. We must stay with the right and if we do so God will bless us.—CS, October 11, 1941.

Politicsa-Grant, Heber J.TP130POLITICS. Politics reminds me very much of the measles. The measles don't hurt much if you will take a little saffron tea or something else to keep them on the surface. But if they once set in on you, they turn your hide yellow and sometimes make you cross-eyed. So do not let politics set in on you. I believe absolutely in the best men for the office. I believe in honest, upright, good men being chosen to occupy places and positions in the state and in the Church.—CR, October, 1922: 5.

Politicsa-Grant, Heber J.TP130It has been whispered around frequently, and I hear the murmur now, that the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ standing at the head and holding the Priesthood desire this man or that man or the other man elected to office.

Politicsa-Grant, Heber J.TP131The Presidency of the Church, so far as they are concerned, allow every man, woman, and child who is old enough to vote, to vote according to his or her own conviction. But we do appeal to all men and women, realizing the responsibility resting upon them, to seek God our Heavenly Father to guide them politically as well as religiously; and to stand for right and for those things that are for the good of this nation. The Latter-day Saints believe absolutely that the constitution of our country was written by inspired men. We believe in upholding the laws of our country. We believe in being obedient to the laws. One of the Articles of our Faith says that it is our duty to do so.—CR, October, 1928: 9.

131Allow me to read a news clipping sent me in a letter by former Governor John C. Cutler of Utah. He wrote: "I thought the annexed clipping would be information to you, as it was to me":

131MORMON LEADER POLITICAL BOSS SAYS REFORMER (Exclusive Dispatch)

131Winona Lake (Ind.) August 9.—"The most powerful political individual in America today is H. J. Grant, head of the Mormon Kingdom," declared Dr. ________ of Pittsburgh, superintendent of the National Reform Association, in addressing the annual Christian Citizenship Institute here today. "Twenty-six years ago," he continued, "there was not a principal man in all Mormondom who had even so much as a vote. All had been disfranchised by the United States government on account of their crimes. Today H. J. Grant patronizes presidents, makes bargains with great political parties, dictates the political policies of Utah and at least five surrounding states and wields effective political influences in at least five others."

131The gentleman must have been listening to one of the lying speeches of a notorious anti-Mormon woman. Dr. ________ is the superintendent of the National Reform Association. If he is properly quoted he'd better reform himself, and purge himself of falsehood. There is a special place prepared for his kind, and if he does not repent he will land there. I announce to all the world that I do not even control, politically, Utah, and that I have no desire to control Utah, that I have never opened my mouth in favor of or against any individual in any of the adjacent states that he is reported to say I control politically. Joseph Smith was told that his name "should be had for good and evil among all nations," or that it should be both "good and evil spoken of among all people." And we his successors have had the same privilege. We have been lied about most scandalously. One anti-Mormon is reported to have said that I had fifteen million dollars in a Wall Street bank, as Trustee-in-Trust for the Church; and I never had fifteen cents.

132As I have said, all the disbelief of all the world and all the lies of men like Dr. __________, who might inform themselves and therefore do not need to tell these lies, cannot stop the progress of this work. Just to show you that it cannot be stopped, let me read again what the Lord told Joseph Smith when he was incarcerated in Liberty Jail. You cannot keep the revelations of the Lord from coming to the Prophet even while in a jail. I will let you read some of it yourselves. It is Section 121. Read it all. I will start with the thirty-third verse:

132How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints. Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson— That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. (D. and C. 121:31-36.)

132Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, or any of his successors, cannot, and never could, handle the powers of heaven only in righteousness. And they never tried to.—CR, October, 1922: 8-9.

132We are told that agitation is going on in some sections of the country in favor of so-called "liberty," which instead of being liberty is anything but liberty.

Politicsa-Grant, Heber J.TP133I do not want to be accused of engaging in politics, but let me tell you that if any state in the union of the United States shall elect a man to stand at the head of that state who has ridiculed the Savior of the world, . . . I lift my voice against it, and I am willing to have it said that this is politics, if they want to make politics out of it. Any Latter-day Saint who sustains or votes for a man to be governor of a state who has ridiculed in print the Savior of the world is doing that which I as president of the Church hereby condemn.—CR, October, 1934: 131.

Politicsa-Grant, Heber J.TP133PARTY POLITICS. I regret exceedingly that in political controversies men seem to lack that courtesy and that respect for their opponents that I believe all Latter-day Saints ought to have. I have never yet heard a Democrat make a political speech that I felt was fair to the Republicans. Being a Democrat, I shall not say anything about what I think of the speeches of Republicans regarding Democrats. It is a strange thing—but they say that "Love is blind." Some people have added, "and can't smell." I have sometimes thought that both statements were true. From my own personal contact with dear and near friends, Republicans and Democrats, I have not been able to discover the exercise of what you might call charity, if you like, for the opinions of others who oppose them politically; at least not as much charity as should exist among our people.

133I am a thorough convert myself to the idea that it is not possible for all men to see alike. You know the remark made by a young man once: "It is a splendid thing that we do not all see alike, because if we did, everybody would want to marry my Sally Ann"; and the other man remarked, "Yes, thank the Lord. If everybody saw your Sally Ann as I see her, nobody on earth would have her, and she would die an old maid."—CR, June, 1919: 19.

Natural Rightsa-Grant, Heber J.TP133INHERENT RIGHTS. Every faithful Latter-day Saint believes, beyond a shadow of doubt, that to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life are inherent rights of which he should never be deprived.—Era, 39:523.

134A COMMENT ON THE PRINCIPLES OUTLINED IN SECTION 134 OF THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS. These principles are fundamental to our belief, fundamental to our protection. And in the providences of the Lord, the safeguards which have been incorporated into the basic structure of this nation are the guarantee of all men who dwell here against the abuses and tyrannies and usurpations of times past.—Era, 43:127.

PUBLIC AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC POLICY

Health, Physicala-Grant, Heber J.TPPUBLIC HEALTH. I maintain that we have been very careless about sustaining and upholding law for the benefit of the general health of the people. There is a lack of interest, on the part of the people, in observing sanitary regulations. Let us improve in this regard. I took quite a lively interest in this question recently, and by request spoke once at a tuberculosis exhibit. The result was that I was asked to speak again and again, which I did. Finally I was asked to contribute my money and become a member of the association, which I did, because one good turn, they say, deserves another, and you have to keep it up.

134I was astonished to find the lack of interest, a lack on the part of the people in being interested in a thing of this kind, something for their general benefit. I was astonished to find that we could spend any amount of money legally for schools, for roads, for bridges, for public improvements, but we could not spend a dollar from the country's funds to aid educationally, for the benefit of the people's health. I read of one good lady up in Dakota who said if one of her hogs was sick; or if anything was the matter with any of the fruits, or flowers, or vegetables, and garden truck; if there were troublesome insects or anything of that nature, all she had to do was to send down to Washington, and the agriculture department would supply her with information on how to cure the hog or protect the plants in the garden. But, if her husband, her son, or her daughter was sick, and she should write to the government, she could not get any information or help. Moral: Be a hog, and the government will take care of you, if you get sick. [laughter] . . .

Health, Physicala-Grant, Heber J.TP135Let us seek to better our condition—intellectually, physically, morally, and above all let us seek for the inspiration of Almighty God to guide us in all the walks of life.—CR, April, 1911: 24-25.

Justicea-Grant, Heber J.TP135THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE. There are a great many people who believe that if a person is indicted, he is undoubtedly a criminal. There are very few people who stop to reflect upon the fact that when a grand jury finds an indictment against any man, it is seldom, if ever, the case, that he is permitted to appear before the grand jury or to have a representative there to state his case. The law itself provides—as I understand it—although I am not a lawyer—that every man shall be considered innocent until such time as he is proved guilty. And no man is guilty, in the true sense of the word, of an offense, just because a grand jury finds an indictment against him. In criminal cases a man is to be considered innocent unless the evidence against him shall be so conclusive that there is not even a reasonable doubt as to his guilt.

Justicea-Grant, Heber J.TP135Certainly Latter-day Saints ought to be as liberal in their judgments as the cold law of the land. And certainly every man ought to be considered innocent in the estimation of the Latter-day Saints—particularly if that man is a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and has devoted his life for the upbuilding of God's kingdom, until such time as he has what is known as "his day in court." We can afford, I believe, to be as liberal as the cold law itself.—CR, October, 1920: 9.

Labor Unionsa-Grant, Heber J.TP135ON LABOR UNIONS. I want to say that I am perfectly willing that men shall join labor unions, that they shall band together for the purpose of protecting their rights, provided they do not interfere with the rights of other people.

Labor Unionsa-Grant, Heber J.TP135Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness belong to all people in the United States, according to the laws of our country, and should upon all the face of the earth. And I say that, to my mind, a provision in a labor union is all wrong that favors boycotting and the laying down of tools or the quitting of employment because a non-union man obtains employment while exercising his God-given right to stay out of a union. Men who have that kind of rule have a rule that is in direct opposition to the laws of God.

Labor Unionsa-Grant, Heber J.TP136There was a battle fought in heaven—for what? To give to man his individual liberty. An attempt to take the agency of man away is made when, if he does not see fit to join a union, men in that union without any complaint or grievance strike because a non-union man is employed.

136Now I'd better not say any more, perhaps, on this question, or I may offend somebody. I may hurt somebody's feelings. But it is the God-given right of men to earn their livelihood.

136The Savior said it was the first great commandment to love the Lord with all thy heart, and that the second was like unto it, to love thy neighbor as "thyself." That is the doctrine for every true Latter-day Saint.

Labor Unionsa-Grant, Heber J.TP136How much love is there in starving your neighbor because he will not surrender his manhood and his individuality, and allow a labor union to direct his labor? Mighty little love, mighty little of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ in any such a rule! I hope to see the day when no Latter-day Saint will join a union unless the union eliminates that clause from its rules. I am not going to ask men to leave their unions. I am not going to lay it down that they must; that it is the mind and the will of the Lord for them to leave a union. I want, as I said here recently, to give every man his free agency; to give every man the right to act as he thinks proper. But I cannot see how a Latter-day Saint who is a member of such a union can get down on his knees and pray for God to inspire and bless him, to bless the Saints and to protect them, and then be a party to allowing one of His own brethren to go year after year without employment, because that brother will not surrender his manhood and join a union with him. There is none of the Spirit of the Lord in that, to my mind. That is exactly the way I see it.—CR, October, 1919: 13-14.

Labor Unionsa-Grant, Heber J.TP137I believe that it is the absolute right of men to combine together for their protection, for their advancement, for their welfare in unions. But as stated here, I deprecate the idea of their undertaking to dictate to those who will not join them.—CR, April, 1920: 11.

Violencea-Grant, Heber J.TP137SYNDICALISM. There is an evil rampant at the present time among some who are teaching that it is justifiable to destroy property, and even to destroy life, in trying to accomplish their purposes. And I desire to lift my voice with all the ability and with all the power with which God has endowed me against anything of this kind.—CR, April, 1920: 10.

137CAUTION AGAINST GOVERNMENT "DOLE." We have on at the present time a great political campaign [1936], and I want to say to the Saints that I hope they will not allow their political affiliations, their regard for political affairs, to cause feelings of ill-will towards one another.

137I have had some of the most insulting letters that ever came to me, condemning me for not being in favor of the Townsend Plan, and that I must be ignorant of the plan. I am not ignorant of the plan. I have not read every word of it, but I have asked one of my secretaries to read every word of the plan and to give me the important points, and to my mind it is in direct opposition to everything I have quoted from Brigham Young and from the revelations of the Lord. The idea of allowing every man and woman who has reached the age of sixty years and wishes to retire from working to get two hundred dollars a month from the government! There is nothing truer than Brigham Young's statement, that we should give nothing to people, unless they are not able to work, without requiring them to do something for it.

137I want to say to the people that one of my nearest and dearest relatives criticised me for not favoring the Townsend Plan. I love him just as much as though he did not criticise me. I am perfectly willing for him to think and believe and act just as he wants to do. I want everybody to do this.

137I do not want the people of the Church, when they are working for the government, to work by the days—by the day—by the day. But I do want them to work by the job, by the job, by the job.

138Let every Latter-day Saint who has a farm, farm it, and not try to borrow money to be paid back by the government. Let every man feel that he is the architect and builder of his own life, and that he proposes to make a success of it by working. "Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work," and rest on the seventh. Do not be willing to labor four or five days and then only half labor. Let every Latter-day Saint give value received for everything he gets, whether it be in work, or whatever he does.—CR, October, 1936: 13.

138CIVIC PRIDE. It is expected there will be a great increase in the tourist travel through the state of Utah from this time on, particularly through the southern part of the state, where the government and the railroads are spending large sums of money to induce tourists to visit Zion National Park, Bryce Canyon, Cedar Breaks, and the Grand Canyon of the Colorado. In view of this, our people should take pride in cleaning up and grading their streets, fixing their fences, planting trees, and in every way making their towns and villages more attractive.—CR, April, 1923: 5.

138THE TARIFF. To my mind it is a poor financial policy to buy from any foreign country anything that can be profitably produced by the tiller of the soil in the United States, and especially is this the case with something as profitable as sugar. I believe absolutely in the purported statement of Abraham Lincoln: "I do not discuss the tariff. I know that if we buy goods made in America we have the goods and we have the money, and if we buy goods not made in America some one else has our money."—Era, 39:525.

138Money is the life blood of a nation. It is exactly like the blood in our bodies; it is the circulating medium. Keep your money at home.—Era, 39:525.

138NATIONAL PROBLEMS AND WOMEN'S WORK. I fully concur with the author who said, "It is no idle sentiment that national destiny is today governed by the women in the homes." I firmly believe that by the women of our nation finally will be worked out for the nation's benefit the solution of many of our greatest problems. The greatest in my opinion will be the final banishment of the liquor traffic from our great country, as completely and perfectly as the slave traffic was banished.—Era, 15:81.

139The women have the vote in Utah and if they, in connection with the young men and young women of the Mutual Improvement Associations, will only do their part, prohibition will come without fail. When? Right now. Do not allow a primary to go by but what you are organized with men and women selected to be there to vote intelligently and to a known purpose. You are the rulers, you are the sovereign people.

139No man should ever represent Utah in any place or position of trust, unless he has stood up and declared himself, unequivocally, without any mental reservation, upon his honor as a man, that he will stand for this thing.—Era 19:837.

Laws, Civica-Grant, Heber J.TP139LINCOLN AND THE POLITICAL RELIGION OF THE NATION. The following quotation from Lincoln with respect to the observance of law is worth repeating often:

Laws, Civica-Grant, Heber J.TP139Let every American, every lover of liberty, every well wisher to his posterity, swear by the blood of the revolution never to violate, in the least particular, the laws of the country, and never to tolerate their violation by others. As the patriots of "seventy-six" did to the support of the Declaration of Independence, so to the support of the Constitution and laws let every American pledge his life, his property, and his sacred honor. Let every man remember that to violate the law is to trample on the blood of his father, and to tear the charter of his own and his children's liberty. Let reverence for the law be breathed by every American mother to the lisping babe that prattles on her lap. Let it be taught in schools, in seminaries, and in colleges. Let it be written in primers, in spelling books, and almanacs. Let it be preached from the pulpit, proclaimed in legislative halls, and enforced in courts of justice. In short, let it become the political religion of the nation.—Era 43:73.

Civil War Prophecya-Grant, Heber J.TP139ON JOSEPH SMITH'S STATESMANSHIP. It has been said that the Latter-day Saints were in favor of slavery. It has been said that we were in favor of secession; that we were in sympathy with the South. But I was glad to hear that quotation by Brother Talmage, of the first message that went over the wires, "Utah has not seceded, but is firm for the Constitution and the laws of our once happy country.—Brigham Young."

Civil War Prophecya-Grant, Heber J.TP140When I heard that yesterday, I thought of the position of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the testimony of this man, Josiah Quincy:

Civil War Prophecya-Grant, Heber J.TP140Smith recognized the curse and iniquity of slavery, though he opposed the methods of the Abolitionists. His plan was for the nation to pay for the slaves from the sale of the public lands. "Congress," he said, "should be compelled to take this course, by petitions from all parts of the country; but the petitioners must disclaim all alliance with those who would disturb the rights of property recognized by the Constitution and foment insurrection." It may be worth while to remark that Smith's plan was publicly advocated, eleven years later, by one who has mixed so much practical shrewdness with his lofty philosophy. In 1855, when men's minds had been moved to their depths on the question of slavery, Mr. Ralph Waldo Emerson declared that it should be met in accordance "with the interest of the South and with the settled conscience of the North. It is not really a great task, a great fight for this country to accomplish, to buy that property of the planter, as the British nation bought the West Indian slaves." He further says that the "United States will be brought to give every inch of their public lands for a purpose like this." We, who can look back upon the terrible cost of the fratricidal war which put an end to slavery, now say that such a solution of the difficulty would have been worthy a Christian statesman. But if the retired scholar was in advance of his time when he advocated this disposition of the public property in 1855, what shall I say of the political and religious leader who had committed himself, in print, as well as in conversation, to the same course in 1844? [^1]

Civil War Prophecya-Grant, Heber J.TP140I will tell you what I will say: He was a prophet of God. And this nation would have been spared the bloodshed and the millions of money expended in the war, and year after year in pensions; and the widows and orphans, made by the war, would not have been deprived of their husbands and fathers, had this nation listened to the inspired words of the boy prophet, Joseph Smith.—Era, 4:689.

PROHIBITION AND HUMAN WELFARE

Prohibitiona-Grant, Heber J.TPPROHIBITION AND HUMAN WELFARE. We are fundamentally for prohibition. As Latter-day Saints we have as you all know—and if there are any strangers here I announce it to them—that we have in our Church what is known as the Word of Wisdom. In this we are told to leave hot drinks (and Joseph Smith interpreted "hot drinks" to mean tea and coffee), tobacco, and liquor alone; that tobacco is not good for man, and that liquor is not good for man, except for the washing of the body. We are promised that if we obey the Word of Wisdom it will give us physical strength, whereby the destroying angel shall pass us by as he did the children of Israel. And we are promised that we shall have hidden treasures of knowledge if we live in accordance with the Word of Wisdom.—CR, April, 1930: 188.

Prohibitiona-Grant, Heber J.TP141THE 1908 RESOLUTION ON TEMPERANCE. At the conclusion of his remarks, Elder Grant read the following: RESOLUTION Believing in the words and teachings of President Joseph F. Smith as set forth this morning on the subject of temperance, it is proposed, therefore, that all officers and members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will do all in their power, that can properly be done, with lawmakers generally to have such laws enacted by our legislature, soon to be elected, as may be necessary to close saloons, otherwise decrease the sale of liquor, and enact what is known as the "Sunday Law."

141(On motion, the immense congregation voted in favor of the resolution submitted, proclaiming "aye" in a unanimous shout.)—CR, October, 1908: 64-65.

Prohibitiona-Grant, Heber J.TP141PROHIBITION AND PERSONAL LIBERTY. Now as to the question regarding state-wide prohibition: there are people who are opposed to it, on the ground that it will interfere with personal liberty. I desire to read to you something upon this question of personal liberty, by ex-Governor Hanley, of Indiana. What he has said is so much better than I could possibly say, that I will quote him:

Prohibitiona-Grant, Heber J.TP141You have a daughter—splendid, beautiful and fragrant as a morning in June, with all its music and sunshine—a daughter fit to be mated to an Apollo, a king! I come to you and say to you: "I am a man of lawful age, I am sound of body and clean of soul. I love your daughter. I want her for my wife, and I ask you to give her to me, to give her to me body and soul." I am putting to you a supreme question—one that makes you thoughtful—and if you yield assent at all it is only upon the condition that I will go with you and with her, into God's holy temple, and before his high altar, and in the presence of His minister and under the ordinances of the Church and the laws of the commonwealth in which we live, and pledge myself in solemn compact and covenant—pledge myself to her, and to you, that if you give her to me I will love, cherish and defend her with my life. That is the condition. I assent to it. I go with you and with her, into God's holy temple, and in the presence of His minister, under the solemnity of the ordinances of the Church and the laws of the state, I solemnly enter into that compact and sign and seal it with my honor. Then I take her away. You have given to me the dearest treasure of your life—given her to me—and I have accepted her under the sanction of the highest and holiest of covenants. But the next day I come back to you and say to you, that, notwithstanding this covenant, and the solemnity in which I entered upon it, in the name of personal liberty I have a right to drink a thing that will make it impossible for me to perform my part of the covenant—come to you and say I have a right to drink a thing that will send me home to her, your daughter, whom I have so taken, a frenzied fiend; send me home to her to beat her flesh and scar her soul—that in the name of personal liberty I have a right to drink a thing after I have taken her to myself and through her begotten children—that in the name of personal liberty I have a right to drink a thing that will put the fire of degeneracy into her children's blood, the frenzy of insanity into their brain, and the rack of palsy into their hands. Men and women, hear me! That thing is not liberty! It's crime! Crime before God! Crime before men!—Era, 19:834-835.

Prohibitiona-Grant, Heber J.TP142UTAH AND PROHIBITION. I believe that Utah should have been the first state in the union to have adopted state prohibition, because the Lord has given to us a prohibition law; for the further reason that the Lord has given to us as a people, the Word of Wisdom for our temporal salvation and advancement and that we might have hidden treasures of knowledge. The Word of Wisdom is today a commandment of the Lord to us, given to us by the Prophet Brigham Young and by the Prophet Joseph F. Smith as a commandment to this people. Therefore, we as a people should have been the pioneers in this great reform for the benefit of mankind.—Era, 19:833.

Laws, Civica-Grant, Heber J.TP143ENDORSEMENT OF SECTION 134 "CONCERNING GOVERNMENTS AND LAWS IN GENERAL." I endorse with all my heart this declaration sustained by the unanimous vote of the general conference in 1835. I am convinced beyond the shadow of a doubt that it is the duty of every Latter-day Saint to sustain and live the law. I believe that every Latter-day Saint who has any idea in his or her heart that some law has been passed and has been decided, whatever the decision may be, by the highest tribunal of our great and glorious country, the Supreme Court of the United States, that it is his duty to obey such law. I believe that every Latter-day Saint—(and by the way, no man is a Latter-day Saint who drinks whiskey—but any Mormon who drinks whiskey today knows that he is in condemnation before the Lord Almighty. . . . )—I believe that every Latter-day Saint owes it to himself to uphold and sustain what is known as the cigarette law. And I believe that we as a people should know by the announcement of every man who is to be elected to the legislature, that he will stand for that law. And if he will not so announce himself, if his opponent, no matter what his politics may be, will stand for that law, that we ought to bury our politics and vote for the man favoring the retaining and enforcing of the cigarette law.—CR, October, 1922: 5.

Alcoholic Beveragesa-Grant, Heber J.TPLIQUOR AND REPEAL. That inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good, neither meet in the sight of your Father. . . . The Lord says it is not good. And all the legislatures and all the congresses and all the senators and all the officers in the kingdoms of the world can say otherwise. But that will not change the word of the Creator of heaven and earth.—CR, April, 1933: 7. And, again, strong drinks are not for the belly, but for the washing of your bodies.

Alcoholic Beveragesa-Grant, Heber J.TP143I do not suppose that when we get whiskey, wine, beer, etc., much of it will be used for the washing of people's bodies.—CR, April, 1933: 8.

144Let me promise you right here and now that if you vote for the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment, there will be a great many more professing Latter-day Saints who will be drunkards than there have been while the Eighteenth Amendment has been in force.—CR, October, 1933: 6.

144AFTER REPEAL. With the help of the Lord, to the very best of my ability, I warned this people not to vote for the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment. I warned them against lies that were being circulated to the effect that there was more drunkenness and more use of liquor than there had been when we did not have prohibition. Millions of dollars of money, I am sure, were expended to have the Eighteenth Amendment repealed. I have seen scores and scores of drunkards since it was repealed, and I have seen women go into restaurants and sit down and drink those things that we as Latter-day Saints know they should not drink.—CR, April, 1937: 13.

144Now, brethren, get down on your knees and pray to God to guide you in all you do. Do you think that there are a lot of people holding the highest offices in the government of the United States that are praying for guidance, men who voted for the repeal of the liquor law? Do you mean that the men who drink their cocktails right along—and we are spending billions of dollars for whiskey—and some of them are now in high places—that those are the men whom God is directing? If you do, I do not. I tell you that no greater crime was ever committed than the repealing of the prohibition law. Billions of dollars squandered, and poverty, and heartaches, and death and damnation to many men, have come because of liquor.—CS, October 11, 1941.

144Everyone said: "We do not want the saloons to come back." Well, they have more than come back. It is said that on Second South Street today there is more drinking than there was in all the saloons we had formerly in the same amount of territory. And it is said there is also as much if not more bootlegging than there was before we repealed the prohibition law.

145I could not help but feel humiliated when the Latter-day Saints knew as well as they knew that they lived that I wanted them to remain true to the Word of Wisdom and not vote for the repeal of prohibition.—CR, October, 1934: 129.

145I feel to have charity at the present time for the Latter-day Saints who have voted for the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment, notwithstanding the fact that they knew very well, without my coming out and saying, "I want you to do it," that I would have been mighty happy if they had voted the other way. I lived in hopes, and I announced myself in public, that if all other states in the Union went "wet," Utah would go "dry."

145Some of my friends begged me to come out and appeal to the people individually, to ask every Latter-day Saint to vote to maintain the Eighteenth Amendment.

145I believe men that have lived the gospel just as well as I have ever lived it, many of them, were conscientious in voting for repeal. On the other hand, if they did it just merely out of politics, well, of course, I felt—always have—that politics are like the measles.

145But I don't feel any harshness. I did feel annoyed, in good plain English, when one of the members of the cabinet saw fit to quote the president of the United States as wanting Utah to go wet. I had a lot of copies of speeches printed, which I was going to send out to the people. I announced that anybody who wanted copies should write for them. Finally I decided not to send them till after election. It annoyed me for one of the cabinet members to undertake to dictate, on behalf of the president, to the people of Utah to vote wet. I decided to keep still until after election, and I am glad to have done so. I don't want to offend any man who disagrees with me.

145But I am very grateful indeed that the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment will not make any difference to any true Latter-day Saint. No Latter-day Saint will patronize those things when the Lord has told us it is His will that we let them alone. If our people are going to take license to follow after the things of the world and the people of the world, and do those things that the gospel of Jesus Christ teaches them not to do, they are not living up to their religion. So, really, the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment will make no difference whatever to a true Latter-day Saint.

146On the other hand, I believe honestly and conscientiously that we ought in the future to be more diligent, more faithful, more energetic—those of us who in the past have kept the commandments of the Lord, than we have been in the past, for fear of the temptations that are coming to our young people; and be sure to set examples before them that will be worthy of their imitation because example is the finest way to preach in all the world.—CS, December 23, 1933: 7.

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TP146ONE SOLUTION OF WORLD PROBLEMS. I have been thinking very seriously of the condition that the world is in today during the great depression all over the globe. I am convinced in my own mind, without a shadow of a doubt, that a revelation covering only one page, given by the Lord, the Creator of heaven and earth, to the Prophet Joseph Smith, would solve the problems of the world if it were obeyed by the inhabitants of the earth; not only solve the problems in our own country but in every country. (D. and C., Section 89)—CR, April, 1933: 6.

WAR AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Grant, Heber J.TPWHAT THE WORLD NEEDS. What the world needs today more than anything else is an implicit faith in God, our Father, and in Jesus Christ, His Son, as the Redeemer of the world. The message of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to the world is that God lives, that Jesus Christ is His Son, and that They appeared to the boy Joseph Smith, and promised him that he should be an instrument in the hands of the Lord in restoring the true gospel to the world.—CR, April, 1935: 9.

146GERMANY. I hope the time is near at hand when liberty will prevail, when there will be peace, as far as we can get it—and efforts to that end will be put forth. . . . The people should strive to the best of their ability to bring about that condition. When that time comes, I expect a reign of liberty in Germany, and there will be a great harvest of souls in that land.—CR, June, 1919: 140-141.

147THE JEWS AND ANTI-SEMITISM. Some of you may be familiar with the agitation that is going on at the present time. . . . against the Jewish people.

147There should be no ill-will, and I am sure there is none in the heart of any true Latter-day Saint, toward the Jewish people. By the authority of the Holy Priesthood of God that has again been restored to the earth, and by the ministration under the direction of the prophet of God, apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ have been to the Holy Land and have dedicated that country for the return of the Jews. And we believe that in due time of the Lord they shall be in the favor of God again. Let no Latter-day Saint be guilty of taking any part in any crusade against these people. I believe in no other part of the world is there as good a feeling in the hearts of mankind towards the Jewish people as among the Latter-day Saints.—CR, April, 1921: 124.

147INTERNATIONAL CONTROVERSIES. We affirm that all international controversies may be settled by pacific means if nations will but deal unselfishly and righteously one with another. We appeal to the leaders of all nations and to the people themselves thus to mend and adjust their differences, lest the vials of God's wrath be poured out upon the earth, for He has said He will visit His wrath upon the wicked without measure.—CR, October, 1939: 8. (By the First Presidency.)

Wara-Grant, Heber J.TP147We further declare that God is grieved by war and that He will hold subject to the eternal punishments of His will those who wage it unrighteously.—CR, October, 1939: 8. (Statement from the First Presidency.)

147Now, I pray the Lord to bless the Latter-day Saints. I pray the Lord to bless the people of the world. I pray with all my heart and soul that any man—I do not care who he is or how high his position,—that is doing anything to get us into war, that he may be confounded; and I pray that we will all pray for guidance with all our hearts and souls. I feel as though it might be well for the Latter-day Saints to set aside a day to pray and to fast and to ask the Lord to preserve us as a nation from getting into war.—CR, October, 1941.

148THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE. I am very thankful that I am not in the least pessimistic or at all alarmed about the work of the Lord. I am a firm believer that this country, both North and South America, is the choice land of the world. It is a land choice above all other lands, according to the words of the prophets in the Book of Mormon. I believe in its final destiny. I believe that there is an over-ruling Providence protecting this country. I believe that this is the only place, in the United States of America, where the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints could have been established and continued without the most terrible persecution, worse than anything we ever had.—CR, October, 1937: 97-98.

148ADVICE REGARDING THE CITIZEN ARMY (1941). It grieves me deeply that it is necessary for thousands of our boys to go into the army. I hope and pray that they will go out with the missionary spirit, maintain their ideals and come back to us as sweet and clean as when they went away. I trust that it will be possible to keep them out of this terrible war. You parents and loved ones, keep as close to them as you possibly can.—Era, 44:267.

148I wish to impress upon the workers in all the organizations of the Church, the need for laboring prayerfully, untiringly, and diligently at this time to persuade the youth of Zion to be more faithful, more diligent, in observing what is known as the Word of Wisdom. I feel that while there are tens of thousands of our young men who are doing this, ever since the first World War there has not been so diligent an observance among young men as prior to that time. In order to be counted as hail-fellows-well-met, seeing that smoking was the rule in the army, many of them became cigarette smokers. And since many of our young men are now eligible for military service, and some actually so engaged, I ask them to remember well all of their principles and ideals, under all conditions and circumstances, when they are at home, and when they are away from home.—Era, 44:73.

149I understand there are many of our boys here today that are in the army. I hope and pray and plead that every boy will feel in his heart: "I want to know what is right and clean and pure and holy, and I want God to help me." I want every Latter-day Saint soldier to get down on his knees and pray God to help him to lead a clean life, and to preach the gospel while he is in the army. The army, as a rule, is a demoralizer of the morals of men, to a very great extent. They think:

149"Oh, well; we are going to be killed anyway—let's have a h—l of a good time." Do not wish for any such good time; there is no good time anywhere for any human being except by doing good and doing right. There is a peace, a joy, and a happiness that comes from doing right that nothing else can compare with.—CS, October 11, 1941.

149Now, I pray the Lord to bless our boys. I give them my blessing, and I have the right to bless them, and I promise them that if they will be prayerful God will give them joy even in the army, if they will live sweet and clean lives. I do hope and pray that they will be like the Lamanites who were converted and who when they went into war none of them lost their lives.—CS, October 11, 1941.

From the book, Figures of the Past, by Josiah Quincy.

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Chapter Six, "Church Administration" for charges to Church officers and teachers.
