Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

149CHAPTER X

150WOMEN, MARRIAGE, AND FAMILY LIFE

MORMON WOMEN

MORMON WOMEN: A TESTIMONY OF INTEGRITY. I have often said in the past when we were suffering slander and persecution and trouble that if we could have a real, genuine photograph of the splendid women that were connected with the women's organizations in our Church, published in various periodicals that were maligning the people, that the very faces of these women would be a refutation to all the charges made against us.

150I remember well in Japan of reading an article by a man who stated it was his business to analyze the faces of people, and he said he had just come from visiting the president of the Mormon Church (that was when Lorenzo Snow was president) and he said, with one single exception, in all his life he had never looked upon a more God-like face than that of the Mormon leader. If the Mormon Church can furnish leaders like this, it will need no greater proof of the integrity of the people.

150I have often felt that a photograph of our dear sisters, with the intelligent, God-like faces that they possess, would be a testimony to all the world of the integrity of our people.—RSM, 17:679-680.

Women, Roles ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP150WOMAN'S CONTRIBUTION TO THE CHURCH. Without the wonderful work of the women I realize that the Church would have been a failure. The mother in the family far more than the father, is the one who instills in the hearts of the children, a testimony and a love for the gospel of Jesus Christ. Our fathers and mothers came here in early days for the one and only thing—to serve the Lord, and to labor for the salvation of humanity; and wherever you find a woman who is devoted to this work, almost without exception you will find that her children are devoted to it.

Women, Roles ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP151She shapes their lives more than the father, because he is away much more; his associations in the world take him away from the family circle; so that to our mothers we owe everything. I, of course, owe everything to my mother, because my father died when I was only nine days of age; and the marvelous teachings, the faith, the integrity of my mother have been an inspiration to me.—RSM, 17:335.

Women, Roles ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP151It is our sisters who carry the burden of the work. We talk about the missionary work of the elders who go forth to proclaim the gospel. We talk about the great pioneer work of the early settlers of this country. But I wish to say here that it is the mothers at home who are making the sacrifice for the boys who go into the mission field. It is the mothers who stand the hardships far more than men. Men are engaged in many activities, and without the devotion and absolute testimony of the living God in the hearts of our mothers this Church would die. May God bless the mothers of men, is my most humble prayer; and I do bless them in the name of God, our Heavenly Father, and in the name of Jesus Christ, our Redeemer.—CR, April, 1930: 23.

Women, Roles ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP151All faithful Latter-day Saint sisters have a very remarkable mission placed upon them. As you shall inspire the young girls with the love of God, with the love of home, the love of the gospel of Jesus Christ, with a desire to seek to do that which will be pleasing to our Heavenly Father, you will grow in ability, strength, and in the power of God.—YWJ, 30:351.

Women, Roles ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP151It is more blessed to give than to receive, and the women are always ready and willing to give, more than the men are. There is a willingness to sacrifice on the part of our dear sisters, and of women generally, all over the world, that we do not find in men. They are leaders in all things that make for spiritual uplift.—RSM, 17:336.

Women, Roles ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP151I have no fear for the Church of Jesus Christ as long as the women of the Church are as devoted as you are and as others are in their various organizations.—RSM, 17:679.

Women, Roles ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP151If we can only keep a deep spiritual interest in the hearts of our sisters in the Primaries, in the Mutuals, and in the Relief Societies, this work is bound to progress.—RSM, 17:679.

MARRIAGE AND FAMILY LIFE

POWER OF MOTHERS IN THE HOME. There seems to be a power which the mother possesses in shaping the life of the child that is far superior, in my judgment, to the power of the father, and this almost without exception. I have talked with a great many highly educated men and women who have usually been willing to credit the mothers for their success in life more than the fathers. As the daily vocations in life take fathers away from home, they do not have opportunity to get as close to the hearts of their children as do the mothers. After all it is by love, genuine love of our fellows, that we accomplish the most. A mother's love seems to be the most perfect and the most sincere, the strongest of any love we know anything about. I, for one, rejoice in it because of its wonderful example to me.—RSM, 20:299-300.

152Speaking of a young couple who went east to become great in certain lines, reminds me of a teacher coming to me in Liverpool, where one of my daughters was taking vocal lessons, and saying: "It is a shame, although I have the credit of being the best teacher in Liverpool, for you to keep your girl here with me. Send her to Paris—send her to Berlin. She has the finest quality of voice of any singer I have ever heard. She can make herself famous."

152I said: "My dear friend, I never expect her to make a single dollar with her voice. I would sooner have her sing lullabies to her own children than to make millions and become the greatest singer in the world." Why? Because in rearing children to God through her example, she was giving them a chance to get in that straight and narrow path that would lead them to life eternal.—RSM, 20:302.

Women, Roles ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP152I can think of nothing that a devoted wife would prize more than to be made the instrument in the hands of the Lord in bestowing His blessings upon her husband and the father of her children through the instrumentality of a special gift.—YWJ, 16:129.

Womena-Grant, Heber J.TP152PIONEER WIVES. I want to say that one of the great things we should never forget in paying tribute to the Pioneers is the marvelous labors of the wives of those men. They had the burdens to bear. The wives stayed at home while the men went out into the mission field, but theirs was the greatest labor.—CS, August 1, 1931: 4.

Marriage, Eternala-Grant, Heber J.TP153TEMPLE MARRIAGE. It has not been at all times and in all places that the Lord has seen fit to bless men and women with temples sacred to Him in which they could begin life together under the everlasting covenant. During many centuries of recorded time, no sanctified temples were available. In most lands this is true even today after a century of temple building. But the fact that many have not been and are not now privileged to enter into the temple marriage covenant . . . will by no means serve as an acceptable excuse for those who could have done so. Such persons, for some cause or other, have neglected their opportunities.

Marriage, Eternala-Grant, Heber J.TP153The blessings and promises that come from beginning life together, for time and eternity, in a temple of the Lord cannot be obtained in any other way. Worthy young Latter-day Saint men and women who so begin life together find that their eternal partnership under the everlasting covenant becomes the foundation upon which are built peace, happiness, virtue, love, and all of the other eternal verities of life, here and hereafter.—Era, 39:198-199.

Marriage, Eternala-Grant, Heber J.TP153I believe that many of the troubles of those Latter-day Saints who have sorrow in their homes and difficulties with their families come from neglect in carrying out the commandments of God, one of the most important of which concerns temple marriage. Much sorrow is chargeable to indifference to this and other requirements.

153One of the serious evils of our day is divorce, the breaking up of families, the infidelity of husband and wife. There are fewer divorces among the Latter-day Saints than among other people. In our own communities the divorce rate is lower among members of our Church who have been properly married in the temple, as compared with those married by civil ceremony, showing that the teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ, when observed, tend to make the marriage covenant sacred. Thereby the evil of divorce is greatly lessened.

153Latter-day Saints who are living their religion go to one of our temples and are married for time and for all eternity.

154Members of the Church who are not living up to the standards of the Church and cannot secure a recommend to go into a temple to be properly married are married by the law of the land or by the bishop of their ward. But they are not sealed as husband and wife for time and for all eternity.

154Another of the great evils of the age is race suicide. This also is not consistent with the gospel of Jesus Christ. Providing opportunity for the spirit children of our Father in Heaven to come to earth and work out their own salvation is one of our sacred privileges and obligations. We teach that among the choicest of eternal riches are children.

Marriage, Eternala-Grant, Heber J.TP154No man or woman in all the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, worthy of a recommend to the temple, and properly married, has been married except for time and for all eternity. And there is no doubt in the mind of any true Latter-day Saint, man or woman, as to the fact of individual existence beyond the grave, as to the fact that we shall know each other, and as to the endless duration of the covenant of marriage that has been performed in the House of the Lord for time and eternity. Of these things we have assurance in the knowledge that God Himself has spoken them, and this is one of the very foundation principles of the Church.—Era, 44:329.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP154PARENTS AND THE REARING OF CHILDREN. We are trying to rear our children to be God-fearing, and to live lives worthy of the imitation of all men.—Era, 44:120.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP154Faith is a gift of God. If we seek for faith the Lord blesses us with that faith. It becomes a gift from Him, and we are promised that if we will do the will of the Father we shall know of the doctrine. If we as parents will so order our lives that our children will know and realize in their hearts that we are in very deed Latter-day Saints, that we actually know what we are talking about, they, by seeking after the Lord, will get that same testimony.—CS, September 26, 1931.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP154I . . . bear my testimony . . . that if we will study the . . . Doctrine and Covenants . . . get the Spirit of the Lord, and teach our children in their youth, that God will bless us. Our children will grow up with a love for the gospel.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP155Let us teach our children by example as well as by precept. When we earn a dollar let us pay ten cents as tithing. When we give the children a dollar tell them to pay ten cents to the Lord. Let us see that they go regularly to their Sunday Schools, their Primaries, and their Mutual Improvement Associations, and, in this way, they will get interested and learn to love the work of the Lord. Their time and talents will be occupied, and they will not have time to waste with those things that are of no good.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP155I have heard men and women say that they were going to let their sons and daughters grow to maturity before they sought to teach them the principles of the gospel, that they were not going to cram the gospel down them in their childhood, before they were able to comprehend it. When I hear men and women say this, I think they are lacking faith in the principles of the gospel and do not comprehend it as they should. The Lord has said it is our duty to teach our children in their youth, and I prefer to take His word for it rather than the words of those who are not obeying His commandments. It is folly to imagine that our children will grow up with a knowledge of the gospel without teaching. Some men and women argue, "Well, I am a Latter-day Saint, and we were married in the temple, and were sealed over the altar by one having the Priesthood of God, according to the new and everlasting covenant, and our children are bound to grow up and be good Latter-day Saints; they cannot help it; it is born in them." I have learned the multiplication table, and so has my wife; but do you think I am big enough fool to believe that our children will be born with a knowledge of the multiplication table? I may know that the gospel is true, and so may my wife; but I want to tell you that our children will not know that the gospel is true, unless they study it and gain a testimony for themselves. Parents are deceiving themselves in imagining that their children will be born with a knowledge of the gospel. Of course, they will have greater claim upon the blessings of God, being born under the new and everlasting covenant, and it will come natural for them to grow up and perform their duties; but the devil realizes this, and is therefore seeking all the harder to lead our children from the truth.—CR, April, 1902: 79-80.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP156There are many who have made a wonderful record in the battle of life even after they have done things in their youth that were not pleasing in the sight of our Heavenly Father or for their own good. But it is far better, if it is possible, for us to start the children out in the battle of life with nothing recorded on the pages of their years except good deeds and faith-promoting thoughts. There is a saying that, "As the twig is bent the tree is inclined." You who teach our children are engaged in the labor of bending the twig.—Era, 42:135.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP156Every father and mother should make it their particular business to set an example worthy of emulation in keeping the Word of Wisdom, then the children are free to do as they wish, and if they do not keep the commandment, there will be no charge laid to the parents.—RSM, 25:14.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP156I pray that your example may be such that your children will live the gospel of Jesus Christ, because that is of more value than anything else in the world.—RSM, 20:302.

156I am thankful that healthy, vigorous, strong, sweet babies are the best crop of Utah, and I hope and pray earnestly that it will ever be so. I hope that the fashion which is a thousand times worse than are the fashions of dress, namely, that of drying up the fountains of life, will never become popular among the Latter-day Saints.—CR, October, 1913: 89.

Family Prayera-Grant, Heber J.TP156FAMILY PRAYER. The Lord has called upon us to pray with our families and in secret, that we may not forget God. If we neglect this, we lose the inspiration and power from heaven; we become indifferent, lose our testimony, and go down into darkness.—JH, September 9, 1888: 2.

Family Prayera-Grant, Heber J.TP156Children notice the example of their parents, their friends, and their teachers. Upon one occasion, in one of the southern counties, when home missionaries were stopping at a brother's home and they had prayers, a little child said: "Papa, we never pray, do we, unless we have company?"—CS, December 23, 1933: 7.

157THE ERA AND THE HOME. I again beg one and all never to fail to have in your homes The Improvement Era. There has been issue after issue of the Era during all the years that it has been published in which I have found something—in every one of them—that was of more value to me quite frequently than ten times or twenty times the cost of the subscription for a year. It has inspiration in it. It has information in it that is of great and wonderful value.—Era, 42:437.

157To me it is a reproach, a real genuine reproach on every Latter-day Saint home that does not have the Era. I do not hesitate to say that. The Latter-day Saints in one particular fulfil their obligation to the Lord almost beyond what we could expect. I am sure that two thousand missionaries require between forty and fifty dollars each month to support them in the mission field. That means a little raising of a million dollars a year that we are expending for missionary work.

157Now I do not think that I am exaggerating the least particle when I say that the very finest missionary we have in the Church today is The Improvement Era, and I am sorry to say that in many homes men are called upon missions where the father and the mother make wonderful sacrifices but have never seen fit to have this magazine in their home. They will spend between forty and fifty dollars a month for two years or two and a half to support a young man in the mission field, and yet they have not stopped to reflect that with two dollars they might have been educating that boy for the labor he is to perform. It is holding up not nickels but pennies in front of your eyes, figuratively speaking, not to take the Era in our homes in order to save two dollars. I believe that every bishop in the Church and every president of a stake and every high councilor is under obligation as a missionary to see that this missionary, The Improvement Era, gets into his home.—Era, 41:694.

157THE Y.W.M.I.A. AND THE HOME. I feel that a wonderful responsibility rests upon the young women of these Improvement Associations because they shape the destiny and make up the great party of active workers in the Church.—YWJ, 30:351.

158LOVE OF THE GOSPEL AND FAMILY TIES. God tells us in the Doctrine and Covenants there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation. We as Latter-day Saints have all started out for the gift of salvation, and we should so order our lives that when we have finished our work we shall be worthy to go back into the presence of our Father and be worthy not only to receive an exaltation ourselves, but also to receive our wives and our children that have been sealed unto us that we shall possess them. No amount of testimony, no amount of knowledge, even knowledge that this is God's work, will ever save a man so that he will have his wife and his children. But the keeping of the commandments of God will entitle him to that blessing.

158That is the only way that they can possess them in the next world, for those they have will be taken away, unless they keep the commandments of God.—CR, October, 1900: 59.

158COMMENT ON THE HISTORY OF PLURAL MARRIAGE. The statement about every Mormon having from two to twenty wives, which has been uttered many, many times, is an absolute falsehood. I presided ecclesiastically for two years [1880-1882] over one of the counties during the time that we were preaching and practicing plural marriage, and no individual was permitted to take a plural wife without the written recommendation of the bishop of the ward in which he resided vouching for his character. Not only that, the president of the stake had to vouch for his character as well. And before he could go into the temple to marry a plural wife the president of the Church had to give him a recommend. I had only two applications for permission to marry plural wives during the entire time I presided over the Tooele Stake of Zion, covering the entire county of Tooele, and I refused them both. I said to the first applicant: "What is needed in your family is sufficient brains to take care of one wife and one family, and certainly you cannot get a recommend from me to marry another wife."

158To the next man I said: "I happen to have lived in Salt Lake before I came out here, and although you are vouched for by your bishop he is not familiar with your conduct when you are in Salt Lake. I happen to have seen you under the influence of liquor, and your kind cannot get a recommend from me to obtain another wife. It is bad enough to have a man who breaks the Word of Wisdom and gets drunk raising one family, without giving him the opportunity to raise another."

159There never was a time in the history of the people of Utah that two percent of the population were liable under the Edmunds-Tucker act. But it was a very fine argument to say that we imported, as people are saying yet that we do, women to Utah, and forced them into plural marriage.—CR, April, 1930: 185.

Plural Marriagea-Grant, Heber J.TP159THE CHURCH AND PLURAL MARRIAGES. No man upon the face of the earth has any right or any authority to perform a plural marriage, and there are no plural marriages today in the Church of Christ, because no human being has the right to perform them. Therefore, any person pretending to have that right is attempting to exercise an authority that he does not have, and therefore he does not perform a marriage and there is no marriage covenant when such ceremonies are performed.

Plural Marriagea-Grant, Heber J.TP159We have excommunicated several patriarchs because they arrogated unto themselves the right, or pretended right, to perform these ceremonies. And after our having excommunicated several patriarchs, another one, so I am informed, has committed the same offense. I announce to all Israel that no living man has the right to perform plural marriages. I announce that no patriarch has the right to perform any marriages at all in the Church. We have delegated, at the present time, to the presidents of stakes, and to the bishops of wards, the right to perform lawful marriages, and there has been delegated to some elders who held positions as county clerks, the right to exercise the authority of the Priesthood to perform legal marriages for time.—CR, April, 1921: 202.
