Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

159CHAPTER XI

160EDUCATION AND MUSIC

EDUCATION IN GENERAL

Educationa-Grant, Heber J.TPTRUE EDUCATION. True education, to my mind, embraces an earnest desire for the guidance of the Father of our spirits, which are eternal—Era, 5:291.

Educationa-Grant, Heber J.TP160When I was a young man, in reading some statistics I was astonished to find that there was a higher percentage of education within the state penitentiary of Massachusetts than there was outside of it; that is, that the average was better in the penitentiary than in the remainder of the state. This made a very profound impression upon my mind. From that time until the present, I have seen nothing and read nothing but what has confirmed me in the conviction that the mere development and improvement of the body and the intellect by education, without developing the spirit, does not accomplish what education ought to do for a person.—Era, 26:1091.

Educationa-Grant, Heber J.TP160If we can get the love of God into the hearts of all in our schools, and open up radio communication with God and keep it open, I am not afraid of scientific facts or knowledge of any kind or description affecting the faith of the Latter-day Saints.—GM, 17:97.

Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP160We, of course, seek after knowledge, light, and intelligence and to inform ourselves upon all matters of importance. The glory of God, we have been told by the Prophet Joseph, is intelligence; and we desire to gain knowledge and to become as intelligent as we possibly can. But above and beyond all other things the fathers and the mothers in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints desire that their sons and daughters shall secure an abiding testimony, an absolute and a perfect knowledge regarding the divinity of the work in which we are engaged. That is of more value than anything else in this world, provided, of course, that those of us who receive that testimony, who obtain the knowledge that we are engaged in God's great work, abide therein and continue in the faith.—Era, 24:866.

Servicea-Grant, Heber J.TP161A MESSAGE TO THE STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH IN 1901. Inasmuch as it is impossible to be with you at your devotional exercises tomorrow morning, I take the opportunity of dictating a few words to be read by Professor Lyman, or whomever he may select . . . . I wish to urge upon you to have a purpose in life, and to labor with all the zeal and energy which you possess to accomplish that purpose. . . . Try always to make practical use of the knowledge that you gain while in school. The oftener you use your information, the greater will be your ability to do so, and the more good you can do to your companions. . . . Don't go through life with your lips sealed against words of kindness and encouragement, nor your hearts sealed against performing labors for another. Make a motto in life: always try to assist someone else to carry his burden. The true key to happiness in life is to labor for the happiness of others. I pity the selfish man who has never experienced the joy which comes to those who receive the thanks and gratitude of the people whom they may have aided in the struggle of life. I commend Longfellow's "Psalm of Life" to your careful perusal.

161It has been said that, "To do that which before us lies in daily life is the prime wisdom." By having this for a motto, in addition to having a purpose in life, and making practical use of our knowledge, I have no fear but that all the students of the University, in after years, will be instruments for good in the hands of God, in accomplishing His purposes on earth. . . .

161I know that you love and respect the president of your university, and in no way can you show that love in a manner that will be more highly appreciated by him than in doing your duty, and living worthy lives, both while in and out of school.

161The university, to a certain extent, is judged by its graduates. Let every student feel that when he shall graduate and go forth to do the battle of life, that he will so order his conduct that he will bring credit to himself, and thereby, of necessity, credit to the institution of learning to which he owes so much.

162All that I have said with reference to showing your love and gratitude to the president of your institution, applies with equal force to the professors, who labor diligently for your advancement; and, above and beyond this, it applies to your fathers and your mothers, to whose hearts you can in no other way bring greater joy than by faithfully performing the daily duties that devolve upon you, and living worthy lives.

162I am reminded that if I were talking to you, it would now be about time for the bell to ring, announcing that the time has expired for your devotional services; and, therefore, I will close with the earnest prayer that God our Heavenly Father will bless each of you, that you may enjoy His Holy Spirit to guide and direct you through all the changing scenes of life; that peace, prosperity, and happiness, may be your portion in this life, and that you will be welcomed back into His presence in the life to come, there to have an eternity of joy.

162I am sincerely your friend and brother in the cause of true education, which, to my mind, embraces an earnest desire for the guidance of the Father of our spirits which are eternal.—Era, 5:288-291.

Teaching, Seculara-Grant, Heber J.TP162TRIBUTE TO THE TEACHING PROFESSION. I have always had a splendid and high regard for teachers ever since I myself once tried to teach. I taught penmanship and bookkeeping in the old Deseret University, now the University of Utah. I never realized how difficult it was to convey one's ideas to somebody else until I engaged in teaching. I would borrow a half dollar from the boys and tell them to make an entry of it, and almost invariably, they would credit me with that half dollar, and when I made out a bill and requested them to pay the debts according to their own books, they would complain and say, "Why, you owe me the half dollar." I would say, "Your own book and your own handwriting testify that you owe me a half dollar and I want you to pay your debts." I had to adopt a great many methods of that kind to hammer such things into the heads, so to speak, of those to whom I was trying to teach bookkeeping. It gave me a remarkable respect for those who are engaged in the occupation of teaching.—Era, 26:1092.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP163THE DUTY OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS TO TEACH THE TRUTH. We have the truth to give to the world. We have the plan of life and salvation. We have the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and if we will live our religion, the Lord God Almighty will bless us. . . . Every Latter-day Saint should have a desire, above all other things, that his life should proclaim the truth, and that his life should be a teacher of the truth, not only to the world, but especially to his own family.—CR, April, 1923: 9.

Teaching, Seculara-Grant, Heber J.TP163RELIGION AND SECULAR EDUCATION. I want to say that I know, from personal testimony to me, that in the university to which I have contributed means to assist in its support, some teachers have been guilty of asking questions that they have no business to ask. Men who are drawing salaries are asking questions that create disbelief in the Bible. If they would just control their tongues and teach what they are paid to teach, I for one would be grateful to them.

Teaching, Seculara-Grant, Heber J.TP163When teachers stand before their classes and ask students to hold up their hands in answer to a question whether they believe something that is in the Bible, such instructors are doing that which I think they should refrain from doing, because that is not what they are paid for. Let the Bible alone, and not attempt to get a "ha-ha" out of those who do not believe its teachings.—CR, October, 1935: 102-103.

163I will thank the Lord when the public sentiment of America shall say that a man who does not believe in prayer cannot teach our children, at the expense of the public. Why should my money be used to employ a man to teach my children infidelity and a lack of faith in God? I remember as a boy, when we had our small common schools, that they hired a non-Mormon to teach in the Twelfth Ward school. He got up and said: "I understand that in the past you have prayed in this school. We will not have any more prayers, because we do not know whether or not there is anybody to pray to." I consider it an outrage that the money of people who believe in the Lord God Almighty can be spent to teach our children that kind of "rot." I endorse Nicholas Murray Butler's words, "The fool who says in his heart: 'There is no God,' finds his god when he is looking in the mirror."—CR, April, 1922: 167.

164MODERN SCIENCE AND MORMONISM. In speaking here last month, Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon referred to a statement made by a minister to the effect that unless the Mormon Church can withstand the criticism of intelligent people, the test of modern science, etc., it must, in the next one hundred years, be counted in the category of declining religions and that it would then be necessary for us to shift our faith from Joseph Smith and his reputed revelations.

164Never while the world stands will it be necessary for us to shift our faith. God lives, Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God. He has appeared to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and Sidney Rigdon, and we proclaim to all the world that we know that He lives and that God has given to us individually a testimony regarding the divinity of the mission of Joseph Smith.—CR, October, 1930: 5-6.

164Unless we provide better means of religious instruction for the rising generation, I fear that many of them will turn away from the truth.—JH, September 2, 1889; DN, September 2, 1889.

Parentsa-Grant, Heber J.TP164DUTY OF PARENTS TO TEACH THEIR CHILDREN. The Lord has given us a commandment that we shall teach our children the principles of the gospel and have them baptized when they are eight years of age. If we fail to keep this commandment, the blessings that are promised to us by the Lord will be revoked, and we will have mourning and sorrow in seeing our children grow up without a desire to serve God. And in after years, when we endeavor to instil into their minds of the principles of the gospel, we will make a failure of it.—JH, April 6, 1894: 9; DN, April 12, 1894.

THE CHURCH AND EDUCATION

Church Educational Systema-Grant, Heber J.TPPURPOSE AND FUNCTION OF CHURCH EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM. The specific purpose of the Church school system is to make Latter-day Saints.—Era, 26:1091.

Church Educational Systema-Grant, Heber J.TP165I remember speaking, upon one occasion, in one of our great Church schools. I said that I hoped it would never be forgotten that the one and only reason why there was any necessity for a Church school was to make Latter-day Saints. If it were only for the purpose of gaining secular knowledge or improving in art, literature, science, and invention, so far as our information was concerned, and adding to it on these subjects, that there was no need of Church schools, because we could gain these things from our secular schools supported by the taxation of the people; and that we had an abundance of uses for all the means that the Church possesses, all the tithing that might come into our hands, without expending vast sums of money upon Church schools. But if we kept in our minds the one central thing, namely, the making of Latter-day Saints in our schools, then they would be fulfilling the object of their existence. The amount of money expended would cut no figure at all, because we cannot value in dollars and cents the saving of a single soul.—Era, 24:866-867.

Church Educational Systema-Grant, Heber J.TP165Unless the heart of a man is right, unless a man is determined to do good, unless he believes in God and in Jesus Christ, and believes in the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he cannot accomplish what he might achieve in this Church if he had that knowledge. It is to implant that knowledge in the hearts of the people that we have a school system, and if the Church school system fails to do this, it will not have accomplished the thing for which it was organized, that which is expected of it, and which we all hope and pray for it to do.—Era, 26:1091.

165There are today [1929] twelve thousand five hundred students in our seminaries and three thousand eight hundred students in our Church schools. It is costing more than twice as much to support the three thousand eight hundred students in the Church schools as it is to support the twelve thousand five hundred students in the seminaries. It costs over ten times as much per capita to give the same amount of religious instruction in our Church schools as is given in our seminaries.

166It is only fair to say that the religious instruction given in our seminaries is equally as extensive and as thorough as that given in our Church schools. We have appeals from all over the Church, wherever Church schools are located, that we do not close these institutions. The people in each stake feel that their particular school is the one that ought not to be closed. While we are expending now and have done so for the past three years, more than all the tithes paid by the people in the various stakes of Zion from Canada to Mexico, it is an impossibility to extend our seminary system further—which has been greatly expanded in the last three years—and still continue our Church schools. When you stop to reflect that it only costs a little less than one-tenth as much to educate our young people religiously in the seminaries as it does in the Church schools, you will realize that we are justified in curtailing our schools and in enlarging our seminaries—when we can give for the same amount as much if not a little more religious education to ten people in a seminary as we can give to one person in a school. We would be delighted if it were possible, not only to keep every one of our Church schools operating, but to have more of them. I am sure that, figuratively speaking, it breaks the hearts of the Presidency and of all of the General Authorities of the Church to close any one of the Church schools. We appreciate the wonderful labors that have been accomplished and the wonderful good that has been done in these schools. But we cannot, without facing a deficit, continue to expend three or four times as much money for building meetinghouses and Church schools with only a very slight increase in our tithes.

166Because of these facts we would like the people to understand that in closing Church schools and opening seminaries we shall be able to give religious instruction to about ten times as many students.—CR, April, 1929: 3-4.

Church Educational Systema-Grant, Heber J.TP166I am very sorry indeed that a great many simply study and learn the words, so to speak, the letter of things, without getting the spirit of them. The spirit, we are told, gives life and animation and power, and it is to develop the spirit of man that we have established this Church school system.—Era, 26:1091.

Church Educational Systema-Grant, Heber J.TP167The whole sum and substance of my subject is contained in the fact that there is one thing, and only one, that these [Church] schools ought to do, and that is to make Latter-day Saints. And, as the salvation of the children of God here on the earth is the purpose for which the gospel has again been revealed, that is the reason for the establishment of these schools, and the specific reason.

Church Educational Systema-Grant, Heber J.TP167Unless these schools had been established, I believe that some of the strongest, best, and most noble workers in the Church of Christ would not be such noble workers, would not have their faith, would have gone away for their education without a love of God in their hearts, and would not today be numbered in the membership of the Church. I believe that as a cold-blooded business proposition, we should try to discern and find out the spirit of men and women teaching in these schools, to see to it that we haven't somebody teaching there just because there is as good a salary as he could get somewhere else or because he can do better financially; and who pays his tithing simply because he is working in the Church school system as I know some have done, for the day they got another job they discontinued paying their tithing. When we can get rid of every teacher who has not the love of God and the love of Jesus Christ and the love of this work and of implanting in the hearts of the children the testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and have only those who are determined to make Latter-day Saints, then this school system will grow more rapidly than it has in the past, and the specific object for which it was created will be more rapidly attained.—Era, 26:1093.

167THE DIVIDENDS OF TEACHING. There is no dividend that any human being can draw from bonds or stocks, or anything in the wealth of the world, that compares with the knowledge in one's heart that he or she has been an instrument in the hands of God of shaping some life for good. And I can promise the righteous teachers of our youth that as the years come and go they will gather dividends of thanks and gratitude from the children whose lives they have been the instruments in the hands of God of shaping for good.—Era, 42:135.

168ON BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY. I rejoice in the growth of this institution. I rejoice in the fact that today the taxpayers of Utah and adjoining states are being saved one million dollars annually because that amount is being expended in the Church schools [1926]. They would have that to pay . . . were it not for the Church. This Church is founded upon the statement that "The Glory of God is Intelligence." In addition to that, in this school we are seeking to implant in the hearts of the young men and young women an absolute testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ and of the restitution again to the earth of the plan of salvation.—GM, 17:75. From remarks at the B.Y.U.'s Semi-Centennial, October 16, 1926.

MUSIC

Musica-Grant, Heber J.TPL.D.S. INTEREST IN MUSIC. I believe, taken as a whole, there are no people to be found in all the world who are taking more interest in music and the musical uplift of the communities in which they reside, than are the Latter-day Saints.—70th Birthday Pamphlet, November, 1926: 15.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP168The singing of our sacred hymns, written by the servants of God, has a powerful effect in converting people to the principles of the gospel and in promoting peace and spiritual growth. Singing is a prayer to the Lord, as He has said: "For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads."—Era, 43:522; D. and C., 25:12.

168L.D.S. CHOIRS. Singing is a very splendid part of the worship of the Latter-day Saints, and all are proud of the record which Utah's two great musical organizations, the Salt Lake and the Ogden Tabernacle choirs, have made at home and abroad. There are also hundreds of other excellent choirs, from Canada on the north to Mexico on the South, whose singing to the ordinary lay member, like myself, is an inspiration.

169I have listened in Stockholm, Copenhagen, Christiania, Zurich, and Rotterdam to our Mormon choirs. Their singing has been the equal in its inspiring and uplifting character to any that I have heard in the stakes of Zion.—Era, 15:786.

Musica-Grant, Heber J.TP169I rejoice in our wonderful Tabernacle Choir. I rejoice in the fine management of this choir and our fine organists. I rejoice in our having such fine groups of singers in different parts of Utah that we can bring here to sing for us. I do not think there is another people in the world of the same number that can begin to compare with our people as congregational singers.—CR, October, 1939: 127.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP169HYMNS AND CHURCH WORSHIP. Let us not forget our hymns when we go to the house of worship. Let the congregation sing; and by all means let the choir members become familiar with the beautiful sentiments that are contained in our hymns. And so shall our Father in heaven delight in the songs of our hearts, which shall become prayers unto Him, and which He will graciously answer with blessings upon our heads.—Era, 43:522.

Musica-Grant, Heber J.TP169LATTER-DAY SAINT HYMNS. I wish that as far as possible we would get into the habit of singing our own music, that is, music composed by our own people. There are an inspiration and spirit which accompany the music of George Careless, Evan Stephens, Joseph J. Daynes, and others of our own faith.—CR, April, 1934: 105.

169I am free to confess that when I go out into the country district and hear sung certain anthems, I wonder why the people do not show preference for the home-made article. I think that Evan Stephens and these other men were inspired of the Lord to write music for us. I do not want to reflect on any of the magnificent things that have been written by others, but I have gone to many a conference where I have listened to anthems when I would rather have heard a good Latter-day Saint hymn sung.—CR, April, 1933: 120.

Musica-Grant, Heber J.TP170The more beautiful the music by which false doctrine is sung, the more dangerous it becomes. I appeal to all Latter-day Saints, and especially to our choirs, never to sing the words of a song, no matter how beautiful and inspiring the music may be, where the teachings are not in perfect accord with the truths of the gospel.—Era, 15:786.

170To my mind the musician who pays little or no attention to the words of a song destroys half the value and charm of his or her singing.—Era, 15:784.

Musica-Grant, Heber J.TP170SINGING AND MISSIONARY WORK. I have no ambition to become a singer. But I do feel that there is a great deal lost in the homes of the people by not having the songs of Zion sung therein. Many a missionary robs himself of strength and power and ability to accomplish good, and to make friends, by not knowing how to sing. Another thing, he prevents himself from getting many a supper and many a bed and breakfast, which he could get if he only knew how to sing. People would invite him in, and welcome him, if he knew how to sing. The songs of Zion bring a good influence into our homes.

Musica-Grant, Heber J.TP170It is not the eloquence that you possess which will carry conviction to the hearts of the people, but it is the Spirit of Almighty God that is burning in your hearts, and your desire for the salvation of souls. Brigham Young said that the Spirit of the Lord would do more to convert people than the eloquence of men. And I say that the singing of the songs of Zion, though imperfectly, with the inspiration of God, will touch the hearts of the honest more effectively than if sung well without the Spirit of God. Sing with the Spirit of God. Love the words that you sing. I love the songs of Zion.—Era, 4:686.

Musica-Grant, Heber J.TP170I am confident that the hymns of Zion, when sung with the proper spirit, bring a peaceful and heavenly influence into our homes, and also aid in preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Musica-Grant, Heber J.TP171I recommend to the youth of Zion, that they go to work with determination and learn to sing. Particularly is this recommendation made to the young men, because, next to a familiarity with the scriptures, the ability to sing will assist them when they are called to the nations of the earth to preach the gospel. It will insure them many a friend, furnish them many a meal and bed, which they would otherwise go without.—Era, 3:894.

171APPRECIATION OF CHURCH MUSICIANS. I say God bless our individual singers and the members of our musical organizations.

171I know of no more self-sacrificing and loyal people than those who constitute our choirs, and who are constantly singing at funerals and in our meetings for the benefit of the Saints. Their talents are given freely, and almost without exception without financial reward. I for one appreciate, beyond my ability to tell, the self-sacrificing and loyal devotion of our singers. I wish them God-speed, and there is no blessing too good for these faithful workers. From the bottom of my heart, I pray that the choicest blessings of the Lord may ever attend them, and that they may constantly grow and improve in their art, and that they may also advance in a knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ.—Era, 15:787.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP171"COME, COME, YE SAINTS"—ITS INSPIRATION AND MEANING. I rejoice in hearing the choir and congregation sing all four verses of the great pioneer song, "Come, Come, Ye Saints." It has been a source of regret to me that [formerly] we seldom if ever heard that fourth verse. I remember, on one occasion, while speaking in this hall, I made the request that whenever the choir or congregation should sing this hymn they sing the fourth verse. As I listened to the remarks of our prophet, I was deeply impressed. He [President Joseph F. Smith] asked the question, "Are we as faithful, are we as diligent as our fathers and mothers were?" While that hymn was being sung I remembered his words; and as we were singing it, I asked myself the question, Do I feel as did our parents?—

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP172And should we die before our journey's through, Happy day! all is well! We then are free from toil and sorrow too; With the just we shall dwell.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP172Do we feel that, if we die, all is well? Are we living so that if the summons should come to us, that we are worthy to go back to our Heavenly Father, when we leave this earth, and be welcomed there? Are we so living that we are worthy of the blessings we have received? I ask myself the question, am I doing all I possibly can for the uplifting not only of myself but of my fellows, am I in very deed a shining light to the people, by reason of the example I set before them?—CR, April, 1909.

Prophetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP172"WE THANK THEE, O GOD, FOR A PROPHET." I have traveled six solid weeks at a time in different settlements and heard "We Thank Thee, O God, For a Prophet" sung in every one of them. And I have thought time and time again that there were any number of Latter-day Saints who ought to put a postscript on it and say, "We thank thee, O God, for a prophet to guide us in these latter days provided he guides us in the way we want to be guided."—Era, 44:255.
