Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

172CHAPTER XII

173YOUTH AND ACHIEVEMENT

FAITH AND INTEREST IN YOUTH

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TPI have always been interested with all my heart and soul in the welfare of the young men and young women of our Church.—Era, 39:396.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP173FAITH IN THE YOUTH OF THE CHURCH. So far as the faith of the young Latter-day Saints is concerned, it is my belief that, in proportion to the numbers of young men and women in the Church who are living up to the three great principles referred to today by Elder Junius F. Wells: namely, (1) prayer to God, (2) observance of the Word of Wisdom, and (3) the studying of the word of God in the holy scriptures, that there is more adherence to these doctrines today among the Latter-day Saints than there was, pro rata, forty years ago when these [Mutual Improvement] Associations were organized. People not of our faith may believe that the youth of Zion can be converted from the faith of their fathers and their mothers, but I expect them to be disappointed. Some of our young people will fall by the wayside. But in my heart I have a firm belief that, as the years roll around, many who are careless and indifferent today, who, because of a little learning, secured in colleges and other places, may apparently have drifted away, in the providences of the Lord will return to the fold. Why? Because there has been implanted in the hearts of the young men and the young women of this Church love of God and love of virtue; and with virtue as the foundation upon which to build, I expect these boys and these girls to come back to us.—Era, 18:909.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP173So far as the youth of Zion are concerned, I have no fear, because those who are keeping the commandments of the Lord are progressing and growing in strength and in power and in influence. Those who are drifting away from the principles of the gospel are losing in influence and power and prestige.—Era, 39:471.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP174I rejoice in the splendid progress of our young people. I am sure there is no other place in the United States where a body of young people could be gathered together, such as I am facing here today [June Conference, 1938], who would pledge themselves, as you have done, to live one of the laws of God [the Word of Wisdom] for the benefit of mankind.—Era, 41:391.

174THE SPIRIT OF YOUTH. It is a great joy to me, always, to meet with the young people. It is a very difficult matter for me to realize that I am what they commonly call a very old man. I believe my spirit is as youthful as it ever was. I enjoy mingling with youth; I enjoy playing with them; I enjoy the sports of youth. True, I cannot take as active a part in some of the athletic sports as I would like to, but I am very happy with youth, and to me the fact that the spirit apparently does not grow old is one of the evidences of the immortality of the soul. I remember reading of ex-President Adams being met one day by a friend who said: "How is President Adams today?"

174"Oh," he said, "President Adams was never better in his life, never younger, never in finer condition, but this house he is living in is becoming rather old and he is hoping for a better one in the near future."

174I hope to keep that spirit of youth.—Era, 41:391.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP174I sympathize with our young people because of the temptations that beset them. I urge them as I always have to live the gospel of Jesus Christ fully. In that way they will have health and happiness and will meet with success in this life and will have an eternity of joy in store for them in the life to come. I bless them with courage to meet the problems that lie ahead.—Era, 43:267.

174COMMENT ON THE FAITHFULNESS OF THE "THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION" IN 1912. Referring to President Smith's statement in the May number [of The Improvement Era] on the faithfulness of the third and fourth generation of young Latter-day Saints: While I was in New York two or three weeks ago, I had the pleasure of attending a conference of all the conference presidents of the Eastern States Mission. During one of our meetings, President Ben E. Rich said: "I do not know how these boys stand, but having read a statement that the third and fourth generations of the Latter-day Saints are drifting away from the faith of their fathers, I would like each of you conference presidents to tell us to which generation you belong."

175Every conference president in the Eastern States Mission was of the third or fourth generation. This was a confirmation of the statement made by our prophet, which I have just been reading from the Era, that the Latter-day Saints are attacked upon false premises.—Era, 15:879.

YOUTH AND THE MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATIONS

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TPThere is nothing within my power that I can possibly do for the advancement of the youth of Zion but that I propose to do it. I have been laboring, as you know, from the time the first Y. M. M. I. A. was organized . . . [1875]. From that day to this I have taken great pleasure in laboring for the advancement of the youth of Zion. I believe in you. I love you. I respect you. I think you are the finest young men and women to be found in any part of the world. And why shouldn't I want to labor for people of this kind? I do, and I expect to continue, and I expect to stay here and continue it just as long as the Lord wants me.—Era, 39:471.

175I have ever taken an interest in the Mutual Improvement Associations because of the realization of the fact that as a young man I stood as it were upon the brink of usefulness or upon the brink of making a failure of my life, and to a certain extent I give the credit to the Mutual Improvement Associations and to the Sunday School that I have become a faithful member of the Church of Christ.—The Contributor, 16:640.

MIAa-Grant, Heber J.TP175THE M. I. A. AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF YOUTH. When I stop to reflect upon the fact that when chosen as a boy, not twenty-four years of age, to preside over a stake of Zion, I had not spoken in public ten minutes at any one time in my life,—I rejoice to know that today there is hardly a boy or girl in her teens who can not stand up and preach on the principles of the gospel, from fifteen to twenty minutes. Nearly all our young people can do this, if they have been faithful in attending the Mutual Improvement Associations.—CR, April, 1909: 113.

MIAa-Grant, Heber J.TP176I am convinced of the deep obligation which rests upon all parents and officers in the Y. M. M. I. A. to exert the best energy of our minds to direct aright the labors of the youth of Zion.—Era, 3:197.

MIAa-Grant, Heber J.TP176BISHOPS AND THE M. I. A. It has been said that "the man without the woman is not perfect in the Lord, neither the woman without the man," and the place of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations is to try and keep up with the young women. That is the principal duty at present. There are some of our bishops who think that there is no place for the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations. They doubtless have no children. If they have daughters, as I have—all my boys being girls—they can have no desire for them to get good husbands, or it would never enter their heads that there is no place in the Church for the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations.—Era, 15:871.

Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associationa-Grant, Heber J.TP176The Y.M.M.I.A. gives the young men an organization which they can call their own, which young people much desire. I feel young enough to desire it.

Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associationa-Grant, Heber J.TP176No greater calamity could befall the young men of this Church than for them to have no organization of their own.

Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associationa-Grant, Heber J.TP176Our Associations teach the young men to preside and conduct public assemblies, and to express themselves in public gatherings. I have met men with salaries ranging from twenty-five to one hundred thousand a year who were not as capable as some of our boys of twenty when it came to making an impromptu speech.—Era, 15:872-873.

Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associationa-Grant, Heber J.TP176We want the boys to get practice in speaking and in conducting themselves properly. Kill our Associations and the needed practice is done away with.

Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associationa-Grant, Heber J.TP177They give opportunity for study along religious, social, scientific, intellectual, and physical lines. They prevent the general organization of clubs, social and select educational societies, and meet the desires and wants of young people in such activities under Church influence and direction. If we fail to provide our young men with the opportunity of doing this, they will go outside of Church influences to indulge in these things.—Era, 15:873.

MIAa-Grant, Heber J.TP177Our association is a rallying place in which the youth may learn from study and experience to develop all noble gifts within them. This implies class work in conduct, application of religious doctrines, literature, science, history, biography, art, government, etc. It is a forum where those who have special talents may be encouraged to cultivate them by public expression, where the young men [and women] take part in debates, orations, music, story-telling, lectures, writing essays, reading, and speaking.—Era, 15:875.

Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associationa-Grant, Heber J.TP177PRIESTHOOD SUPPORT IN THE M.I.A. The Priesthood should support the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association because, (1) it is a feeder to the Priesthood quorums; (2) it is a vital force for good in the community and a help to the Priesthood.

Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associationa-Grant, Heber J.TP177You cannot convert a bishop who has an active, wide-awake Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association but that it is one of the finest organizations that could possibly exist in his ward. He knows the benefit, he knows the support, the same as the bishop knows the benefit to his ward of a young man who comes home from a mission filled with the Spirit of God, and who can feed the people the bread of life. There is no labor that pleases the Lord more than for young men to prepare themselves for missions. From my own experience, I know that the active M. I. A. member is better prepared for missionary work than one who has not attended Mutual. In this field the young men may have the opportunity for preparation to do good, effective missionary work. There is no place better for men and women of experience to do good than can be found working in our Mutual Improvement Associations. The best missionaries, the best workers, should be called, if necessary, to do missionary work among the young people in their association activities. Often more practical good and more genuine religion can be impressed by a word in the right place, in the games, parties, entertainments, classes, and festivals of the young than in much preaching and exhortation.—Era, 15:876-877.

MIAa-Grant, Heber J.TP178I feel that the receiving of a testimony is the one great central object to be accomplished in these Associations of our young men and young ladies.—Era, 24:866.

178APPRECIATION TO ERA WORKERS. I thank with all my heart all the officers of the Young Men's and Young Women's Mutual Improvement Associations in every stake of Zion, and the presidents of stakes and bishops of wards, and workers throughout the missions and throughout the entire Church, for their splendid support of our magazine; and I tender to them my heartfelt thanks, and earnestly pray my Heavenly Father to reward them with an increased flow of His Spirit. May peace, prosperity, and happiness attend all of our good people who are working for The Improvement Era, throughout the entire journey of life, and may there be an eternity of joy in store for them with their loved ones in the life to come, is my most earnest and sincere prayer.—Era, 40:341.

Boy Scouts of Americaa-Grant, Heber J.TP178ENDORSEMENT OF BOY SCOUT MOVEMENT. I am very happy to give the Boy Scout movement my full endorsement. For many years as acting superintendent of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, I was active in the promotion of this program. I feel that thousands of our boys have been helped in becoming good men by living up to the principles of the Boy Scout movement.

178It is a real satisfaction to me to know that through the cooperation of our general, stake, and ward officers we have more Boy Scouts per capita than any other church in the United States.

Boy Scouts of Americaa-Grant, Heber J.TP178I hope that our Scout leaders will remember that it is our privilege and obligation, in connection with the promotion of this program, to see that our boys also receive proper religious training in order that they may become real American citizens.—Era, 38:69.

179ADVICE TO YOUTH. I do ask the young people as I asked the graduates of Brigham Young University, Wednesday last—over four hundred of them—to read and learn section one hundred twenty-one of the Doctrine and Covenants, starting with the words, "How long can rolling waters remain impure," and continuing to the end of the section, and to do so every month for five years. In fact, I think it would be well if they would read it once every week for six years. . . .

Priesthooda-Grant, Heber J.TP179It tells that men who have the Priesthood should not use it for their own aggrandizement, and that should they do so they would lose the spirit of the Lord and would aspire after the things of this world instead of the things of God.—Era, 44:393, 447.

Young Mena-Grant, Heber J.TP179Young men who are laboring in the M.I.A. cause should be true to themselves. When they resolve to accomplish something, they should never become discouraged, but should labor cheerfully and with a determination until the promise to themselves has become a reality. I cannot possibly impress this lesson too strongly upon the minds of my readers. If we fall into the habit of making resolutions in relation to ourselves, and of constantly breaking them, such a course will tend to make us careless in the fulfillment of promises to others.—Era, 3:84.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP179The one central thing, the one great message that I desire to deliver to the youth of Zion is to get a knowledge of the divinity of this work, and then to love the work and to follow out the admonition given to the father of the Prophet Joseph Smith:

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP179"Oh, ye that engage in the service of the Lord, see that ye serve him with all your might, mind and strength."

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP179That is the central message that I wish to deliver. But how can we serve the Lord? By obeying His commandments. Faith without works is dead, like the body without the spirit.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP179Let the young people be honest tithe payers; let the young people observe the Word of Wisdom; let the young people attend to their secret prayers and supplicate God, night and morning, for the direction of His Holy Spirit; let them honor their fathers and their mothers, that their days may be long in the land which the Lord their God has given them.—Era, 24:873-874.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP180My message to the young people of the Church is this:

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP180Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of the true and the living God. Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hands of God of establishing upon the earth the true gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ; Brigham Young was the lawful successor to Joseph Smith, and Brigham Young gave to all the youth of Israel, Associations for their improvement, but the keynote he gave to those Associations was that they should secure a testimony of this gospel.—Era, 24:869.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP180If there is one thing more than another that I would like above all other things to impress upon young men it is a desire to find some labor, some work in connection with the gospel of Jesus Christ, through which they can give something to this gospel.—Era, 42:393.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP180THE DANGERS OF IMITATION. It is natural for young men and women to imitate and to be influenced by their daily associates. I know of many splendid young men who have entered the employ of intelligent and bright men but with moral standards not of the highest, who, because of the capacity and the ability of their employers to make money, have followed their examples in things contrary to the teachings of their parents, contrary to the revelations of the Lord. With few exceptions, young men who have so done have made complete failures of their lives—some of them morally as well as financially.

Youtha-Grant, Heber J.TP180I want to say that the young Mormon boy who apes the habits of those not of our faith is in greater danger of making a moral and financial wreck of himself, than the boy who has not been trained as our boys have been trained.—Era, 25:956.

SOME ELEMENTS OF ACHIEVEMENT

Talentsa-Grant, Heber J.TPTHE WAY TO ACHIEVEMENT. I believe that we can accomplish any object that we make up our minds to, and no boy or girl ought to sit down and say, because she cannot do as well as somebody else, that she will not do anything. God has given to some people ten talents. To others, He has given one. But they who improve the one talent will live to see the day when they will far outshine those who have ten talents but fail to improve them.—Era, 4:684-685.

Successa-Grant, Heber J.TP181THE CRITERION OF SUCCESS. The great criterion of success in the world is that men can make money. But I want to say to you Latter-day Saints that to do this is not true success. As a man grows and increases in the things of this world, if he is not careful, he will lose the Spirit of the Lord, and he will set his heart upon the things of this world. And if he loses the Spirit of the Lord, and fails to be honest with God in the payment of his tithes as strictly and honestly as he would account to a partner if he were engaged in business, that man will lessen his strength, will lessen his power, will lessen the testimony of the Spirit of God within his soul. There is no question of it in my mind. We must be honest with the Lord. The great trouble is that there are many people who, as they grow and increase in the things of this world, set their hearts upon them and lose the Spirit of the Lord. Therefore, that which is counted by the world as success is failure; because if a man starts out for a prize and he fails to secure it after laboring nearly a lifetime for that prize, certainly his life has been a failure. I know many individuals who, when they made small sums of money, were absolutely honest with the Lord, and paid one-tenth of it. But when they made large sums of money they paid all the way from one percent, instead of ten, up to two or three percent. What is the matter? Why, the appetite for money grows upon a man, increases and strengthens unless he is careful, just as much as the appetite for whiskey. It gets possession of him, and he loves the money instead of loving it only for the good that he can do with it. He does not estimate properly the value of things. I once wrote a little sentiment for The Improvement Era, which was published fourteen years ago [in 1897], as follows:

Successa-Grant, Heber J.TP181"Not he who merely succeeds in making a fortune, and in so doing blunts the natural affections of the heart, and chases therefrom the love of his fellows, can be said to be truly successful: but he who so lives that those who know him best shall love him most; and that God, who knows not only his deeds, but also the inmost sentiments of his heart, shall love him; of such an one, only—notwithstanding he may die in poverty—can it be said indeed and of a truth, 'he should be crowned with the wealth of success.' "—CR, October, 1911: 23-24.

Successa-Grant, Heber J.TP182I assert with confidence that the law of success, here and hereafter, is to have a humble and a prayerful heart, and to work, work, WORK.—Era, 3:195.

Successa-Grant, Heber J.TP182The Lord is no respecter of persons, and will give success to all who work for it. If I can only impress upon the minds of the youth of Zion the eloquence, the inexpressible eloquence of work, I shall feel fully repaid.—Era, 3:195.

Faith and Worksa-Grant, Heber J.TP182I believe in the man who is willing to do the things which the Lord has commanded, and who shows his faith by his works.—Era, 24:259.

Successa-Grant, Heber J.TP182What are we working for? Wealth? Riches? If we have embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ, then we are working for eternal life. Then we are laboring to save our souls. And after saving our own souls we are laboring for the salvation of our children. Perchance we leave them wealth. What does it amount to? Look at some of those families among the Latter-day Saints who have been left in affluent circumstances. Show me, my friends, if you can, their increase in faith and works in laboring for the onward advancement of God's Kingdom, because of their increase in wealth. . . . I want to say that the best inheritance that you can leave to your sons and daughters is an investment in the kingdom of God.—JH, October 30, 1892: 5; DN, December 17, 1892.

Work of the Lorda-Grant, Heber J.TP182HOW TO GET THE SPIRIT OF GOD. If any man lacks the Spirit of God, let him go to work and labor for the advancement of the kingdom of God, and he will have the Spirit of God.—JH, October 4, 1895: 7.

182The most prosperous men all over this country, wherever the Latter-day Saints are scattered, are those who have paid an honest tithing and who have been the most liberal in donating for temples—so it will always be.—JH, October 4, 1895: 7.

183ON A PERSON'S USEFULNESS. Some people think they are not appreciated and are not allowed sufficient scope for usefulness. There is but one person who can curtail an individual's usefulness, and that is himself.—JH, October 4, 1889: 5; DN, October 5, 1889.

183There is nothing like example. I like to encourage people to do their duty and to have a mind to do something, and if they have the mind and the desire, I am convinced they can do almost anything they want to within the bounds of reason.—Era, 44:459.

Unitya-Grant, Heber J.TP183THE BENEFITS OF COOPERATION. The accomplishments of our people have been brought about by pulling together, by "teamwork," by absolute unity and cooperation, which I believe existed here to a greater extent than in any other community.—Era, 39:131.

Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP183WORK AND LONG LIFE. I do not ask any man or child in this Church, although I am more than eighty years of age, to work any more hours than I do. I have worked more than one day from half past three in the morning until nine o'clock at night. [^1] I do not know of anything that destroys a person's health more quickly than not working. It seems to me that lazy people die young while those who are ready and willing to labor and who ask the Lord day by day to help them to do more in the future than they have ever done in the past, are the people whom the Lord loves, and who live to a good old age.—Era, 39:131.

Servicea-Grant, Heber J.TP183INITIATIVE AND SERVICE. I have been impressed with the fact that there is a spirit growing in the world today to avoid giving service, an unwillingness to give value received, to try to see how little we can do and how much we can get for doing it. This is all wrong. Our spirit and aim should be to do all we possibly can, in a given length of time, for the benefit of those who employ us and for the benefit of those with whom we are associated.

Servicea-Grant, Heber J.TP184The other spirit—to get all we can, and give as little as possible in return—is contrary to the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not right to desire something for which we do not give service or value received. That idea is all wrong, and it is only a question of time when the sheep and the goats will be separated, so to speak.—Era, 43:137.

Self-Developmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP184It is by exercise and by practice that we become proficient in any of the vocations or avocations of life, whether it be of a religious or of a secular character.—YWJ, 30:351.

184There is a lack of doing things in the world, and it is that doing of things with us that counts and gives us strength and power with the Lord and develops the people.—YWJ, 30:352.

Self-Reliancea-Grant, Heber J.TP184Nothing destroys the individuality of a man, a woman, or a child so much as the failure to be self-reliant.—RSM, 24:627.

Self-Developmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP184Every young man should . . . have an ambition to qualify himself for labor to the full extent of his ability, so that he will be able to accomplish all that is possible for him to do in planting the standard of truth firmly on the earth.—Era, 3:197.

Self-Developmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP184The man that grows each day of his life is the man that fills the plain, simple, everyday duties which devolve upon him.—JH, October 4, 1895: 7.

Self-Developmenta-Grant, Heber J.TP184I have found nothing in the battle of life that has been of more value to me than to perform the duty of today to the best of my ability. I know that where young men do this, they will be better prepared for the labors of tomorrow.—Era, 3:82.

Self-Improvementa-Grant, Heber J.TP184TOWARD SELF-IMPROVEMENT. I do not believe that any man lives up to his ideals, but if we are striving, if we are working, if we are trying, to the best of our ability, to improve day by day, then we are in the line of our duty. If we are seeking to remedy our own defects, if we are so living that we can ask God for light, for knowledge, for intelligence, and above all, for His Spirit, that we may overcome our weaknesses, then, I can tell you, we are in the straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal. Then we need have no fear.

Self-Improvementa-Grant, Heber J.TP185I am not afraid of any individual ever injuring me, but I am afraid that perchance I may fail to be as faithful and diligent as I ought to be; I am afraid I may fail to use all the talents God has given me, in the way I ought to use them.—CR, April, 1909: 111.

Self-Improvementa-Grant, Heber J.TP185I hope that no young man will throw away any of his time waiting for "something to turn up."—Era, 3:195.

Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP185I would urge upon the young men to do nothing for show, but to do their best to obtain knowledge and then strive to put the knowledge obtained to practical use. I am acquainted with some people who are regular encyclopedias of knowledge, but so far as their knowledge being utilized for the benefiting of their fellow men, they might just as well not possess it or be deaf, dumb, and blind; this is all wrong.—Era, 3:304.

Faith and Worksa-Grant, Heber J.TP185Faith and knowledge without practice are of no value. All the knowledge in the world would not amount to anything unless we put that knowledge into actual practice. We are the architects and builders of our lives, and if we fail to put our knowledge into actual practice and do the duties that devolve upon us we are making a failure of life.—CR, April, 1939: 18.

Self-Improvementa-Grant, Heber J.TP185I believe unless we have ambition to accomplish things and to do things that we amount to but very little in the battle of life. I know of nothing at the present time that seems to me sadder than to find the number of our people who are losing the spirit of integrity and devotion and ambition to do things. It seems to me all wrong. Every individual should have a desire to grow and increase in capacity and in ability to do things. Certainly by mere exertion of the will, by mere desire, we accomplish nothing. We must put with that desire the labor to accomplish the things we desire. I am sure that a young man who is perfectly satisfied with what he is doing, although he may be doing very little, and has no ambition to do more, will stand still. But I am convinced that every individual can improve from day to day, from year to year, and have greater capacity to do things as the years come and the years go. I believe in that with all my heart.—Era, 41:391.

Consciencea-Grant, Heber J.TP186I would sooner have the approval of my own conscience and know that I had done my duty than to have the praise of all the world and not have the approval of my own conscience. A man's own conscience, when he is living as he should live, is the finest monitor and the best judge in all the world. Men can accuse you of wrong-doing, and it has no effect at all if you know they lie and you have done that which is right.

Consciencea-Grant, Heber J.TP186No amount of lying hurts a man if he has done what is right. No amount of criticism bothers a bishop or a president of a stake as to the expenditure of tithing or the managing of Church affairs if they know that with all the power and all the ability and all the strength they possess, they are doing the best they know how and doing that which they think and know is right. Criticism does not have any effect upon a man who is doing his duty. A man who does his duty has the approval of his own conscience and that is the finest pay in all the world.—Era, 42:585.

Rewarda-Grant, Heber J.TP186I am a firm believer that in this life alone, without going into the next, nearly every man gets his compensation for anything that he does, not only in dollars, but in something far more valuable than dollars. As long as a man will do his duty, he will be all right. Furthermore he will get over being selfish, which is one of the world's greatest needs. The Lord does not need your tithing, as far as He is concerned, but you need it for your growth, spiritually and temporally, that the windows of heaven may be opened and the Spirit of the living God given to you.—Era, 41:585.

Rewarda-Grant, Heber J.TP186ESTIMATES OF MEN. There are many men in this world who have been over-estimated all the days of their lives, and others who have never had their full share of credit.—YWJ, 14:352.

Rewarda-Grant, Heber J.TP186THE LAW OF SERVICE. It is a God-given law that in proportion to the service we give, in proportion to what we do in this Church and out of it—what we are willing to sacrifice for the Church and for those to whom we owe our loyalty outside of Church activity—we shall grow in the grace of God and in the love of God, and we shall grow in accomplishing the purposes of our being placed here on the earth.—Era, 43:137.

Servicea-Grant, Heber J.TP187The real secret of happiness in life and the way in which to prepare ourselves for the hereafter is service, and it is because we give service more than any other people in the world that we are happy.—CS, September 26, 1931.

Servicea-Grant, Heber J.TP187I am converted to the thought that the way to peace and happiness in life is by giving service. Service is the true key, I believe, to happiness, because when we perform labors like missionary work, all the rest of our lives we can look back upon our accomplishments in the mission field. When we perform any acts of kindness, they bring a feeling of satisfaction and pleasure into our hearts, while ordinary amusements pass away. We can't look back with any particular satisfaction upon having spent an evening just for the privilege of laughing loud and long.—GM, 23:10.

Read "A Page from the Life of a Busy Man," in February, 1937, issue of The Improvement Era, page 67.

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Chapter Six, "Church Administration" for charges to Church officers and teachers.
