Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

187BOOK THREE

THE MINISTRY OF HEBER J. GRANT

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPIt has been one of the joys of my life, because of the knowledge which I have of the divine mission of the Savior, to bear my testimony in England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Germany, France, Belgium, Holland, Switzerland, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Czechoslovakia, Canada, Mexico, in most of the states of the American union, in far-off Japan, and in the Hawaiian Islands, and to lift up my voice declaring that our Heavenly Father and His beloved Son have again spoken from the heavens and that God introduced His Son to Joseph Smith and instructed him to hear His Son; and the Savior promised Joseph Smith that he should be the instrument in the hands of God of again establishing the Church of Jesus Christ upon the earth. —HEBER J. GRANT, 1938, Christmas Radio Message.

187CHAPTER XIII

191HIS APPROACH TO CHURCH SERVICE

DESIRES, HOPES, AND AMBITIONS

I am in favor of trying to save the weak-kneed; I am in favor of trying to help those who need help; and I want never to forget the teachings in the Doctrine and Covenants, from start to finish.—RSM, 24:629.

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TP191I have never had any desire in my heart in standing before the Latter-day Saints other than that I might be able to say something that would be for their good, for their benefit; and that would be calculated in its nature to encourage them, and to fix in their hearts a desire and a determination to be more faithful, more diligent, more energetic in the discharge of the duties that devolve upon them in the future of their lives than they have been in the past.—CR, April, 1908: 55-56.

A LIFETIME AMBITION

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPI entered an office as a young man fifteen years of age and I labored among those not of our faith until I engaged in business for myself at nineteen. Then I was connected with institutions at home and abroad, none of which were Mormon institutions—companies in England, France, Germany, and from New York to San Francisco. All of my contacts in a business way were with those not of our faith.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP191Years rolled on, and before I was twenty-four I was made the president of the Tooele Stake of Zion. I announced in a speech that lasted seven and a half minutes that I would ask no man in Tooele to be a more honest tithe payer than I would be; that I would ask no man to give more of his means in proportion to what he had than I would give; I would ask no man to live the Word of Wisdom better than I would live it, and I would give the best that was in me for the benefit of the people in that stake of Zion.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192That night I heard in the dark a man say in a contemptuous way: "It is a pity if the General Authorities have to send a man out here to preside, if they could not find one in Tooele County, that they could not have sent one with sense enough to talk at least ten minutes; and that they had to send a boy to preside over us."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192When I heard this, I remember thinking: "The boy is the only one who has any right to complain." (My income fell off four thousand dollars the first year that I was in Tooele in comparison with what it was the year before.) However, I was not able during the next three or four Sundays to talk as long as I did the first one. I ran out of ideas in five, six, and six and a half minutes.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192At the lunch table after my first short speech which lasted seven and a half minutes, President Smith said: "Heber, you said you believe the gospel with all your heart, and propose to live it, but you did not bear your testimony that you know it is true. Don't you know absolutely that this gospel is true?"

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192I answered: "I do not."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192"What, you! a president of a stake?" said President Joseph F. Smith.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192"That is what I said."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192"President Taylor, I am in favor of undoing this afternoon what we did this morning. I do not think any man should preside over a stake who has not a perfect and abiding knowledge of the divinity of this work."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192I said: "I am not going to complain."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192Brother Taylor had a habit, when something pleased him excessively, of shaking his body and laughing. He said, "Joseph, Joseph, Joseph, he knows it just as well as you do. The only thing that he does not know is that he does know it. It will be but a short time until he does know it. He leans over backwards. You do not need to worry."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP192I went to the little town of Vernon in Tooele County, took two others with me to do the preaching, and I got up to say a few words and spoke for forty-five minutes with perfect ease under the inspiration of the Lord. That night I shed tears of gratitude to the Lord for the abiding, perfect, and absolute testimony that came into my life of the divinity of this work.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP193The next Sunday after speaking at Vernon, I was at Grantsville. I told the Lord I would like to talk forty-five minutes. I got up to speak and ran out of ideas in five minutes, and I was sweating.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP193After the meeting I walked out past the farthest house in the west part of Grantsville, I am sure nearly three miles, and I got down behind a haystack and I shed some more tears. But they were tears of humiliation. I made a pledge to God there upon that occasion that never again in my life would I stand up before an audience with the feeling that all I needed to do was just stand up and talk; but that I would get up upon all occasions with a desire to say something that might be of benefit to the people to whom I spoke, and not with the spirit of pride, such as I had that day when I stood up in Grantsville. And I have never failed from that day until now—fifty-odd years ago—to have any desire in my heart when speaking except that I might say or read something that would be of lasting benefit to those who listened to my voice.—Era, 42:393.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPTHE CALL TO THE QUORUM OF THE TWELVE

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPForty years ago this October conference [1922], I met the late Elder George Teasdale at the south gate of the Tabernacle grounds. He shook hands with me and said: "Brother Grant, I am delighted to see you. You and I are going to be—" and he stopped suddenly and his face turned red. But the Lord gave me the balance of the sentence. Four times in my life I have been permitted to read the thoughts of people. The balance of Brother Teasdale's sentence was—"sustained this afternoon as apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ to fill the vacancies in the Quorum." And that went through me like a shock of electricity.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP193I came to the Sunday afternoon meeting of the conference, because of this partial sentence, and the balance that was given to me, with the assurance in my heart that Brother Teasdale and myself would be sustained as apostles. Those of you who were at that conference remember that it adjourned without filling those vacancies. I do not believe that any mortal man ever more humbly supplicated God during the next few days to forgive him for his egotism than I did for thinking I was to be chosen as an apostle. As you are aware, within a week a revelation came to John Taylor calling Brother Teasdale and myself to those positions.—CR, October, 1922: 2-3.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP194It has never ceased to be a wonder to me that I do represent the Lord here upon the earth. My association from childhood with the remarkable and wonderful men that have preceded me has made it almost overwhelming to think of being in the same class with them.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP194The last words uttered by President Joseph F. Smith were to the effect that, when he shook hands with me—he died that night—"The Lord bless you, my boy, the Lord bless you; you have got a great responsibility. Always remember this is the Lord's work and not man's. The Lord is greater than any man. He knows whom He wants to lead His Church, and never makes any mistake. The Lord bless you."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP194I have felt my own lack of ability. In fact when I was called as one of the apostles I arose to my feet to say it was beyond anything I was worthy of, and as I was rising the thought came to me, "You know as you know that you live that John Taylor is a prophet of God, and to decline this office when he had received a revelation is equivalent to repudiating the prophet." I said, "I will accept the office and do my best." I remember that it was with difficulty that I took my seat without fainting.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP194There are two spirits striving with us always, one telling us to continue our labor for good, and one telling us that with the faults and failings of our nature we are unworthy. I can truthfully say that from October, 1882, until February, 1883, that spirit followed me day and night, telling me that I was unworthy to be an apostle of the Church, and that I ought to resign. When I would testify of my knowledge that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, the Redeemer of mankind, it seemed as though a voice would say to me: "You lie! You lie! You have never seen Him."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP195While on the Navajo Indian reservation with Brigham Young, Jr., and a number of others, six or eight on horseback, and several others in "white tops"—I was riding along with Lot Smith at the rear of that procession. Suddenly the road veered to the left almost straight, but there was a well-beaten path leading ahead. I said: "Stop, Lot, stop. Where does this trail lead? There are plenty of footmarks and plenty of horses' hoof marks here." He said, "It leads to an immense gully just a short distance ahead, that it is impossible to cross with a wagon. We have made a regular 'Muleshoe' of miles here to get on the other side of the gully."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP195I had visited the day before the spot where a Navajo Indian had asked George A. Smith, Jr., to let him look at his pistol. George A. handed it to him, and the Navajo shot him.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP195I said, "Lot, is there any danger from Indians here?"

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP195"None at all."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP195"I want to be all alone. Go ahead and follow the crowd." I first asked him if I allowed the animal I was riding to walk if I would reach the road on the other side of the gully before the horsemen and the wagons, and he said, "Yes."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP195As I was riding along to meet them on the other side, I seemed to see, and I seemed to hear, what to me is one of the most real things in all my life. I seemed to hear the words that were spoken. I listened to the discussion with a great deal of interest. The First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles had not been able to agree on two men to fill the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. There had been a vacancy of one for two years, and a vacancy of two for one year, and the conferences had adjourned without the vacancies' being filled. In this council the Savior was present, my father was there, and the Prophet Joseph Smith was there. They discussed the question that a mistake had been made in not filling those two vacancies and that in all probability it would be another six months before the Quorum would be completed. And they discussed as to whom they wanted to occupy those positions, and decided that the way to remedy the mistake that had been made in not filling these vacancies was to send a revelation. It was given to me that the Prophet Joseph Smith and my father mentioned me and requested that I be called to that position. I sat there and wept for joy. It was given to me that I had done nothing to entitle me to that exalted position, except that I had lived a clean, sweet life. It was given to me that because of my father's having practically sacrificed his life in what was known as the great reformation, so to speak, of the people in early days, having been practically a martyr, that the Prophet Joseph and my father desired me to have that position, and it was because of their faithful labors that I was called, and not because of anything I had done of myself or any great thing that I had accomplished. It was also given to me that that was all these men, the Prophet and my father, could do for me. From that day it depended upon me and upon me alone as to whether I made a success of my life or a failure.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP196There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated.—(D. and C. 130:20, 21.)

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP196It was given to me, as I say, that it now depended upon me.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP196No man could have been more unhappy than I was from October, 1882, until February, 1883, but from that day I have never been bothered, night or day, with the idea that I was not worthy to stand as an apostle, and I have not been worried since the last words uttered by Joseph F. Smith to me: "The Lord bless you, my boy, the Lord bless you: you have got a great responsibility. Always remember this is the Lord's work and not man's. The Lord is greater than any man. He knows whom He wants to lead His Church, and never makes any mistake. The Lord bless you."

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP196I have been happy during the twenty-two years that it has fallen to my lot to stand at the head of this Church. I have felt the inspiration of the living God directing me in my labors. From the day that I chose a comparative stranger to be one of the apostles, instead of my lifelong and dearest living friend, I have known as I know that I live, that I am entitled to the light and the inspiration and the guidance of God in directing His work here upon this earth. And I know, as I know that I live, that it is God's work, and that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God, the Redeemer of the world and that He came to this earth with a divine mission to die upon the cross as the Redeemer of mankind, atoning for the sins of the world.—Era, 44:267, 315.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPA TESTIMONY AS PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL OF TWELVE (1918)

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPI bear witness to you here today that I do not believe that any man on earth from that day, February, 1883, until now . . . has had sweeter joy, more perfect and exquisite happiness than I have had in lifting up my voice and testifying of the gospel at home and abroad in every land and in every clime where it has fallen to my lot to go. And I have gone to Japan; I have been in the Hawaiian Islands; I have been from Canada to Mexico; I have been in nearly every state in the union of the United States. I have been in England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Germany, Holland, Belgium, France, Switzerland, Italy, Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, and I have had joy beyond my ability to express, in lifting up my voice in bearing witness to those with whom I have come in contact that I know that God lives, that I know that Jesus is the Christ, the Savior of the world, the Redeemer of mankind; that I know that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of the true and living God, that I have the abiding testimony in my heart that Brigham Young was a chosen instrument of the living God, that John Taylor, that Wilford Woodruff, that Lorenzo Snow were, and that today [1918] Joseph F. Smith is the representative of the living God, and the mouthpiece of God here upon the earth.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP197I do not have the language at my command to express the gratitude to God for this knowledge that I possess. Time and time again my heart has been melted, my eyes have wept tears of gratitude for the knowledge that He lives and that this gospel called Mormonism is in very deed the plan of life and salvation, that it is the only true gospel upon the face of the earth, that it is in very deed the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. That God may help you and me and everyone to live it, is my constant and earnest prayer.—CR, October, 1918: 23-25.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPON BECOMING PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPI stand here today in all humility, acknowledging my own weakness, my own lack of wisdom and information, and my lack of the ability to occupy the exalted position in which you have voted to sustain me. But as I said as a boy in Tooele, I say here today, that by and with the help of the Lord I shall do the best that I can to fulfill every obligation that shall rest upon me as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the full extent of my ability.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP198I will ask no man to be more liberal with his means than I am with mine, in proportion to what he possesses, for the advancement of God's kingdom. I will ask no man to observe the Word of Wisdom any more closely than I will observe it. I will ask no man to be more conscientious and prompt in the payment of his tithes and his offerings than I will be. I will ask no man to be more ready and willing to come early and to go late, and to labor with full power of mind and body, than I will labor always in humility. I hope and pray for the blessings of the Lord, acknowledging freely and frankly that without the Lord's blessings it will be an impossibility for me to make a success of the high calling whereunto I have been called. But, like Nephi of old, I know that the Lord makes no requirements of the children of men save He will prepare a way for them, whereby they can accomplish the thing which He has required. With this knowledge in my heart I accept the great responsibility without fear of the consequences, knowing that God will sustain me as He has sustained all of my predecessors who have occupied this position; provided, always, that I shall labor in humility and in diligence, ever seeking for the guidance of His Holy Spirit; and this I shall endeavor to do.—CR, June, 1919: 2-3.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP198I shall not occupy your time by reading section one hundred twenty-one of the Doctrine and Covenants. I will leave that for every one of those holding the Priesthood, and as many of the audience as may feel so disposed, to read it when they go home. With the help of the Lord, I shall endeavor, standing at the head of the Priesthood of God upon the earth, to exercise the authority that has come to me in keeping with that wonderful revelation: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned." God being my helper, the Priesthood that I hold, the position that I occupy, shall be exercised in accordance with these words that I have quoted to you. We can do nothing, as recorded in that revelation, only as we exercise love and charity and kindness—love unfeigned. With the help of the Lord that is exactly how I shall administer, to the best of my ability, the Priesthood of God that has come to me.—CR, June, 1919: 4-5.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP199I can pledge to you the best that is in me to fulfill the high and holy calling that has come to me, to exercise in righteousness the power of the Priesthood of the living God, which centers in me, and to administer my office as the Trustee-in-Trust, holding your property, to expend it and use it to the very best of the ability with which God shall endow me.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP199I expect to counsel with my counselors, with the twelve apostles and with the presiding bishopric of the Church—the men to whom the Lord refers in the revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, naming the men who are to expend the funds of this Church, although I realize and know that legally and technically, I have the right to handle your funds personally, because of your vote, just as my predecessors have had that right. Yet I know that in a multitude of counsel there is safety, and I expect to have the multitude of counsel.—CR, June, 1919: 43.

THE WELFARE OF THE CHURCH

LeadershipGospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TPI pray constantly for all of the officers of this Church, whether in the Priesthood or in the auxiliary associations. I am sure, in my secret prayers particularly, that I never forget, morning or night, those that have been called to preside, to direct the affairs in the Priesthood quorums and in the auxiliary associations. My prayer is that each of you holding a place of responsibility shall so order your lives that they shall be examples of diligence and energy and of the Spirit of the living God, that can be followed in every part by those over whom you preside.—RSM, 17:679.

Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TP200There is but one path of safety to the Latter-day Saints, and that is the path of duty. It is not a testimony, it is not marvelous manifestation, it is not knowing that the gospel of Jesus Christ is true, that it is the plan of salvation—it is not actually knowing that the Savior is the Redeemer, and that Joseph Smith was His prophet that will save you and me; but it is the keeping of the commandments of God, living the life of a Latter-day Saint.—CR, April, 1915: 82.

Gospel Livinga-Grant, Heber J.TP200I quote with pleasure from Lord Bulwer-Lytton: "What man wants is not talent—it is purpose; not power to achieve, but the will to labor."—Era, 3:82.

200I may not have been a very good preacher of the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ from the standpoint of doctrinal preaching. But I have endeavored to the best of my ability, since I was called as a boy forty-odd years ago to preside over the Tooele Stake of Zion, and forty years this coming October [1922] to be one of the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, to preach the doctrine of James: "I will show thee my faith by my works."—CR, April, 1922: 5.

200I have never seen the day since I became the president of Tooele Stake of Zion, at the time I was not yet twenty-four years of age, when I did not want to know what the president of the Church wanted, and what the leading officials of the Church wanted me to do, and that I did not want to do whatever they would have me to do, no matter what my personal likes or dislikes might be. I have sacrificed my own financial prospects to a great extent, among the prospects being the one this dear friend of mine offered me [Colonel A. G. Hawes], a little job of forty thousand dollars a year when the Church was making me an allowance in tithing office orders of three thousand six hundred dollars.—Era, 42:329.

201Now I want to make all mistakes on the side of mercy. But once in a while I want to see justice get just a little bit of a chance among the people.—JH, October 6, 1894: 12; DN, December 15, 1894.

201I am naturally emphatic in my talk, and I want to say to all of our young people that I hope they will never get the impression that because they fail to live up to the Word of Wisdom and other teachings of this Church there is any hatred in my heart towards them. I try even to love my enemies, to say nothing of the sons and daughters of men and women who would readily give their lives for this cause. There is no section in all the Doctrine and Covenants from which I have quoted more often and that I have tried to live up to more perfectly than section one hundred and twenty-one, that wonderful revelation given to the prophet of God while he was in Liberty Jail.—CR, April, 1932: 124.

THOUGHTS ON INCREASING YEARS

ON HIS FORTIETH BIRTHDAY. It has ever been my desire, in laboring among the Latter-day Saints, to inspire them with a desire to obey the commandments of God.—DN, December 12, 1896; JH, November 22, 1896: 7.

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP201AFTER HIS SEVENTY-FIFTH BIRTHDAY. You will pardon me for being personal, but you know they say when a person gets beyond seventy-five years of age he cannot talk about anybody but himself and likes to deal in reminiscences, that he has no thought for the future. I want to quote a few lines entitled "Age" and say that they are my sentiments, although not original with me:

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP201Age is a quality of mind: If your dreams you've left behind, If hope is cold; If you no longer look ahead, If your ambitions' fires are dead— Then you are old. But if from life you take the best, And if in life you keep the zest, If love you hold; No matter how the years go by, No matter how the birthdays fly— You are not old. —CR, April, 1932: 13.

202COMMENT ON PASSING HIS SEVENTY-FIFTH BIRTHDAY. I rejoice in what I have seen in the seventy-five years of my life. It may sound a little egotistical, but few men reach the age of seventy-five years in perfect vigor of health of body and mind, and I desire in this conference to express to my Heavenly Father and to the people composing the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, my gratitude for this vigor of body and mind, and for the health that I possess. I am grateful, beyond all of my ability to express my gratitude, for the prayers and the faith and the good will of the Latter-day Saints.—CR, April, 1932: 8.

202THOUGHTS AFTER BEING EIGHTY. Do you want to live a long time? I do. I would like to stay here at least another twenty years, and I would like to work every day during that twenty years; and I expect that maybe I may do it, if I live as I ought to live. The Lord has been very good to men who have stood at the head of this Church.—CR, April, 1937: 16.

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP202THE DESIRE TO SERVE. Now what I desire and the ambition of my life is that from now until my end comes I can accomplish more year by year than I have accomplished in the past, for the reason that I should have and I believe I do have a greater comprehension of the duties and the responsibilities that rest upon me and that rest upon all of us than I had many years ago. I am grateful beyond expression that as the years come and go my love for this gospel of Jesus Christ that has again been restored to the earth is stronger, and that there is a greater desire in my heart to labor for the spread of truth and the building up of the Church of Christ here upon the earth today than there has been ever before, and I believe that ought to be the ambition of each and every one of us.—Era, 41:391.

THOUGHTS ON TESTIMONY

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TPI am grateful beyond expression that it has fallen to my lot, in humility, but with gratitude and thanksgiving to God, to lift up my voice and testify that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. I have rejoiced that in all of my travels and in all of my meetings with men during the fifty-six years it has fallen to my lot to travel in the interests of this Church, I have never found one thing that has in the slightest degree affected my faith or caused me to have any doubts regarding the divinity of the work in which we as Latter-day Saints are engaged.—Era, 41:519.

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TP203I have for fifty-seven long years been working in this Church—two years as president of a stake, and fifty-five years in this identical month [October, 1937], as an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. And I want to bear my testimony that during the fifty-seven years I have never found anything in this gospel of Jesus Christ that has in the least weakened my testimony as to the divinity of the work in which we are engaged.—RSM, 25:15.

Faitha-Grant, Heber J.TP203I am thankful that instead of finding things to weaken my faith day by day and year by year I am finding that which strengthens it.—Era, 39:396.

Trialsa-Grant, Heber J.TP203When we stop to contemplate the great hardships that our fathers and mothers have had to pass through in establishing the work of God in the earth, it should cause us to be thankful because of our comparatively pleasant surroundings. I sometimes feel that we know but little of their sorrows and of what they have had to endure. When we realize how easy it is for us to live, we cannot begin to imagine what hardships they have had to pass through. I am truly grateful that I have not been called to endure such trials. I never had a desire myself, to have experiences of this kind. We sometimes meet people who say they would like to have witnessed the trials of the early Saints and taken a part in them, but I have no wish to nominate myself for a martyr. I tell you what I do desire: it is to be tested and tried only so far as is necessary to qualify me for the duties which have been imposed upon me, and to gain an exaltation in the presence of my Heavenly Father.—CR, April, 1898: 14-15.

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TP204I leave with you my testimony that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith was and is a prophet of God. . . . How do I know it? I know it as well as I know that I stand before you tonight. I know heat; I know cold; I know joy, and I know sorrow; and say to you that in the hour of sorrow, in the hour of affliction, in the hour of death, God has heard and answered my prayers, and I know that He lives. I leave my testimony with you.—Era, 4:691.

CROWNING DESIRE

Above everything else in all the world, I desire our young people to love our Redeemer, our Savior, who gave His life for us.—Era, 42:437.

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TP204If I know my own heart, I believe it is set upon the advancement of the Church and kingdom of God. I know that there is nothing on the earth that I rejoice over so much as I do in the fact that I am associated with the servants and handmaidens of God in the Church of Jesus Christ; and I do not believe that there ever is a day that passes over my head that I do not thank God for the restoration again of the plan of life and salvation, and that I have been made a partaker of the same. I supplicate Him earnestly that my mind may never become darkened, that I may never depart from the truth; that I may never forget any of the covenants that I have made, but, as I grow in years and increase in understanding, that I may grow in a testimony of the gospel and in the desire—not only a desire, but in doing it—to labor for the onward advancement of the kingdom of God on the earth.—CR, April, 1899: 26.

204May God bless you, one and all, and every honest man and woman that lives upon the face of the earth, is my humble prayer, and I ask it in humility in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen.—Era, 41:263.
