Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

204CHAPTER XIV

205EXPERIENCES IN JAPAN

TAKING THE GOSPEL TO JAPAN

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TPFAREWELL THOUGHTS ON LEAVING FOR JAPAN. In bidding you good-bye to go to a foreign land to preach the gospel, I wish to go with your faith. I desire to be remembered in your homes night and morning. I love the Latter-day Saints. I love to labor for the advancement of the kingdom of God. I know that He lives. I have reached out my hand and plucked the fruit of the gospel, and I know that the gospel tree is alive and bears fruit. I delight to labor for the spread of the gospel, and I thank God for the privilege of going to introduce the gospel to a nation that has been in darkness. I hope and pray that in the providence of God there is a great labor to be accomplished. I pray in humility that I may go forth with the faith and the prayers of the Saints to accomplish all that God desires I should do. I leave my blessing with the Latter-day Saints, and I do it in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—CR, April, 1901: 34.

205THE FIRST REPORT (1902). As I remarked last night at the Priesthood meeting, I hesitated for some little time, after the Spirit came upon me to attend this conference, before writing for permission to do so. I thought my desires might be misconstrued, and that there would perhaps be a feeling that I was homesick and desired to shirk the responsibilities resting upon me in a far-off land. But after having once thought of the idea of being with you and partaking of the spirit of this conference, I could not, hard as I tried, get rid of the desire to come. I finally wrote the letter, and when it reached here permission was given to me. Although I have had to travel a little over seven thousand miles to come to this conference, I am glad to be here, and I was happy when the word came that I was to have this privilege. Only those who have been in the habit of feasting on the teachings of the servants of God, under the inspiration of the Spirit of God, from their childhood up, and have ever been meeting-goers, can appreciate how hungry I became to listen to the servants of the Lord. . . . For eight months I did not have this privilege, except in the little council meetings held with my associates upon our mission in Japan.—CR, April, 1902.

Japana-Grant, Heber J.TP206Gaburo Kikuchi, the second convert [in Japan], for a number of years has separated himself from the Christian sect to which he belonged, because, he said, they did not teach the Bible, and he has been teaching the people the truths of the Bible in the parks in the city of Tokyo, having audiences of from five hundred to one thousand five hundred people. He seems to be a very sincere, determined man, and I have enjoyed my conversations with him. The day I baptized him, before attending to that ordinance, I told Brother Kelsch to try to discourage him from becoming a member of the Church and that I would do the same, because I told him I desired him to study more and to comprehend more before he was baptized. He came to the hotel before I was out of bed in the morning and insisted upon baptism. When I told him that he had better study more and get a better comprehension of the gospel, he said, "It is true. I believe it. I want to be baptized. And I can understand it better after I have been baptized and confirmed a member of the Church." I knew this was true; so I told him he would be persecuted and he quoted the scripture, "Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake." Brother Kelsch and I went on in this line, trying to discourage this man. I referred to the drivings of our people, to the killing of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, and to the fact that many men had to give up their lives for the truth; and I wanted him to be thoroughly converted. He said, "It is true; and if I die and am the first martyr in Japan, it would be the best thing that could happen to Japan." "That's enough," I said, "I'll baptize you."—CR, April, 1902.

Japana-Grant, Heber J.TP207I have the assurance in my soul that there is to be a wonderful work accomplished in Japan; that there will be many, yea, even thousands of that people that will receive the gospel of Jesus Christ. We have made no effort whatever to try and baptize people. Many have come and applied for baptism—ten young men at one time. Many have written us letters and asked to be baptized into the Church. But we have realized that they did not understand the gospel. And we had no desire to baptize and seal the Holy Ghost upon a person who would be likely to lose the Spirit and turn around and fight the Church. We have had no desire to baptize people just to make a showing. We prayed earnestly every day for the guidance of the Spirit of God. We fasted and prayed often. We had a delightful time. Time passed very pleasantly and did not hang upon our hands. I never spent an hour in sightseeing. I did make one little trip through the country on the cars, to get some knowledge of it. But I never went away for the sake of seeing the sights and enjoying myself in that city. I was busy all the time, talking with those that called upon me, answering letters, and studying the language. The Lord granteth unto men according to their desires, whether it be for life or death, joy or remorse of conscience; and the only desire that I had was to fulfill my duty in that land from day to day. And if I should return after three or five years without converting or baptizing one soul I would be satisfied. However, I have been exceedingly grateful to my Heavenly Father that He saw fit to impress with His Spirit a couple of men who, I believe, are honest. They may not prove faithful, but I believe they are honest today. The other man was a Shinto priest who could not speak a word of English. We had to talk to him through an interpreter. This man was cast out from his congregation of one thousand five hundred by his superiors and told that he would be reinstated in his office, provided he quit calling upon the Mormons. He said, "I believe that there is some truth with them; I am not yet convinced, but I will not stop calling on them." Finally he was cast out. He continued to call upon us and was baptized.—CR, April, 1902.

Japana-Grant, Heber J.TP208The Lord has raised up friends to us. Many influential men have called and visited with me. I am told that a certain man there by the name of Goro Takahashi is by far the strongest writer in defense of Christianity in the nation of Japan. This man, before I ever met him, wrote an article in one of the leading magazines of Japan, opposing the Mormon religion. My interpreter interpreted this for me, and I afterwards read it to the man. He laughed and said, "He has not interpreted my article. The very first line says that 'The people of Tokyo welcome with loud huzzahs Lamanism, which is polyandry, or a plurality of husbands,' and I did not say any such thing. I said, 'The enlightened people of Tokyo.' The whole sarcasm is lost by your interpreter. It was not the common people, it was not the laboring people, but it was the enlightened people of Tokyo that were crying out against the Mormon people." I asked him if he would not translate the first page for me himself. (I had about ten pages of it.) He said he was a very busy man, but he would translate the first page. As nearly as I can remember, the first page was as follows: "The enlightened people of Tokyo have recently welcomed a sect from Tibet that preaches Lamanism, polyandry, a plurality of husbands, and scarce have they welcomed them with extraordinary enthusiasm and the huzzahs died away before they are condemning, with absolute ignorance, the Mormon religion! And these people who are condemning the Mormons and polygamy are believers in concubinage! Can there be under the sun a greater inconsistency than this? We might say something about the emperor and his concubines, but perhaps it would be considered disloyal, and therefore we will keep quiet."—CR, April, 1902.

208I rejoice to be here. I rejoice in the testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I rejoice in the increased testimony that my mission has given me. I never expected that it would be possible for a man of my temperament and disposition, who from a boy of fourteen years of age has been actively engaged in business, to forget it, and that I could content myself in a foreign land studying a language that put me to sleep nearly every time I tried it and yet be happy. But I was. There was the sweet Spirit of God with us, and many times in our little meetings we shed tears of joy, because of the outflow of the Spirit of God. If I had the privilege of picking the Church over for three companions I could not be better satisfied than with those that I have. I had my choice, and I have not been disappointed.

209I say to you, my friends, that I am happy to be here. All of the officers that have been chosen during my absence, my head and my heart have been pleased and satisfied with. It is a sorrow to me to come home and not receive the handshake of my beloved President Snow, whom I loved as dearly as life itself. But I rejoice that the son of one of the two martyrs for the cause presides over the Church of Christ. [^1] I rejoice in the knowledge that the work of God is onward and upward, and that each of us who is true and faithful will be saved. I rejoice that this gospel is going to all the nations of the earth. I rejoice in being a messenger of the plan of life and salvation. God has blessed me with this knowledge: I know that He lives. I know that Jesus is the Christ. I know that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God. I know that I shall live forever, and that if I am faithful I shall be exalted. I know that this same blessing will come to all of you, if you are faithful; and that you may be, and obtain the blessing, is my prayer, and I ask it in the name of Jesus. Amen.—CR, April, 1902.

Japana-Grant, Heber J.TP209SECOND REPORT ON JAPAN (1903). I know that the Latter-day Saints have been greatly interested in the mission I was called to preside over, and I regret I am not able to tell you that we have done something wonderful over in Japan. To be perfectly frank with you, I acknowledge I have accomplished very little indeed, as the president of that mission; and very little has been accomplished—so far as conversions are concerned—by the few elders sent there to labor, or by the sisters who were with me. At the same time, I have the assurance in my heart there will yet be a great and important labor accomplished in that land. The inhabitants are a wonderful people. What they have accomplished during the past fifty years, since the country was opened to foreigners, is little less than marvelous. Verily, "a nation has been born in a day," in Japan. . . .—CR, October, 1903: 7.

210I rejoice to say we had a delightful trip to Japan; and a very pleasant trip home, except the first three days, when we were in a typhoon. When we held a service, the captain paid us the compliment of coming to meeting. He had his seventieth birthday on the vessel as we were returning, and the passengers contributed a few dollars apiece, and gave it to a gentleman for the purpose of buying a very handsome silver loving cup to present to the captain, on his arrival in Seattle. I held services on the boat during the voyage, and spoke forty or fifty minutes. The captain said he had been on the ocean from boyhood, but had seen so much hypocrisy in religion that he would never go to any of the meetings that were held on his vessel. But, it seems he learned to like us, as we went with him to Japan, and he came to meeting and listened to us. Said he, "I declare it's pretty good sound sense that you folks talk. Yours is a pretty good practical sort of a religion. I rather like the Mormons, and will always be glad to have them travel on my boat."

Japana-Grant, Heber J.TP210In Japan we have many warm friends; and we rejoice to know that our elders are doing very well indeed; and the two sisters there have an excellent spirit. There were a dozen of us there, and I do not believe I ever associated with the same number of brethren and sisters, for the same length of time, whom I loved any more dearly. They are very choice. Of course they are young and inexperienced. But the Lord is blessing them and the younger ones are learning the language very rapidly. I am well satisfied with the progress they are making. . . .

Japana-Grant, Heber J.TP210The people there were as kind and considerate of us as we could possibly ask them to be. We followed the advice we received from the Presidency to the best of our ability. We have published two tracts. One of them was a short tract I wrote, containing a little information about the Church era. The other was a tract written entirely by Brother [Alma O.] Taylor, on God. He did not attempt to write on the Godhead for fear of confusing the people. It is a very able tract. He first wrote one that would have been very satisfactory in any land where the people understood English. But it struck me that it would be too deep and far beyond what the Japanese could understand. So I handed it to him and said, "Brother Taylor, I wish you would ask the Lord to help you write this in a kind of second reader style." He wrote it again, and simplified it. And if you had not known the same man had written the two tracts you could hardly have believed it. It delighted us all and we praised the Lord for the ability He had given Brother Taylor to write this tract. We feel it will do a great deal of good. . . .—CR, October, 1903: 10-13.

211AN EXPERIENCE IN JAPAN WITH THE PRESS. When I went to Japan, we made all arrangements to board and lodge at a very fine place that overlooked the town, upon a bluff, a delightful location. I handed my card to the gentleman after arrangements had been made and our rooms selected, and he said, "Well, from Salt Lake City! I am glad to see you. We are expecting some preachers from Salt Lake City."

211I said: "Turn the card over, and maybe you will find they have arrived."

211He turned the card over and saw the Articles of Faith of our Church. He said, "Oh, you cannot stay in my house, I would not allow a Mormon to sleep under my roof."

211I said: "Thanks."

211He rushed to a newspaper, published by an Englishman (and in English by the way), telling that he would not let a Mormon sleep under his roof.

211Brother Louis A. Kelsch, the minute we arrived in Yokohama, went to see a minister whose picture he had seen in a newspaper. I think it was in St. Paul that be had seen a picture of this minister taken in Japan with two converts. Brother Kelsch cut the picture out of the paper because a voice, figuratively speaking, without making any noise—a communication to that part of him that shall live after he is gone—said, "You shall meet that man in Japan."

212When he returned to Chicago, he said to his wife, "Brother Grant has been called on a mission to Japan, I see by The News, and I know two men who are going with him." This was at the dinner table. He had then received no notice of his call.

212"Who are they?" she asked.

212He said: "One of them is Horace S. Ensign; the other I do not care to mention."

212That night after they retired, his wife said: "Lou, are you the other one?"

212He said: "Yes."

212As I was saying, as soon as he got to Japan he called on this gentleman, and the minister was delighted to meet him. He showed him the picture and said: "A voice told me that I should meet you in Japan. Here I am. I am delighted to meet you." The minister went on talking to him and said: "You know, we are expecting Mormons here and all of us have joined together and have petitioned the government not to allow them to be permitted to speak here."

212Brother Kelsch said: "Turn that card over and maybe you will find that they have arrived," and gave him his opinion in good plain English of his Christian spirit.

212The editor of the newspaper literally "ripped the man up the back" who refused to allow us to stop in his boardinghouse. I called on the editor of the paper and thanked him for his attacking the man for his lack of Christianity and a decent respect for other people. And he said: "Don't you bother about thanking me. I have been reading stories about you, and I am going to publish a lot of them."

212I said: "Go right ahead. The more you publish the more grateful I will be if you will only give me the privilege of replying to them."

212"You shall have all the space you want."

212He published a lot of things not very good, and I took space, occupying one entire page and a fraction answering them. Then there was another small publication against us, and I wrote another long reply. The gentleman no doubt concluded that space was too valuable to let me say all that I wanted to say, so there were no more attacks.—CR, October, 1936: 10-11.

President Joseph F. Smith, son of Hyrum Smith.

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Chapter Six, "Church Administration" for charges to Church officers and teachers.
