Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

212CHAPTER XV

214GLIMPSES OF FAMOUS CONTEMPORARIES

WILLIAM GEORGE JORDAN AND MORMONISM

I received a letter from William George Jordan, the author of a number of books which we have published in serial form in The Improvement Era [Individuality of Self Control, Little Problems of Married Life, and others]. He is also the author of The Power of Truth, the English edition of which is Great Truths.

214I sent him a number of tracts, a Book of Mormon, and some pamphlets, and in acknowledging their receipt he thanked me for them and expressed the hope that some day he might visit Utah and learn by personal contact regarding our people.

214"From what I know of your people," he said, "your religion more than that of other creeds yields dividends of finer individual lives. No faith is of any value unless it does yield dividends of better lives."

214I feel that compliments or praise of this kind, coming from those who are not of us, are precious and should be appreciated by every Latter-day Saint.

Church Membersa-Grant, Heber J.TP214I rejoice that men not of us discover that for honesty, for sobriety, for uprightness of life, for virtue, that no other people can make a better record than do the Latter-day Saints. I rejoice exceedingly in the magnificent record which has been made by our boys who have gone to Harvard and to the other universities from one end of the country to another. For quality and quantity, and for upright lives, the record which our boys have made is one that every Latter-day Saint should be proud of. I rejoice in this record for, because of it, we are becoming better known. People are beginning to recognize what Mr. Jordan has said, namely, that this gospel of Jesus Christ, commonly called by the world Mormonism, is in very deed yielding dividends of better individual lives.—CR, October, 1913: 89-90.

TRIBUTES TO FRANCIS M. LYMAN AND CHARLES W. PENROSE

Lyman, Francis M.a-Grant, Heber J.TPWhile in Japan, I prayed to the Lord with all my heart, in the woods of that country, that I might be permitted to succeed Brother Lyman as the president of the European Mission. And why? Because I knew from my experience in following him in the Tooele Stake of Zion that he would have all the holes filled up, the bridges made, and the roads all in a good condition. I knew that I would find the mission well organized and everything in fine shape, with a good foundation upon which to build.

Lyman, Francis M.a-Grant, Heber J.TP215I built upon that foundation, and the young missionaries seconded my efforts there. God blessed us in our labors, and there was an increase of our Church work in that land during my administration. I feel that there will be still greater increase under the administration of Brother Penrose, because of the foundation laid by Brother Lyman, seconded by my efforts.

215When people say that the Latter-day Saints do not believe in education and investigation, they simply tell that which is not true. Last year, in the British Isles alone, over four million tracts were distributed by the elders, and those tracts were principally written by Elder Charles W. Penrose.

215In ability to expound the scriptures, Brother Penrose has that qualification pre-eminently.

215I once heard a man talking with Rev. Dr. Iliff on the railway train. (They did not know I was in the seat behind.) This man said to Iliff that he had heard nearly every great preacher in the United States, but that when he was in Salt Lake City he had heard in the Mormon Tabernacle the best and most logical sermon he had ever listened to. He asked Dr. Iliff: "Who is your great Mormon preacher out there?"

215Iliff said he didn't know any great Mormon preacher.

215"Why," said the man, "you must know that man; there could not be another one like him."

215"Well," replied Iliff, "I don't know whom you mean."

215"Well, who edits the Mormon paper out there?"

215"Oh! that's Penrose," said Iliff.

216"That's the fellow," said the man. "He preached the best and most logical sermon I ever heard in my life."

216Thin as I am, that put fat on my ribs. This man who preaches such a fine sermon today is president of the European Mission [1907]. I tell you that, with all the intelligence in the British Isles, there is no man there who, with the Bible as the standard, can confute Brother Penrose.

216We are not ashamed of our religion. We know the gospel of Jesus Christ is true. We have set our light so that it can be seen of all men.—CR, April, 1907: 36.

PRAYER FOR CALVIN COOLIDGE

I desire, and I am sure that all Latter-day Saints desire, that the inspiration that comes from God may be given to President Coolidge in the great office which he holds, and that wisdom may come to him and his cabinet in directing the affairs of our beloved country.—CR, October, 1923: 2-3.

216I pray that the Lord will bless the president of the United States of America and his cabinet, and that He will vindicate the president and every honest member of his cabinet. I believe that there are honest, upright, God-fearing, patriotic men in the cabinet of President Coolidge. I believe he is a man worthy of the blessings of Almighty God. That is my opinion of the president of the United States. I believe that he has the welfare of the people of this great country at heart.—CR, April, 1924: 160.

PORFIRIO DIAZ

Mexicoa-Grant, Heber J.TPSpeaking of the accomplishments in our Mexican colonies, that great president and warrior who ruled Mexico with an iron hand for so many years—Porfirio Diaz, when he visited (just a short time before he was driven from his country) the fair in Chihuahua; when he came to the exhibits of industry and frugality; when he saw the products of our canning factories, our harness factories, the shoe factories; when he saw the exhibits from our academy there—as fine an academy as is in all Utah, barring only Logan, Ogden, Salt Lake, and Provo, our four principal cities; when he saw all the exhibits there, that warrior, whom nobody would expect to, shed a tear; when he saw what this "ignorant" people had done in Mexico, he wiped his eyes and said: "What could I not do with my beloved Mexico if I had more citizens like these Mormons?"—CR, October, 1923: 160.

AN INTERVIEW WITH KING OSCAR OF SWEDEN IN 1906

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TPIn the Scandinavian missions we are still [1924] having difficulty in getting people into Sweden. I regret that the present condition is altogether different from what it was in the days of King Oscar. It fell to my happy lot, with Brother Alex Nibley and some of my friends, to have the privilege of calling on King Oscar on the 4th day of July [1906], many years ago. With characteristic American assurance, I presented myself at the king's palace and requested an interview. The man who came to the door looked at me as if he thought I were crazy, not to be properly presented through the minister plenipotentiary. I wrote a letter of introduction to his majesty, enclosed a letter from Governor Heber M. Wells of the state of Utah, told him that day, July 4th, was the day that we Americans celebrate, and asked for an audience; and added that I knew that I ought to be presented in proper order, that I had letters from the Utah senators to our minister; but, the day being the 4th of July, we hoped that he would waive all of the customary formalities necessary to see a king. And he very kindly consented, stepped out of the palace, and greeted us. After learning that only two or three in our party understood the Swedish language, he immediately changed to faultless English, perfect English. He was a magnificent specimen of humanity, standing over six feet high.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP217He made this remark to me: "Mr. Grant, I have sent my personal representatives, unknown to the people, to nearly every state in the union of the United States, to find out how my former subjects are getting along, how they are prospering; and in no other state in the union are the former subjects of Sweden and Norway more contented, more prosperous and happier than in Utah. As long as I am king of Norway and Sweden, your people shall have religious liberty, notwithstanding all the priests and religious denominations are against you."—CR, April, 1924: 153-154.

REED SMOOT AND WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT

Smoot, Reeda-Grant, Heber J.TPElder Reed Smoot, as you all know, is a senator from Utah. And thank the Lord for such a senator, a man who has gained for himself a national and an international reputation for his honesty, for his integrity, and for his great and wonderful ability. He stands today [1926] at the head of the greatest committee [finance] in the senate of the United States.

Smoot, Reeda-Grant, Heber J.TP218I remember when ex-President Taft was here he said, with that little chuckle of his that made us all laugh, "And to think that when he first came down to Washington nearly everybody tried to keep him out of the senate. Now I have come all the way to Utah to plead with the people to be sure and send him back again."—CR, April, 1926: 11.

REED SMOOT

Smoot, Reeda-Grant, Heber J.TPI am particularly grateful that Elder Reed Smoot has had the privilege of being with us, and of bearing his testimony to us here today. From the reports that we received of his condition of health, I little expected that we would have this privilege. I rejoice in the very remarkable and wonderful mission that he has been performing as a senator of the United States. He has gained the confidence and the respect of men all over this country.

Smoot, Reeda-Grant, Heber J.TP218In my trips from the Pacific Coast to the Atlantic, I came in contact with many influential men, and in the southern states I met many men whose training and politics were in direct opposition to those of Senator Smoot. All these influential men expressed to me their admiration for his devotion to his work as a senator. I believe that few men have ever made a finer record for themselves in the senate of the United States than Elder Reed Smoot has done. I rejoice in his accomplishments. I have met influential men from away across the Atlantic who have said to me that they had a poor opinion of our people until they saw the remarkable and splendid work and upright, honest life of one of the apostles.

Smoot, Reeda-Grant, Heber J.TP219One man said: "If you were not a good people I am sure that Senator Smoot would not permit himself to be associated with you as one of the leaders of your Church." I pray that the blessings of the Lord may be and abide with him, that he may be restored to perfect health and strength, and have the opportunity of continuing his labors for the benefit of the people of this great country that we, as Latter-day Saints, love so well, and believe that the Lord Almighty was at the helm when it gained its freedom, and as the revelations say, that he inspired the constitution of our beloved country.—CR, April, 1925: 77.

ALEXANDER G. HAWES AND A SIDELIGHT ON THE REED SMOOT CASE

The nearest and dearest friend I ever had in the world, outside of my own people, was the late Colonel Alexander Gilchrist Hawes. He came to my mother's home as an unmarried man, when I was a child, and he resided with us for six months. Years later he returned with his bride, and his first child was born in our home. He was a loyal friend, not only to me but also to our people. He was here when Senator Smoot was striving to maintain his seat in the senate [1903-1906], and he called on the senator and asked if he could do anything for him. The senator said, "What can I do for you, sir?"

219He said, "Nothing; I have come to ask you if I can do anything for you." He said, "Have you the votes of the senators from California for you to keep your seat?"

219The senator said, "No."

219"I will go right out and fix that for you. They are my personal friends. They are members of the Bohemian club."

220He and one other man, Raphael Weal, were the survivors of the originators of that club. He succeeded in getting those men to pledge themselves to vote for the senator first, last, and all the time, notwithstanding they had received petitions from California bearing thousands of names, against the senator's retaining his seat.

220And then he said, "I remember fighting with so and so in the 'Bloody Seventh,' as it was called, of Illinois, which lost more men in proportion to its numbers than any other regiment. He was one of my fellow officers and I got his vote." Then he spoke of another vote he had secured. He said, "I would like to stay here all summer, if my business didn't call me away, and fight that this man shall keep his seat. A more un-American, damnable idea never entered into the brains of a man than to deprive an honorable man of his seat in the senate because he is an apostle of a Church that is looked upon with contempt." He said, "Heber, I have done this little work for the senator for three reasons:" (I was in England at the time that I received his letter, presiding over the European Mission.) "First, because it was right, and I like to be always on the right side." (By the way, he was one of John Brown's men in early days.) "Second, because I knew how much it would please you, my dear old friend. And I always try to get my numerals right; you ought to come third instead of second. Third, because it was mighty good Republican politics."—CS, November 11, 1933: 5.

WILLIAM JENNINGS BRYAN

At one of our general conferences some years ago we were honored with the presence of Senator Owen from Oklahoma and the Honorable William Jennings Bryan. These gentlemen remained until after the conference session, when an informal organ recital was given in their honor. Perhaps a hundred or a hundred and fifty people were present and, following the recital, requests came from different parts of the small audience that Senator Owen and Mr. Bryan make some remarks. They did so and from the press reports of the occasion we read the following:

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP221Mr. Bryan said the truths he had heard expounded there that day he should endeavor to carry with him throughout life, and he believed that through him many people might hear the truth concerning Mormonism, for he would endeavor to give an exposition of what he had heard, in plain truth, to the people with whom he associated. Mr. Bryan said he had been undecided about coming to Salt Lake. He had been asked to speak in Los Angeles, Monday, but he had obeyed a whim almost and had come to Salt Lake. He did not know why, but now he said he believed it was providential. At any rate he said he had heard truths uttered that impressed him deeply, and he knows that he is better equipped to perform his work in the world for having heard Mormonism expounded. Particularly was he impressed, Mr. Bryan said, with the Mormon belief in the personality of God. It is a beautiful belief, he said, and one by which the world might profit. He referred to the application of the gospel in the lives of the Mormon people, and said such principles applied to the problems of the world would in very deed solve the difficulties with which the world is beset.221He referred to the single standard of morality, as expounded by one of the speakers, and said that in very truth that is a principle that might well be applied to the lives of all men.

221The publishing house of Revell & Co. have published a book containing the last address of William Jennings Bryan, which address was prepared for the celebrated evolution case in Tennessee, but was never delivered. I have had the privilege of reading and re-reading the book. It shows that he had perfect faith in God our Heavenly Father, and in my judgment it is a very strong defense of the divinity of Christ and of the Godhood of our Father in heaven.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP221I had the pleasure of visiting with Mr. Bryan after his remarks following our conference. He said that he was expected to deliver three speeches in California before leaving, but that he believed the world at large would get more benefit from what he had learned in our conference than the people would have received had he remained in California and delivered those three speeches. He promised to send me a little pamphlet containing his ideas about God. After reading it I remember saying to my family that William Jennings Bryan ought to be a Latter-day Saint, because many of his views were in perfect harmony with our faith.

221Every Latter-day Saint upon the face of the earth believes in the individuality and personality of God our Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ. A man who does not so believe has no right to be called a Latter-day Saint. Every Latter-day Saint believes absolutely that God conversed with Joseph Smith, and introduced to him the Lord Jesus Christ as His beloved Son.—CR, October, 1925: 3-4.

BISHOP DANIEL TUTTLE

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TPWhen I was only a young man, I rejoiced in the splendid tributes that were paid to us by the late Bishop Daniel Tuttle [of the Episcopal Church]. He went east and told the truth about us, that we were "a God-fearing, upright, conscientious people, serving God." While he did not agree with us, he admired our integrity, and said that truth and righteousness always prevailed amongst us.—CR, April, 1935: 10.

BRIGHAM YOUNG

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TPFifty-four years ago [1863], as a little child, I took a sleigh ride with President Brigham Young. That is, I ran out and took hold of the back of the sleigh, intending to ride a block and then drop off and walk home. But President Young was driving such a fine team, or at least his driver was, that I dared not let go, hence rode on till we reached the Cottonwood, and then when the sleigh slowed up to pass through that stream, I jumped off and the president saw me.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP222He said, "Stop, Brother Isaac, stop. The little boy is nearly frozen. Put him under the buffalo robe and get him warm." Isaac Wilson was his driver.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP222After I got warm he inquired my name, and told me about my father, and his love for him. He told me to tell my mother, and he wanted her to send me up to his office in six months to have a visit with him; and in six months I went for the visit. From that time, fifty-four years ago, until the day of his death, I was intimately acquainted with President Young. This I can say also with respect to John Taylor and with all of the General Authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

General Authoritiesa-Grant, Heber J.TP223For thirty-four years and a half I have been one of the General Authorities. I have been associated with them in all of their councils. I know the hearts of these men. I know their desires. I know their devotion to God and to all that is for the uplift and the betterment of mankind. I can bear witness that I know, as I know that I live, that every word spoken here this morning by President Joseph F. Smith, bearing witness of the honor, the virtue, the integrity, and the uprightness of the men who presided over this Church, is true.

General Authoritiesa-Grant, Heber J.TP223I rejoice that in all my associations with the General Authorities of the Church since I was six years of age I have never heard one word, in public or in private, fall from the lips of these men, but what would be for the benefit, for the uplift, for the improvement morally and intellectually, physically, and spiritually of the Latter-day Saints.—CR, April, 1917: 23-24.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP223I became acquainted with Brigham Young when I was a little child six years of age. From that time until the day of his death I was intimate with him. I was as intimate with one of his boys—the late Feramorz L. Young—as any two boys ever could be. Perhaps no three young men were ever more intimate than Heber J. Grant, Feramorz L. Young, and General Richard W. Young. We grew up together. We slept together. We played together. We attended Sunday School together. We attended day school together.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP223I was almost as familiar in the homes of President Brigham Young as I was in the home of my own mother. In one home, that of Aunt Emily Partridge Young, if I was hungry I felt as free to go in and ask for something to eat there as in my own home. I have spent hours and hours, as a child, in the rooms of Eliza R. Snow, listening to her counsel and advice, and hearing her relate incidents in the life of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and bearing witness of the wonderful blessings of God to Brigham Young. As I say, I was familiar with the Prophet Brigham Young. I knelt down time and time again in his home in the Lion House at family prayers, as a child and as a young man. I bear witness that as a little child, upon more than one occasion, because of the inspiration of the Lord to Brigham Young while he was supplicating God for guidance, I have lifted my head, turned and looked at the place where Brigham Young was praying, to see if the Lord was not there. It seemed to me that he talked to the Lord as one man would talk to another. I can bear witness of his kindness, of his love to me as an individual, of his love of God and of the inspiration of the Lord that came to him as he stood where I am standing, when I had the privilege of being in the audience and listening to his inspired words.—CR, June, 1919: 7.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP224Do you know that all this trouble about the Hoover [Boulder] Dam and the division of water [^1] never would have come about if we had got all that President Young tried to get.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP224All that he asked for when he knocked for admission into the union as the State of Deseret was all of Utah, fully one-half of Colorado, a little patch down in New Mexico so as to take in the San Juan River, all of Arizona, Nevada as far as the Sierra Nevada Mountains, Idaho way up into the north, and one-third of what is now California. Los Angeles and that whole section would have been included. Every drop of water that goes into the Hoover Dam would have been in the State of Deseret. Texas would not have been in it for size.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP224This shows the great capacity of the man. He sent scouts into the various sections of the country, realizing as he did that irrigation was what was going to count, through the inspiration of the Lord, in this country, and he arranged to get all of the watershed of the Colorado River.—CR, April, 1932: 11.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP224The last interview I had with Brigham Young was on the very day he was taken sick. I met him coming out of his office with a cape on his arm and I said:

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP224"President Young, I was elected yesterday the assistant cashier of Zion's Saving Bank, and I have been told this morning that I must give a bond of twenty-five thousand dollars to vouch for my honesty. It occurs to me that it would be very appropriate and a nice thing for the president of the bank to sign the bond of the assistant cashier."

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP225He smiled and said: "Heber, I have had a very strenuous day, and I am just going for a ride. I shall be glad to sign the bond. I do not see how I could get out of it because I said so many good things about you in the directors' meeting yesterday (or the day before, I have forgotten which) about your integrity and honesty and favoring you for this job. If I refuse to sign your bond now, the directors would say, 'What did you say all those good things about him for if you are afraid to sign his bond?' "

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP225He came home, was taken sick, and passed away. I am sure, from my own experience and all of the symptoms that were published in the paper, he died of appendicitis. During all those years of my acquaintance with him, fully fifteen, I learned to love and respect him as a man of God, a man of great ability.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP225I remember saying to the vice-president of a great bank with hundreds of millions of dollars, that the day would come when Brigham Young would be acknowledged as one of the greatest pioneers and colonizers who ever lived.

Young, Brighama-Grant, Heber J.TP225He said: "Why say the day will come? No man who knows anything of the accomplishments of Brigham Young but what could say the day has come."—CR, April, 1932: 10-11.

GEORGE Q. CANNON

Cannon, George Q.a-Grant, Heber J.TPI remember that when George Q. Cannon was elected a delegate to Congress his right to a seat in Congress was contested. The attorney who went to Washington to oppose Brother Cannon—and in behalf of the man who had received (as I remember it) just ten percent as many votes as President Cannon—told the Congressmen that we were a vile lot and went on to say that if a man were opposed to the Mormon hierarchy he was liable to disappear and nobody would know what had become of him; that a man took his life in his hands if he dared to be in opposition to the Mormon people. When he got through, President Cannon said to him, calling him by name:

Cannon, George Q.a-Grant, Heber J.TP226"You pride yourself that than you, no more bitter, no more relenting, vicious opponent of this awful Mormon system lives, do you not?"

Cannon, George Q.a-Grant, Heber J.TP226"I certainly do."

Cannon, George Q.a-Grant, Heber J.TP226Brother Cannon said, addressing the committee hearing his case: "Gentlemen, I do not think it is at all necessary for me to answer the gentleman's arguments. He has lived with us for over twenty years. He has a fine dwelling that has cost about $25,000 to erect." Then he sat down, and the committee voted for Brother Cannon to retain his seat.

Cannon, George Q.a-Grant, Heber J.TP226Years later it was suggested that the horrible Mormon problem could be solved by giving the franchise to the women. It so happened that the legislature was in session at the time, and there was not a single non-Mormon in the legislature. Within forty-eight hours, if my memory serves me right, the women were enfranchised by our legislature. The same identical gentleman who was employed to fight George Q. Cannon's taking his seat in Congress was sent to Washington to have the franchise taken away from the Mormon women, as he said that it only added power to the awful hierarchy. He announced that the Mormons had from two to twenty wives, etc., and that these women were all slaves and voted just as they were told to do by their husbands.

Cannon, George Q.a-Grant, Heber J.TP226When he got through speaking, President Cannon remarked: "Does it not surprise you, gentlemen, as you are all married, how some intelligent men believe that other men's wives can be bossed?" He then sat down. He had killed the gentleman's argument.

Cannon, George Q.a-Grant, Heber J.TP226However, when the discussion came before the Congress of the United States, the franchise was taken away from the women of Utah, but it was later restored when Utah attained statehood.—CR, April, 1930: 184.

THE PRESIDENTS OF THE CHURCH

President of the Churcha-Grant, Heber J.TPIt has fallen to my lot, although a very weak, humble instrument in the hands of the Lord, to succeed the wonderful men who have presided over this Church—the Prophet Joseph Smith, than whom no greater man I believe has ever graced the earth; that marvelous pioneer, Brigham Young; that mighty champion of liberty, John Taylor; that exceptional converter of men to the gospel of Jesus Christ, Wilford Woodruff; Lorenzo Snow, an extraordinary man of eighty-five years of age, who in three years lifted the Church from the slough of despondency financially to a place of financial standing; and that man, beloved by all who knew him, one of the outstanding men of all the world, Joseph F. Smith, the greatest preacher of righteousness I have ever known.—CR, April, 1930: 22.

AN ASSOCIATION WITH FRED W. SHIBLEY

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TPBack in 1921, during the confusion of post-war finance and economic upheaval, a gentleman came here from New York, representing the bankers, in connection with the indebtedness of the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company, which was frozen, owing to the company's being unable to market its sugar inventory without heavy loss. He himself was the vice-president of the Banker's Trust Co., one of the greatest banks in New York—a very magnificent man—Mr. Fred W. Shibley by name. An effort was made by some, before he came and after he arrived here, to discredit the Church, its leaders, and its people.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP227Mr. Shibley told me one man said, in substance: "Those Mormon leaders are a bright lot; they are just getting rich at the expense of the credulity and superstition of their followers, and gathering in the tithing for their own benefit."

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP227He said: "I smiled and stated: 'Yes, I had a practical illustration of how the president is robbing his people. I went a few nights ago through the most beautiful and elegant school of music I have ever seen in my life. I doubt if there is a finer one in all the United States of America. I doubt if you could buy the building in which that school of music is housed for less than three-quarters of a million dollars, and I enjoyed going through the school. I learned that that school building was presented to the president of the Church and that the man and woman who presented it, a Mr. and Mrs. McCune, begged and pleaded with him time and time again, to occupy it as the official residence of the president of the Church, and thus magnify the Church and have a place that was worthy of entertaining the greatest, the best, and the finest of the great men that visit Utah. And he refused to do it. What would it cost to maintain such a home? Not less than one thousand two hundred to one thousand five hundred dollars a month, if it were kept up properly with necessary servants.' "

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP228He continued: "Yesterday morning the president of the Church invited me to come and have breakfast with him. He had invited me to dinner, but I had a previous engagement. The next day I had another engagement, and the following day I had to leave for New York, so he said: "Come up and take breakfast at eight o'clock in the morning." I agreed. There was no hired girl there. His daughter came in from the next house where she lived, and fried the pancakes. Oh, yes, I had a practical illustration of the way he is grafting the Church, living in a modest house that any ordinary man with a salary of three hundred fifty dollars a month would support, if not a better one."

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP228Now they had tried to make this gentleman believe that the leaders of the Church were robbing the people. But Mr. Shibley is not an easy man to deceive. His life has been spent in analytical affairs. He is what he termed himself to be—a financial doctor. He said: "I am not a banker, in the ordinary sense of making loans; I am simply the man who is sent out to look into the condition of companies that are in financial distress." And it was his duty, like a doctor, to diagnose the case and to administer some restoratives to keep the patient alive. With his analytical mind, he realized that the fellow who was trying to "stuff" him was not telling the truth.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP228He went through our sugar factories, examined the books of the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company covering a period of twenty long years. He made out a detailed statement of our prospects for one year, two years, three years, and made a very optimistic report that at the end of three years, at the outside, the company ought to be in a condition whereby it would be worthy of living and would be of great financial benefit to the community here if it were sustained. As a result of his visit to Utah a plan was developed under which the banks, in cooperation with the Mormon Church, effected an extension of the debt of the company which gave it time to dispose of its surplus sugar profitably and pay in full its indebtedness to the banks.—Era, 43:585, 631, 632.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TPHENRY WARD BEECHER AND THE LITERAL BELIEFS OF THE MORMON PEOPLE

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TPOn the first trip I ever made into Arizona, Old Mexico, and New Mexico, with Brigham Young, Jr., I read the synopsis of a speech delivered by Henry Ward Beecher the day previous. It was in a Monday morning paper published in Albuquerque.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP229Mr. Beecher said, "You must not accept the Bible literally. If you did, you would all have to be Mormons."

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP229I turned and read it to Brother Brigham, and said, "Hurrah for Henry! He has told the truth this time, whether he tells it again or not!"—GM, 17:95.

Snow, Erastusa-Grant, Heber J.TPERASTUS SNOW [^2]

Snow, Erastusa-Grant, Heber J.TPI cannot sit down without paying a tribute to Erastus Snow, than whom I know of no more devoted servant of God, and no man more interested in the work of the Latter-day Saints. Although he lived three hundred fifty miles from Salt Lake City, he never came to this city to a conference without coming to my mother's home, to eat a meal, and to inquire as to what I had been doing during the past six months. More than all the rest of the General Authorities of the Church I am indebted to him for an individual interest and for the teachings, advice, and counsel he gave to me.—CS August 1, 1931: 4.

Reference is to the great Colorado River Compact involving Utah, California, Arizona, Nevada, Colorado, and Wyoming.

In a letter to his cousin (later his First Counselor), A. W. Ivins, President Grant wrote on October 22, 1882: "Brother Erastus Snow comes the nearest to my idea of what an apostle should be of any member of the Twelve."

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Chapter Six, "Church Administration" for charges to Church officers and teachers.
[^2] This statistic is most significant when it is recalled that the cash income of farms is considerably lower, per capita, than the cash income of city workers, and it takes cash to send missionaries into the field.
