Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

229CHAPTER XVI

230REPORT OF HIS 1937 EUROPEAN TOUR

DEPARTURE, AND VISITS IN THE FRENCH MISSION

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.French Missiona-Grant, Heber J.TPAs you are all aware, since our last Conference (April, 1937) it has fallen to my lot to visit nearly all of our missions in Europe. We have had a very enjoyable time. Statistics are never interesting, but I feel that it is only fair to give you some information pertaining to our trip.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.French Missiona-Grant, Heber J.TP230We left Salt Lake City, Sunday, June 13, 1937, and sailed from Quebec on the 16th. Our party, consisting of Hugh B. Brown, Joseph Anderson, and myself, arrived in Cherbourg, France, June 23rd, where we were met by President Richard R. Lyman of the European Mission, and President O. F. Ursenback of the French Mission. We went directly to Paris where I delivered a talk before the American Club in that city. This talk was received very favorably and nearly all of it was published in the Paris edition of the New York Herald.

a-Grant, Heber J.French MissionTP230After our visit in Paris we went to Liege, Belgium, a part of the French Mission, at which place we visited three Sunday Schools. We also held a meeting in Herstal, near Liege, where I dedicated a new building; and in the evening we held a meeting in Liege. The attendance at each of these meetings was very good indeed. In fact at nearly every meeting we held the attendance was in excess of what we expected it to be, and upon more than one occasion over one-half of all the people in our audience were non-members of the Church.

MEETINGS IN SWITZERLAND

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Swiss-German MissionTPWe held a meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, on June 30th, and one on July 1st in Neuchatel, Switzerland. The branches in all these places, that is, at Liege, Geneva, and Neuchatel, are a part of the French Mission. From Neuchatel, President Ursenbach returned to headquarters in Liege, and President Philemon M. Kelly of the Swiss-German Mission met our party at Neuchatel, and accompanied us through the Swiss-German Mission./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Swiss-German MissionTP231We held a meeting in Bern at which there was a large attendance; as I remember it, over four hundred people. The following day a brief meeting was held at Interlaken, as we were passing through that city to take a trip on the cog railroad to see the wonderful Alps. Never before at any time have I been able to get such a magnificent view of the Alps as I did on this occasion. The clouds disappeared just before we reached the highest point on the railroad, and we could see five or six of those great towering mountains, covered with snow. When we made the return trip, the clouds covered the top of the mountains, so that we were unable to see them. We were very grateful for that wonderful, magnificent sight, second only of course to the Grand Canyon of the Colorado./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Swiss-German MissionTP231On July 4th, meetings were held in the morning and in the afternoon at Basel. Three or four hundred people attended each of these meetings. Tuesday, July 6th, we held a meeting in Zurich, Switzerland, and there were also over four hundred people at this service./

IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Czechoslovakia MissionTPServices were held in Frankfurt-on-Main, Germany, and there were more than nine hundred people in attendance at this meeting. This was the last meeting that we held in the Swiss-German Mission. From Frankfurt, we went to Prague, Czechoslovakia, by way of Nuremburg, at which latter place we were met by President Wallace F. Toronto. We held a meeting with the Saints and friends in Prague. The hall . . . was crowded and many people were standing up during the entire session. While in Prague we visited the buildings that have been erected in that city for the benefit of feeble-minded children, those who are undernourished, and the old people. It was the most wonderful exhibit of fine, modern buildings and efficient work along the line of taking care of the unfortunate that I have ever had the privilege of visiting. The lady in charge spent three or four hours with us in visiting all of the places of interest there. These homes are named after the first president of the republic, Mr. Masaryk./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.Czechoslovakia MissionTP232We were received in a very cordial way by the officials of the republic, and they expressed regret that the president of the republic (Mr. Benes) was absent, also that President Masaryk, the founder of the republic at the conclusion of the Great World War, was away./

IN GERMANY

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.GermanyTPOn the following day, July 10, in company with President Toronto and wife we left for Dresden, Germany. Here we held a fine meeting with over six hundred people in attendance. Here we met Elder Roy A. Welker, the president of the German-Austrian Mission, who, by the way, has filled a most satisfactory mission, following the very successful presidency of Elder Oliver H. Budge, of Cache Valley./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.GermanyTP232On July 14th, we held a meeting in Breslau, and from Breslau we went to Berlin. In the latter city we visited three Sunday Schools, and in the evening held a meeting in a large auditorium where there were over eleven hundred people present. Some of them stood up during the entire session. We were assured that over two-thirds of that audience were non-members of the Church./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.GermanyTP232One thing that was very pleasing to us was that we had perfect liberty in the holding of our meetings in Germany, notwithstanding the fact that more than thirty different denominations have been prohibited from preaching there./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.GermanyTP232I thought it was very remarkable that we should have the privilege of holding meetings with the people of Germany./

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.GermanyTP232I learned that upon one occasion our elders were prevented by the officials from preaching at a meeting. The officials said: "You have no right here, you must not preach."/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.GermanyTP232The elders said: "We have not been prohibited from holding meetings and preaching."/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.GermanyTP232The officers said: "We know better. You will have to stop, and we will bring you the evidence that you are not permitted to preach."/

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.GermanyTP233They came back and said: . . . We could not find the word Mormon nor the name The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on the prohibited list."/

TO LONDON

#%%#a-Grant, Heber J.British IslesTPFrom Berlin our party went to London. Brother Richard R. Lyman was with us until the time when we reached Dresden. But as he was advertised to deliver a speech in London on "World Peace," he returned to London and was not with us at the meetings held in Dresden, Breslau, and Berlin. The various mission presidents were with us at the meetings held in their particular missions, namely: Presidents Kelly, Welker, Ursenbach, and Toronto, all of whom have made very fine records in presiding over the various missions on the continent and have made friends of many leading officials in all of those countries, and stand well with them./

BUILDINGS DEDICATED IN GREAT BRITAIN

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TPOn July 20th, we held a meeting in Liverpool, England, at which I dedicated a building that we have purchased there that is to be remodeled and used as a chapel.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP233On July 21st, we held a meeting in Burnley, and I dedicated a Church building there.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP233July 22nd, we held a meeting in the Bradford Branch, and I dedicated the meetinghouse. At this meeting there were between three hundred and three hundred fifty people in attendance. They have a very nice Church building and quite a few of those who were present at the meeting were non-members.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP233Sunday, July 25, we held meetings in the London South and the London North Branches, and a church building was dedicated in each of these places. We have a very nice, expensive dwelling in the South Branch which has been remodeled to answer our purpose as a meeting place. In the North Branch we have a new chapel that we have erected that is very comfortable and answers our needs very well.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP233On the 26th of July, we visited Wales and held a meeting at Merthyr Tydfil where a little Church building was dedicated. The attendance at this meeting was approximately one hundred people. There are very few of our people in Merthyr Tydfil, but those we have there were very grateful to have a little meetinghouse of their own instead of renting a hall.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TPTHE BRITISH CENTENNIAL—1837-1937

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TPOn July 30th our party visited Vauxhall Chapel in Preston, where Elder Heber C. Kimball and his associates delivered the first sermons that were preached in Great Britain in this Dispensation (1837). It was at that time that the gospel was introduced in Great Britain.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP234We visited the place where the Cock Pit [^1] was located, although it has now disappeared, and there is merely a hole in the ground where the Cock Pit once stood. The same afternoon services were held near the River Ribble where the first British converts were baptized. (Really and truly, I feel a good deal like the old lady who had been attending Fast meetings for twenty or thirty years but had never had sufficient courage to bear her testimony. Finally one day she got up and bore her testimony and when she came home she said: "We had the finest Fast meeting today that I have ever attended." The question was asked: . . . Who spoke?" She answered: "I did.")

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP234I feel a little that way myself. And I know that Brother Clark and I and the other speakers enjoyed talking to the Saints there assembled. We had really a spiritual feast upon that occasion, and there was no one who captured the audience more completely than did Sister Ruth May Fox, the president of the Young Women's Improvement Associations of our Church.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP234On July 31st, we attended a baseball game between the Rochdale team consisting of Mormon missionaries and a Liverpool team. About three thousand people witnessed the game. The missionaries had a very easy time in winning over their opponents. Really it gave me a great thrill to watch the game. It took me back to my boyhood days when I played in the nine that won the championship of the Territory of Utah, and I have never played since. (I decided to quit while my credit was good.) It thrilled me to hear that audience cheering and shouting, "Saints! Saints! Saints!"

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP235I confess I was greatly pleased. It is a good thing to have a fine lot of boys playing ball and making friends. The people who were present were principally non-members of the Church.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP235On the evening of July 31st, there was presented a very beautiful pageant by the missionaries and Saints in the Town Hall of Rochdale. More than eight hundred people were present and hundreds were turned away. I assure you that it was a very creditable pageant indeed, a beautiful presentation. I was astonished at the splendid way in which the pageant was presented, considering the fact that those who participated did not have the time to have a rehearsal.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP235There are about six thousand people in the British Isles belonging to the Church, and there is many a stake—in fact sometimes two stakes adjoining each other, here at home, in which there would be more than twenty thousand people, who do not produce pageants that are better than was that one. It was a great credit to the people.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP235There was such an appeal from those who could not get into the building to see the pageant that it was repeated Sunday night, although somewhat abbreviated.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP235The meetings that were held in the Town Hall in Rochdale on Sunday were very wonderful indeed. The Lord was very good to all those who spoke. The speakers at these meetings, in addition to myself, were President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Elder Richard R. Lyman, Elder Joseph J. Cannon, Elder Hugh B. Brown, Elders George D. Pyper, and Arthur Winter, Sister Ruth May Fox, and others. The same afternoon we dedicated a small chapel at Rochdale.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP235On the following day, August 2nd, some auxiliary meetings were held.

VISIT TO HOLLAND

On August 7th, we visited the Scout jamboree in Holland. The party consisted of myself, my daughter, Mrs. Lucy G. Cannon, Joseph J. Cannon and wife, Elder Richard R. Lyman, and Joseph Anderson. We left London on August 6th for Holland, and were met at Rotterdam by Brother Franklin J. Murdock who is the president of the Netherlands Mission. At the Scout jamboree we were very cordially received by Chief Scout Executive James E. West, expressing the deep appreciation of himself and associates for our having lent them, as they put it, part of the time of Brother Oscar A. Kirkham, who did a very fine work, and had an important position at the jamboree.

236Sunday, August 8, we held a meeting in Amsterdam, and in the evening of the same day held a meeting in Utrecht. On August 11th we held a meeting in Rotterdam. All of these meetings were very well attended, and among those present were many non-members of the Church. We subsequently authorized by telegrams signed by myself and Brother Richard R. Lyman, the sale of our mission headquarters in Rotterdam for fourteen thousand guilders, and the purchase of a building at the Hague for twelve thousand guilders. Our new quarters are on a very fine residential street, and the property cost something more than forty thousand guilders. The building is in a very fine state of repair. It was built by the Seventh Day Adventist Church and is a creditable place for our mission headquarters in Holland, for which we are very grateful.

236Our party went from Rotterdam, Holland, to Hamburg, Germany, where we were met by Presidents Philemon M. Kelly, Thomas E. McKay, and Alfred C. Rees. A meeting was held in Hamburg the night of August 13th, at which there were more than six hundred people in attendance.

EXPERIENCES IN SCANDINAVIA

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TPWe held meetings in Esbjerg, Denmark, Sunday, August 15, at which in the afternoon, the Esbjerg Branch's new Church building was dedicated. At all three of the meetings held in Esbjerg the attendance was large, particularly in the evening. While in Denmark, the party was accompanied by President Alma L. Petersen of the Danish Mission. Sister Clarissa Beesley joined us at Esbjerg, and accompanied us on our tour of the Scandinavian Missions.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP237We held a meeting in Copenhagen, where there were nearly five hundred in attendance. Brother Oscar A. Kirkham was also present at this meeting and at Stockholm. During our tour of the Swedish Mission we were accompanied by President Gustive O. Larson.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP237The first meeting was held in Malmo on August 19th, and there were between two and three hundred people in attendance. Meetings were held in Stockholm, Sunday, August 22nd, which were very well attended, nearly all present being our own people. There were between three and four hundred people present at each of these meetings. We then held a meeting in Goteberg, Sweden, where our party was met by President A. Richard Petersen of the Norwegian Mission, who accompanied us on our tour of Norway. At the meeting held in Oslo, on August 26th, there were nearly five hundred people present.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP237In Bergen, on Sunday, August 29, we held two meetings, one in the morning and one in the evening, and at the evening meeting there were more than six hundred people in attendance fully—two-thirds of those who were present being non-members of the Church.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP237I am sure that there were in the building fully one hundred people who could not get seats and they remained standing, as far as I could judge, without any of them going out during the entire service. After the close of the meeting the choir sang three very beautiful selections. One was particularly beautiful; I cannot recall the name of it, but we all decided that the singing of it on this occasion was better and sweeter than we had ever heard it sung before.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP237I am very pleased to tell you that Evan Stephens' anthems were sung in nearly all of the places we visited. They have been translated into the various languages and we enjoyed them very much, indeed. . . .

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP238Brother Joseph J. Cannon—who has just been released from the presidency of the British Mission, after having filled a very fine mission and was succeeded by Brother Hugh B. Brown at the time we left on this trip to visit Holland and the Scandinavian countries—to our astonishment was able to speak the Swedish language to the people, and they assured us that he spoke good Swedish. We thought this was very remarkable, seeing that it had been about thirty-five or thirty-eight years since he first went there and filled a mission of nearly three years.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP238We held a number of M.I.A. meetings in addition to the regular meetings, and I met with the missionaries many times in the different missions where only the missionaries and the mission presidents were present.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP238The party returned by steamship from Bergen, Norway, to London by way of Newcastle, leaving Bergen, August 30th.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP238We sailed for home on September 4th, arriving here on Sunday, the 12th—just thirteen weeks from the Sunday we left on our trip.—CR, October, 1937: 2-8.

Scandinaviaa-Grant, Heber J.TP238It melted my heart to find how anxious the people who are in those countries are to hear the Authorities of the Church, how their hearts swelled with gratitude when President Clark, myself, Brother Lyman, and others were with them. I feel really and truly ashamed of myself that I have neglected so long returning to that part of the flock. They are just as much a part of this Church as we are, and, the Lord helping us, they shall not be neglected in the future as much as they have been in the past. They are a part of the work of God, and they are entitled to visits every year or two from some of the leaders of this Church. We have taken care of our people here at home, and we have sadly neglected those fine people over in those countries. Pardon me, but I do feel in my heart condemned that I did not take the time to go back there sooner, and if the Lord spares my life I am not going to wait very long before going back again.—CR, October, 1937: 12, 13.

MORMONISM'S CENTURY IN GREAT BRITAIN

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TPWhile upon this mission one thing that thrilled me was to read the book by Richard L. Evans giving a history of missionary work in Great Britain. Fifty thousand, as I remember it, of the staunchest, finest of all the people of Great Britain have helped to build this Church by emigrating to this country. A marvelous work.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP239Wilford Woodruff baptized over two thousand people, and Orson Pratt nearly the same number. Heber C. Kimball, Lorenzo Snow, and others did marvelous and wonderful work there also.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP239President Heber C. Kimball was inspired in the most marvelous and wonderful way in opening up that mission. I had great joy in contemplating these things.—CR, October, 1937: 12.

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP239More than one hundred and twenty-six thousand people have entered the waters of baptism in the British Isles during the century, nearly half of whom have emigrated. Nearly six thousand missionaries have been sent by the Church to Great Britain. And these converts and emigrants and missionaries have interchanged skills in the arts and crafts and in the professions—have interchanged thought and culture and truth and eternal principles. They have sealed their service to each other with friendship, with conviction of truth, with testimonies of the gospel, and with fellowship in the Church of Jesus Christ. And out of it all has come a loyal Church membership in Great Britain and a mighty posterity in America who cherish their British lineage and heritage. . . .

British Islesa-Grant, Heber J.TP239For the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints the century under the sovereigns of the British Empire has been a century of mighty accomplishment. That the Lord our Heavenly Father may greatly bless this nation and all its righteous people is my most earnest and sincere prayer for the land that has harbored, for one hundred years, the oldest overseas mission of the Latter-day Church of Jesus Christ.—Era, 39:405.

The Cock Pit, Preston, England, was the scene of the first British Mission conference, in 1837.

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Chapter Six, "Church Administration" for charges to Church officers and teachers.
