Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

239CHAPTER XVII

240SOME MEMOIRS AS CHURCH LEADER

THE SETTLEMENT OF THE WEST

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TPThe accomplishments of the Latter-day Saints are in absolute and full accord with the prophecy delivered on the west bank of the Mississippi River by the Prophet Joseph Smith, as recorded in the prophet's journal under date of August 6, 1842:

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP240I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains. Many would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors or lose their lives as consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities, and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP240This has been fulfilled to the very letter and we have over one thousand wards and branches from Canada on the north to Mexico on the south. The Church has expended during the last three years between three and four million dollars in assisting to erect local meetinghouses. The people have contributed a like amount. As you know we have built here [in Salt Lake City] a four-million-dollar temple, and we have built temples in St. George, Manti, Logan, Canada, Arizona, and the Hawaiian Islands, costing in all many millions of money. We have in very deed fulfilled that prophecy notwithstanding the fact that this western country was considered worthless. When you think of this arid region, when you think that it was considered of no value, and then realize what has been accomplished, it is beyond question that we have fulfilled that prediction.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP240At the very time this prophecy was uttered, Daniel Webster, one of the foremost statesmen in the United States at that time, said:

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP241What do we want with this vast worthless area, this region of savages and wild beasts, of deserts, of shifting sands, and whirlwinds of dust, of cactus and prairies dogs? To what use could we ever hope to put those great deserts or those endless mountain ranges, impenetrable and covered to their very base with eternal snow? What can we ever hope to do with the western coast of three thousand miles, rock-bound, cheerless, uninviting, and not a harbor on it? Mr. President, I will never vote one cent from the public treasury to place the Pacific Coast one inch nearer Boston that it now is.

Church Growtha-Grant, Heber J.TP241When I think of the magnificent harbor at Seattle, and the wonderful Golden Gate harbor as well as others on the Pacific Coast, I am aware that Daniel Webster was not very well informed. When we think of this "worthless" country—Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and California—having furnished more wealth so far as the precious metals are concerned than any other part or all of the balance, I think, of the United States; when we realize that we have one mine here, a copper mine, the copper being mined in a most unusual and wonderful way, having paid as I recall over one hundred and fifty million dollars in dividends, working successfully ore that does not run one percent—less than twenty pounds of copper to a ton—handling upon one occasion more than eighty thousand tons in a day, or double as much as was handled in a day in the construction of the Panama Canal; when we think of the millions upon millions of dollars' worth of gold produced in California; when we think of the rich copper mines in Arizona, to say nothing of silver, lead, and gold in all these sections, and Colorado's immense wealth, we realize that Daniel Webster did not know very much about this country.—CR, October, 1930: 4-5.

A SIDELIGHT ON KANSAS CITY

It would be of interest to you to know that some years ago I played a game of golf in Kansas City with a son of former Governor Crittenden. He handed me a pamphlet in which appeared the pictures of the founder of the Kansas City Star, his wife, and the first presiding bishop of the Mormon Church. Mr. Crittenden checked off a description of some of the property in that vicinity and jokingly remarked, "Mr. Grant, you are playing on your own links, as the title stands in the name of the presiding bishop of the Mormon Church."

242Subsequently I was asked to speak before the Chamber of Commerce of Kansas City, and I remarked that I owned as president of the Church nearly one-half of Kansas City, but I could not get possession of it, because, under the law, adverse possession for a certain number of years gives one a title.

242Nearly all the abstracts of title to land in the eastern part of Kansas City show the title to the land in the name of Edward Partridge, the presiding bishop of the Mormon Church.—CS, August 22, 1936: 1.

A STORY OF WORLD WAR I

I happened to be the chairman of the committee that raised their proportion of the six-billion-dollar fund during the [first] World War. There are very few who realize what a billion is. A billion is the equivalent of a dollar a minute for every minute from the birth of the Savior until the time of the great World War. We raised our proportion. There was a great meeting being held in California, and the presidents of the various state organizations of defense and the chairmen of the Liberty Loan drive were invited to that meeting. We had a meeting of what were called the "Patriotic One Thousand," and then afterwards a brief meeting at which there were about one hundred present. In that brief meeting there were many doubts expressed as to the war's being won by the allies. I said: "So far as the Mormons are concerned we have no fear whatever as to the outcome. Every Mormon believes in the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Mormon teaches that this is a land choice above all other lands, and that no king, or kaiser for that matter, will ever reign here."

242Several said, "My gracious, we had better join the Mormon Church."—CS, August 6, 1938: 6.

"THE GENEROUS GIVER"

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TPI remember, upon one occasion—having had placed upon me by the Presidency of the Church a somewhat difficult mission to raise a large sum of money in the way of donations to maintain the honor and credit and good name of certain prominent men—receiving a letter from one man saying that he heard I was engaged in this financial mission, and he said he rejoiced to hear of it, that he had long wanted the opportunity of doing something, in addition to his tithing, to show to the Lord his appreciation of the wonderful blessings that had come to him. He concluded: "I have pleasure in sending you five thousand dollars to assist in this mission that has been placed upon you, and if you need more from me, do not hesitate to call."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP243I could not help contrasting in my feelings, the position that this man took with that of a president of a stake to whom I appealed for one thousand dollars, and who, I am sure, was worth at least twice as much as the man who, without solicitation, had sent me a check for five thousand dollars. He not only did not give me anything at all, this stake president, but he made it his special business to see the men of means in his stake and forestalled my visit there so that when I went there, I did not get anything from anybody.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP243I remember, upon one occasion, when this mission was upon me, of hearing a man pray in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. He was also in a stake presidency. He dedicated to the Lord his time, his talent, his substance, and all that he had. I thought: "This is just the man I am after; he has plenty of money," and immediately I called upon him with my letter of appointment from the First Presidency. I did not get anything from him, and I concluded that his "dedication" to the Lord of all that he had was done believing that the Lord would not come and ask for any part of it.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP243At the time that stake president failed to respond, he utterly lacked the inspiration and the spirit and the willingness to carry out the prayer that he had previously uttered, because I had heard him dedicate his time and talents to the Lord. His prayer was merely a matter of form and I knew that it was only a matter of time when that man would no longer be a stake president. I made no complaints whatever, but I saw him gradually losing his faith and power with the people; finally a change was made.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP244I also watched the other man, who of his own free will and accord showed his appreciation of the blessings of the Lord by sending me this five thousand dollars without any solicitation on my part. I made no recommendations for promotion in the Priesthood of this man, but it was only a short time before he became a president of a stake, because he was showing his faith by his works, by making a practical demonstration that he did love the Lord, that he was grateful to the Lord, that he did desire to show that gratitude substantially.—Era, 42:713.

SEEKING OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TPTwice in my life I prayed to the Lord to be appointed to a position.

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP244The first time was when there was a disorganization of the general superintendency of the Mutual Improvement Associations because of the failure of one of the men in that superintendency to retain his standing in one of the high positions in the Church. I got down on my knees and I asked the Lord to call me to be one of the superintendency of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. The Contributor was a very splendid magazine, one of the very finest magazines the Church has published. I am willing to make the assertion that if you will look through the volumes of the Contributor, you will find that they are full of good matter, worthy of the attention of any Latter-day Saint. It . . . died a natural death because of the lack of support on the part of the people.

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP244We had no magazine, and there were no meetings of the general board, except that they met once in about every six months. I realized that they ought to meet every week, that they should come together and converse and work out programs. I prayed to the Lord that I might be chosen as one of the general superintendency. The very next day when I was in the president's office, President Joseph F. Smith said to President Woodruff, who was then also general superintendent of the Y. M. M. I. A.: "Brother Woodruff, I believe you ought to have two other counselors in the superintendency of the Young Men's Mutual. I suggest that Brother Grant here and Brother B. H. Roberts be counselors as well as myself."

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP245They asked me if I was willing to work in that capacity. I told them: "Yes." But I did not tell them I had prayed to the Lord to give me the job. We immediately called a meeting, and we considered the proposition of starting The Improvement Era. I signed my name in one year over eight thousand times to letters that were sent to people, asking them to take that magazine. I contributed one hundred dollars a year for three years to a fund to be used in sending the Era to the missionaries free of charge, and The Improvement Era spent over thirty thousand dollars actual cost afterwards in sending this magazine out to the missionaries to help them in their work. It has been a success ever since, and it is growing all the time. It is worthy of our support.

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP245The other thing that I asked of the Lord was this: When in Japan, feeling that I was not accomplishing anything, I went out into the woods and got down on my knees and told the Lord that whenever He was through with me there, where I was accomplishing nothing, I would be very glad and thankful if He would call me home and send me to Europe to preside over the European missions. A few days after that a cable arrived: "Come home on the first boat." And I went home.

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP245Brother Joseph F. Smith said to me: "Heber, I realize you have not accomplished anything in Japan. We sent you there for three years, and I want you to put in the other year in England, if you are willing."

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP245I said, "I am perfectly willing."

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP245Later I went in to bid him good-bye and said: "I will see you in a little over a year."

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP245He said, "Oh no, I have decided to make it a year and a half."

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP246I said, "All right, multiply it by two and do not say anything about it to me." And he did.

Callingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP246I want you young people to know that in all my labors I got nearer to the Lord, and accomplished more and had more joy while in the mission field than ever before or since. Man is that he may have joy, and the joy that I had in the mission field was superior to any I have ever experienced elsewhere. Get it into your hearts, young people, to prepare yourselves to go out into the world where you can get on your knees and draw nearer to the Lord than in any other labor.—Era, 39:396.

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TPHISTORY OF THE SUGAR INDUSTRY

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TPMany years ago President Woodruff announced that the Lord would like the great business of manufacturing sugar established in our midst. A committee was appointed from the directorate of two of the largest Church institutions, two of the most substantial in all Israel, to look into the matter. They investigated the advisability of establishing the beet sugar industry in this state and unanimously reported adversely.

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP246President Woodruff was not satisfied. Another committee was appointed. I was on the first committee and he appointed me on the second committee. I begged to be excused, because I had already formed my opinion, had already signed my name to a report, but he would not listen to my request to be excused. We went into the matter again, thoroughly and carefully, and the second committee reported adversely. President Woodruff said: "Never mind the report. The inspiration to me is to establish the sugar industry."

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP246I was called upon a mission, and a letter was given to me in connection with other members of the Council of the apostles. We were sent out to ask men to subscribe for stock in the Utah Sugar Company.

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP246I took individual letters to different men asking them to subscribe. I delivered a letter to the late David Eccles, than whom I never met a clearer-headed business man in my life, and I have met men who draw their hundred thousand dollars and more every year in salary. He had a comprehensive grasp of business affairs which to me was superior to that of any man I ever met. David smiled when the letter was presented to him, signed by President Woodruff and his counselors, asking him to invest five thousand dollars, or seven thousand five hundred dollars.

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP247He said, "Well, I would like to get off at the lowest figure. You can put me down for five thousand dollars." Then he added: "I hope they will buy lumber from me, so I may make a profit on a part of the five thousand dollars; and after I get my stock, if you can find someone who would like to buy it for twenty-five hundred dollars, I will be much obliged to you if you will come and get the stock."

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP247Years later, when he put hundreds of thousands of dollars into the sugar business, I don't know whether or not he felt to give credit to that humble man, Wilford Woodruff, for the inspiration of the Lord whereby this great industry was established.

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP247But for the inspiration of the Lord to Wilford Woodruff I doubt if we would have any sugar business in this state or in Idaho, today, that would amount to very much. I am inclined to think that the Great Western or some other company would have established the business in Utah and Idaho, and that the people of these states would simply have been working for them instead of owning the majority of the stock in our great intermountain factories.

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP247After we had let the contract for the building of the sugar factory at Lehi, the panic of 1891 came on. There was a provision in the contract that before the machinery was shipped by the Dyer Company, if we would pay a forfeit of fifty thousand dollars the contract could be cancelled. I had been sent to New York, Chicago, Boston, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and other places, by the Presidency, to try to raise the money necessary to build this factory, but it looked like an impossibility to get the money. It was the opinion of business men and others that we should pay the fifty thousand dollars forfeit and abandon the enterprise. But when the recommendation was presented, Wilford Woodruff's answer was this:

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP248From the day I received a knowledge of the divinity of the gospel of Jesus Christ revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith, from the day that I went out as a humble priest to proclaim that gospel, although it looked like death in front of me, if the path of duty that the gospel required me to tread called me to face death, I have never turned to the right nor turned to the left. And now the inspiration of the Lord to me is to build this factory. Every time I think of abandoning it there is darkness; and every time I think of building it, there is light. We will build the factory if it bursts the Church.

Sugar Beetsa-Grant, Heber J.TP248We did build it and it did not burst the Church [Laughter]. It and subsequent factories have made millions of dollars for our people.—CR, June, 1919: 8-9.

GROWTH OF SALT LAKE CITY

I have seen every building in Salt Lake City, with the exception of some dwellings, erected within my lifetime. I was born where the Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution now stands. That was my homestead where I first saw the light of day. I can remember the main street as cabbage patches, tomato patches, and fruit orchards. I have seen the entire growth of that city.—Era, 35:258.

PRESIDENT GRANT'S "CIGAR MONEY" (On Giving Books)

I remember upon one occasion a friend of mine, not in the Church, saying:

248"How can you afford to spend hundreds of dollars every year in giving books away to your friends?"

248I said: "Oh, I get a great deal of pleasure out of it, and in addition I sometimes give pleasure to four or five hundred others. Sometimes I give away in a year a thousand or two thousand pamphlets that cost only ten cents each, and it is my cigar money. I am sure it does not cost me any more than you spend to gratify your own appetite in smoking cigars."

248He said, "Well, you have knocked me out in the first round and with the first blow."—CS, June 25, 1932.

THE WORD OF WISDOM

I have urged upon the people, and have been called a crank for so doing, the observance of the Word of Wisdom and I expect to continue to be a crank in that respect to the end of my life. I am converted beyond the shadow of a doubt that no man or woman in this Church who does not observe the Word of Wisdom can grow and increase in a knowledge and testimony of the gospel as he or she could otherwise do.—CS, June 25, 1932.

249I believe as firmly as I believe that I am standing here before you today that, on three separate and distinct occasions in my life I would have lost my life had I not been an observer of the Word of Wisdom. But on account of the pure blood I had in my veins and the promise of God and the keeping of the commandments of God, my life has been spared.—CR, October, 1937: 15.

SABBATH OBSERVANCE

Sabbath Daya-Grant, Heber J.TPI am opposed to Sunday baseball, and have been so from my boyhood days. When a young man, I was passionately fond of the game. Today I am happy in contemplating the fact that, much as I loved to play it, I never played a game on Sunday. I am grateful to know that I also persuaded more than one young man from playing on Sundays.

Sabbath Daya-Grant, Heber J.TP249Not only am I opposed to Sunday baseball, but I am decidedly and emphatically in favor of a Sunday law which will not only prevent the playing of baseball but will also provide for the closing of theatres and other places of amusement. In my opinion, our legislators, from the date of Utah's admission into the union, have neglected a very important duty to the public. I hope such a law on this subject may be placed on our statute books when the next legislature shall meet.

Sabbath Daya-Grant, Heber J.TP249I never think of the quiet in the great city of London, on Sundays, and compare it with our own city, that I am not humiliated.—Era, 16:262-263.

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TPANGELS AND TESTIMONIES

Testimonya-Grant, Heber J.TPI have met many young men who have said to me, "I do not know that the gospel is true. I believe it, but I do not know it." I have invariably replied to them that our Lord and Master has said that he who will do the will of the Father shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether He spoke of Himself, and if they would do the will of the Father, they should eventually have a knowledge of the gospel. Some of them have said: "Oh, if I could only see an angel; if I could only hear speaking in tongues; if I could only see some great manifestation, then I would believe." I wish to say to all within the sound of my voice that the seeing of angels and great manifestations do not make great men in the Church and kingdom of God.—CR, April, 1900: 22.

A SIGNIFICANT LETTER

I may say that, with the exception of my associates in the Church of Christ and my own relatives, there is no man living upon the earth today that has as warm a place in my heart and that I love as dearly as the man who wrote this letter. I do not know that he would care to have me mention his name. [^1] Therefore I shall not do so. But I will state that at the time he wrote this letter he was the general manager for the United Kingdom of a corporation of over two hundred millions of dollars; so you may know that he was a man of considerable experience and importance in the business world. The letter was written to me from London:

250My dear Heber:

250Your very nice long letter of the 10th came duly to hand. Of course, you know, aside from the long and intimate personal friendship we have had together, how much I have always been impressed with the genuineness and sincerity of the religious feeling among the men and women who hold your faith. Many times and oft I have said, in conversation, that the only religious people I ever knew who lived up to their professions were the Mormons of Utah. And this is true.

251I am indeed grateful that my friend has not access to the list of non-tithe payers, amounting to ten thousand, because I doubt very much if then he could say "that the only religious people I ever knew who lived up to their professions, were the Mormons of Utah."

251I am grateful that the Mormons with whom this man became acquainted were not only Mormons in name, but that they were in very deed Latter-day Saints. He gained his opinion of all Mormons by those with whom he became acquainted; and I have often said in public that I regard it as the duty of every Latter-day Saint to so order his life that his conduct will inspire all people with respect for him, and thereby create respect for the entire people. It is in keeping with the teachings of our Savior to let our light so shine, that men, seeing our good works, will glorify God and be led to embrace the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

251This it is that inspires respect, even when there is a total absence of a belief in the doctrines. Your people carry their beliefs into daily life, and act as if they think there is something in them. If I had the belief to start with, I cannot see how as a sensible person I could do otherwise.

251Now here is the sentence that I desire impressed upon your minds indelibly:

251If there is anything [and my friend draws a big black line under "anything"] in a belief which involves an eternity of future existence, there is everything. [And my friend draws another black line under "everything."]

251Do we as Latter-day Saints believe this? Do we appreciate the force of my friend's remark?

251"If there is anything in a belief which involves an eternity of future existence, there is everything."

251Are we convinced that there is everything in this belief which involves an eternity of future existence? And do we, as our friend says we do, carry our beliefs into daily life, and act as if we do think there is something in them? Are we like the salt that has lost its savor, that is henceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under foot of men? My friend continues:

252Now, I have given you my own sincere thought. The fact that I have no such conviction is evidenced by the fact that I am agnostic on such questions, as shown by my own actions.

252If we are to take that standard—what is shown by the actions—then there are thousands of Latter-day Saints who are agnostics. And that is the standard of Jesus Christ. It is the only standard by which we will stand or fall.

252Still I never attempt to proselyte on behalf of non-belief; and the last thing I would do, is to disturb those who believe in a theory which I don't; and I won't argue in defense of my own lack of believing.252I think, Heber, I have expressed about these views to your mother many years ago.

252This man, as I have said, is a friend of mine, and he has shown his friendship by his actions—a friendship which I doubt very much I could have experienced from many of the Latter-day Saints if they had been put to the test.

252In the panic of 1893, this man, learning of my financial distress, wrote me a letter and announced that it was impossible to borrow any money in San Francisco (where he was then located) upon ordinary securities, but that money was there to be lent upon real estate. He said that he had no real estate except his home, but if the money from a mortgage placed upon his home would save my financial life, he said, "Telegraph me upon receipt of this letter; do not wait to write, because delays are dangerous, and the money shall come to you by the first mail." I could not restrain my tears when I read that letter, to think that God had given me sufficient of His Spirit whereby I had been enabled to so live that a man who was an agnostic, and who had no hope beyond the grave, had been so impressed with the genuineness of my character and integrity that he was willing to risk his home to save my "financial life." What called forth his letter?

252My friend [previously] wrote to me from London, inquiring about my mother, about her sister, and about a number of other people with whom he was acquainted when he was a boarder in my mother's home, and wanting to know how they were getting along. Among others, he inquired regarding my cousin, Anthony W. Ivins. And I wrote and told him of the sacrifices that he had made in selling his property and moving to a foreign country. With regard to those sacrifices, I remarked that he had gone because of a call he had received, without any earthly hope of reward. And I said: "You see that we Mormons go where we are sent, without regard to the profits that may come to us."

253This called forth the letter referred to above.

253That man, to my knowledge, many years ago, was the instrument in the hand of God, in connection with another friend of mine, of making for this people a friend of a man who was chosen to govern this territory, namely, Governor Axtell. He wrote to me that he came here imbued—"filled full," is the expression in the letter—with his ideas of the Mormons. He said: "He is my friend, and I know what kind of people you are, and he comes there believing as I believe."—CR, April, 1901: 31-33.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TPTO ONE WHO FEARS FOR HIS TESTIMONY

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP[More than fifty years ago a friend of President Grant, residing in another city, wrote that he had no testimony of the truth of the gospel. This admission brought forth from the president, then only thirty years of age, a reply mingling cold reason and inspiration in a manner that gives answer not only to the president's friend but to all who feel themselves in like position. In going over the president's voluminous and carefully kept papers, his daughter, Rachel Grant Taylor, came upon this letter which we reprint here not only for the value of its message, but also as a thoughtful insight into the straight thinking and inspiration of a young man who fulfilled the promise of his youth.—Editor.]

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP253My dear Friend:

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP253You claim that you have no testimony of the truth of the gospel. I am inclined to the opinion that you felt almost as if you had written what was not so when you penned those words. I shall not enter into an argument on the subject, knowing that it will do no good, as no amount of argument would change your position. If the spirit within you did not feel condemned when you wrote that you had no testimony, then I am sure that you are walking on very dangerous ground, and my advice to you is that you start in and devote your time to fasting and praying until you obtain a testimony.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP254I can't give you a testimony any more than I can do your eating and thinking for you. The history of our people and the history our enemies are making and have made against us is as strong a testimony as I know anything of, so far as convincing my reason goes. The fact that crime cannot live in the Church and that the Church has stood and can stand because of the testimony in the hearts of the people, even if half or two-thirds of the leaders were to make shipwreck of their faith, is another item. The fact that men live God-like lives and testify to the truth of the gospel (Why? Because their lives entitle them to the Spirit of God, and they can therefore testify by its aid.) and then do evil and testify that the gospel is not true (Why? Because their lives have caused God's Spirit to depart from them.) is another item that would naturally appeal to one's reason.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP254It would frighten my reason if, when I found men increasing in wisdom and good acts, I found them drawing away from the gospel; but I have during my entire life to find a case of this kind. When men stop praying for God's Spirit, they place confidence in their own unaided reason and they gradually lose the Spirit of God, just as near and dear friends, by never writing to or visiting with each other, will become perfect strangers, so to speak. The minute a man stops supplicating God for His Spirit and direction, just so soon he begins to become a stranger to Him and Hs works.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP254I might go on and write a dozen pages in the same vein as I have started, and you would find nothing in them that would give you a testimony, or perhaps nothing that you had not thought of yourself. Earnest, honest, and sincere prayer to God is worth more to you than all I can say or write.

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP254Everything is progressing favorably with me. The family and I are in the possession of good health. . . .With assurances of regard and esteem, and best wishes for you and yours, I remain, Sincerely yours,

Grant, Heber J.a-Grant, Heber J.TP254Heber J. Grant. —Era, 41:199.

REFLECTIONS ON HIS TEACHERS

I know that many times I have poured out the gratitude of my heart to Hamilton G. Park, who was the teacher of my Sunday School class in my boyhood and young manhood days. I shall never get over thanking this man for the wonderful impression for good that he made upon me and for the remarkable testimonies he bore in our classes, telling his experiences as a missionary, and the blessings and power of God that attended him while proclaiming the gospel in two missions to his native country, Scotland.

255I look forward with the keenest pleasure of meeting in the hereafter Hamilton G. Park, George Goddard, Bishop Nelson Empey, Bishop Edwin D. Woolley, Bishop Millen Atwood, and others who made an impression for good upon my mind and heart as a boy. I could mention scores of others to whom I am indebted. I shall be grateful throughout all the ages of eternity to those men for the impression that they made upon me.

255We may think that the impressions we make may not be lasting, but I can assure you they are. I am sure that a testimony borne by a teacher to little children, under the inspiration of the living God, is a difficult thing for them to forget.

255I shall be grateful always to Eliza R. Snow, second only to my mother, for the many wonderful things that she told me as a little boy when I used to run errands, or come up to the Lion House to deliver a message to "Aunt Eliza," as I always called her from my earliest recollection. She was sure to ask me to sit down a few minutes, and then she would talk to me. She told me scores and scores of faith-promoting incidents in her life in Nauvoo when she was there as a girl with my mother, and incidents in the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that have been of value to me. She inspired me with a determination to live a life that would be worthy of my mother and my father.

255I remember vividly also the wonderful teachings to me of the late Erastus Snow. . . . Seldom if ever did he come to a conference in April or October, or come here on some special mission, that he did not visit my mother's home and inquire how we were getting along, inquire of me whether I was attending to my duties, what I was doing, and the kind of company I was keeping. I shall never, while I live, and when I go beyond the grave, get over being grateful for the wonderful testimonies and the wonderful fatherly advice of that man to me.

Teaching, Gospela-Grant, Heber J.TP256Each and every one of our teachers has the opportunity and the power under the inspiration of the Spirit of God, to make an impression upon the hearts and souls of little innocent children and young boys and girls who are starting out in the battle of life. I pray with all the fervor of my soul that God will help you in your labors; and I can promise you that He will help you. The important thing for you is to have a love of your work and to do your work under the inspiration of the Spirit of the living God. That is the whole difference between the Church of Jesus Christ and the people of the world. They have the letter of the gospel; they are teaching the Bible just as diligently and many of them believe in it as strongly and try to live up to its precepts just as well as we do; but the Spirit of the living God they do not have. Why? Because they haven't the power of the Priesthood, and because they have not accepted the gospel as we have.—Era, 42:135.

FINDING TIME TO PERFORM TEMPLE WORK

Templesa-Grant, Heber J.TPIf we have a desire to do a thing, we can generally find the time to do it. I made up my mind several years ago that I would like to go to the temple once a week when I was in Salt Lake City, although I had so much work to do that quite frequently I got out of bed at 4:30 in the morning and talked to the dictaphone—I have dictated many times more letters before going to my office at 8:30 than any stenographer can write in one day. I had felt for years that I did not have the time to go to the temple, but finally I got the desire to go, and from that time on I had no difficulty in finding the time to go once a week. Occasionally I went twice a week, and it so happened that one week I went all four nights that the temple was open. . . .

Templesa-Grant, Heber J.TP257I believe that if I could find the time to go to the temple and do temple work once a week, there is hardly a man in the entire Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints but who can find the same time if he wishes to plan his work accordingly. The trouble with so many people is they do not have the desire. (I am speaking of people who live where there is a temple.) If you get it into your heart and soul that this is one of the most important things you as Latter-day Saints can do, you will find a way to do it.—Era, 44:459.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TPSOME "UNBAPTIZED CONVERTS"

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TPI remember attending the funeral of a gentleman in Salt Lake, a very dear friend of mine not of our Church, whose wife was a life-long member of another church, and the anguish of that woman at that funeral, the almost frantic anguish that nearly drove her wild, and the mourning and the sorrow for months and months that that woman experienced, convinced me beyond a shadow of a doubt that her faith utterly failed in comforting her heart.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP257Some months after the death of her husband, I happened to be visiting at her home, and she invited me to sit down on the lounge. She wanted to tell me something. She told me that a short time before her husband had died he said to her that he did not want to break her heart, but "if it were not for the fact that you and your friends and your grandparents have been devoted members of another church I tell you what I would do: I would join these Mormons. We have lived among them for twenty-five years; they take care of their poor better than any other people in the world. They take care of their sick better; they visit the homes of their friends in the hour of sickness and sorrow and are like one great large family. They are in very deed brothers and sisters. There is nobody like them; and I would join them, only I know it would break your heart."

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP257Months later I wrote her and asked permission to go into the temple and do the work for her husband; and she called at my house and granted this permission and handed me some money to donate to the temple. I made up my mind, after a few years had passed, that I would have a conversation with her, and refer to the fact that we believed in marriage for time and all eternity. But just before I had made up my mind to have that conversation with her—she was living at the time in California—she passed away.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP258I was very sorry that I did not have the opportunity to talk with her because I had lived in hope that she would see the necessity of being baptized herself. But shortly afterwards I learned that just before she died, when she was visiting in Utah, she called a president of a stake to her home there and said: "I cannot, I have not the moral courage to tell my children, having reared them in another church, that I have lost my faith and that I believe in the Mormon religion. I want you, when I am gone, to have your wife go to the temple and have the work done for me and my husband. Mr. Grant has done the work for my husband; I want you to have us married for eternity and sealed together."

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP258Now, here was a woman whose life and that of her parents and her grandparents before her had been spent in another church, who, in the hour of her death, that supreme test that comes to the human heart, her faith in her religion, that knowledge that you and I possess, was lacking; and of that comfort that comes to my heart in the hour of death and to yours, she was entirely void; and the very death of her husband, I am convinced, caused her to reflect and to pray and to study and look into the truth to that extent that before she passed away she wanted to be counted as a member of the Church of Christ.

Nonmembers, Inspireda-Grant, Heber J.TP258I regret that she did not have the moral courage to come out boldly and acknowledge her faith and go down into the waters of baptism during her life, but I am glad she was anxious to have the work done. I am pleased to say that it was done for her and her husband, and I am pleased to say I had the privilege of performing the sealing ordinance for that couple.—Era, 42:521.

FACING DEATH

Death, Physicala-Grant, Heber J.TPDeath seems a most terrible thing, as near as I can judge by attending the funerals of people where the surviving relatives do not know the truth, but to a Latter-day Saint, while death brings sorrow into our homes and our hearts, that sorrow is more or less of the same nature that we feel when we are temporarily called upon to part with our dear ones who are going out into the mission field or who are moving away for some time. That awful anguish that I have seen exhibited by those who know not the truth, I believe never comes into the heart of a true Latter-day Saint.

Death, Physicala-Grant, Heber J.TP259It has fallen to my lot to part with two wives, to part with a beloved mother, to bury both of my sons, one daughter, and most of my life-long friends, and yet I do not believe that I have suffered at all in comparison to what I have seen others suffer who know not the truth.—Era, 42:521.

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP"FORGIVE ALL MEN"

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TPLet thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.259The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy sceptre an unchanging sceptre of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee for ever and ever.—(D. and C. 121:45, 46.)

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP259I have a very wonderful respect and regard for this quotation from page two hundred fifteen of the Doctrine and Covenants [Section 121]. Some years ago a prominent man was excommunicated from the Church. He, years later, pleaded for baptism. President John Taylor referred the question of his baptism to the apostles, stating that if they unanimously consented to his baptism, he could be baptized, but that if there was one dissenting vote, he should not be admitted into the Church. As I remember the vote, it was five for baptism and seven against.

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP260A year or so later the question came up again and it was eight for baptism and four against. Finally all of the council of the apostles, with the exception of your humble servant, consented that this man be baptized, and I was then next to the junior member of the quorum. Later I was in the office of the president, and he said:

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP260"Heber, I understand that eleven of the apostles have consented to the baptism of Brother So and So," naming the man, "and that you alone are standing out. How will you feel when you get on the other side and you find that this man has pleaded for baptism and you find that you have perhaps kept him from entering in with those who have repented of their sins and received some reward?"

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP260I said, "President Taylor, I can look the Lord squarely in the eye, if He asks me that question, and tell Him that I did that which I thought was for the best good of the kingdom. . . . I can tell the Lord that he had disgraced this Church enough, and that I did not propose to let any such man come back into the Church."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP260"Well," said President Taylor, "my boy, that is all right. Stay with your convictions; stay right with them."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP260I said, "President Taylor, your letter said you wanted each one of the apostles to vote the convictions of his heart. If you desire me to surrender the convictions of my heart, I will gladly do it. I will gladly vote for this man to come back. But while I live I never expect to consent if it is left to my judgment. That man was accused before the apostles several years ago and he stood up and lied and claimed that he was innocent, and the Lord gave to me a testimony that he lied, but I could not condemn him because of that. I got down on my knees that night and prayed God to give me the strength not to expose that man, seeing that he had lied but that we had no evidence except only the testimony of the girl that he had seduced. And I prayed the Lord that some day additional testimony might come, and it did come, and we then excommunicated him. And when a man can lie to the apostles, and when he can be guilty while proclaiming repentance of sin, I think this Church has been disgraced enough without ever letting him come back into the Church."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261"Well," repeated President Taylor, "my boy, don't you vote for him as long as you live, while you hold those ideas; stay right with them."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261I left the president's office. I went home. My lunch was not ready. I was reading the Doctrine and Covenants through for the third or fourth time systematically, and I had my bookmark in it. But as I picked it up, instead of opening where the bookmark was, it opened to—

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261"Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord. . . .

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men.—(D. and C. 64:9, 10.)

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261And I closed the book and said: "If the devil applies for baptism and claims that he has repented, I will baptize him."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261After lunch I returned to the office of President Taylor and I said, "President Taylor, I have had a change of heart. One hour ago I said, never while I live, did I expect to ever consent that Brother So and So should be baptized, but I have come to tell you he can be baptized, so far as I am concerned."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261President Taylor had a habit, when he was particularly pleased, of sitting up and laughing and shaking his whole body. He laughed and said, "My boy, the change is very sudden, very sudden. I want to ask you a question. How did you feel when you left here an hour ago? Did you feel like you wanted to hit that man right squarely between the eyes and knock him down?"

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261I said, "That is just the way I felt."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261He said, "How do you feel now?"

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261"Well, to tell you the truth, President Taylor, I hope the Lord will forgive the sinner."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP261He said, "You feel very happy, don't you, in comparison. You had the spirit of anger, you had the spirit of bitterness in your heart toward that man, because of his sin and because of the disgrace he had brought upon the Church. And now you have the spirit of forgiveness and you really feel happy, don't you?"

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP262And I said, "Yes, I do. I felt mean and hateful and now I feel happy."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP262And he said: "Do you know why I wrote that letter?"

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP262I said: "No, sir."

Forgivenessa-Grant, Heber J.TP262"Well, I wrote it, just so you and some of the younger members of the apostles would learn the lesson that forgiveness is in advance of justice where there is repentance; and that to have in your heart the spirit of forgiveness and to eliminate from your hearts the spirit of hatred and bitterness, brings peace and joy; that the gospel of Jesus Christ brings joy, peace and happiness to every soul that lives it and follows its teachings."—CR, October, 1920: 5-7.

LEADERSHIP OF THE CHURCH

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TPYou will always be blessed and benefited in following the advice and counsel of those whom God has chosen to preside over the Church. By honoring the man God has chosen, God will honor and bless you. And as you individually do your duty, you will grow and increase in the light and inspiration of the Spirit of God. As we grow and increase individually, so will the Church grow and increase. I tell you, "Obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." I am willing to be utterly ruined financially, if that resulted from fulfilling the counsel and wishes of those whom God has placed to preside over me. This is the work of God. Joseph Smith was a prophet of God; we must remember that. We must "seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness," and then shall all other things be added.

Leadershipa-Grant, Heber J.TP262Life eternal is what we are working for. Do not allow the wisdom, the riches or the education of the world, or anything else, to blind our eyes to the fact that this is God's work, and that the mouthpiece of God is on the earth. When he speaks, let us be ready and willing, with our time, our talents and all that has been given us to labor to fulfill what God desires. I tell you, God will vindicate His mouthpiece, as He vindicated Wilford Woodruff and his counselors in the establishment of the sugar industry.—CR, October, 1903: 9-10.

Colonel Alexander G. Hawes, who has since died.

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Chapter Six, "Church Administration" for charges to Church officers and teachers.
