Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

262BOOK FOUR

STORIES FROM LIFE

It is admitted that statements of personal experiences, spoken or written, carry more force and make a more lasting impression upon the minds of hearers and readers than can be made in any other way. This must be my excuse for relating so many incidents in my own career.

—HEBER J. GRANT,

Era, 3:82.

263CHAPTER XVIII

267THIRTY FAVORITE STORIES

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TPI. ON FOLLOWING COUNSEL—THE CAREER OF RICHARD W. YOUNG

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TPAs a young man Richard W. Young graduated as a cadet at West Point, and before going to the school he was set apart by his grandfather, President Brigham Young, to serve as a missionary while in the school, and then, after graduation, to continue as a missionary in the army.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP267After his graduation there was a surplus, so he assured me, of graduates from West Point, and more second lieutenants than the army needed, and it was considered no disgrace whatever for the graduates to resign. On the contrary, the government was pleased to receive their resignations with the understanding that they would volunteer should our country ever be engaged in war.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP267Richard consulted his uncle, Colonel Willard Young, and other friends including myself, stating that he would like to resign, as he was the only living child of his widowed mother. He hated to be separated from her, and an army career would not permit him to be near her.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP267Some of us agreed to lend him money to secure a legal education, which would cost, he thought, from four to six thousand dollars. We had no doubt he would make a success as a lawyer and would repay the loan.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP267After he had partially arranged for the money to pay his expenses for his education as a lawyer, he said to me:

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP267"Heber, inasmuch as grandfather blessed me and set me apart as an army missionary, do you think it is proper for me to resign that missionary labor without consulting his successor, President John Taylor?"

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP267I told him it would not be right. He consulted President Taylor, and was told to remain in the army. It was a great disappointment to Richard.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP268When he secured his appointment in the army after his graduation, he was assigned to Governor's Island, a few minutes' ride from New York City. He entered Columbia Law School in New York, was graduated with honors, and during the time of securing his education he received a salary as second lieutenant and had quarters for himself and his family on Governor's Island, then counted by many as the finest army post in the entire United States. He not only escaped being in debt several thousand dollars for his legal education but in addition received a salary while securing his education.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP268After he had been graduated from Columbia Law School, General Winfield Scott Hancock, who was in command at Governor's Island, commended him on the industry he had exhibited in preparing himself for the battle of life. General Hancock remarked that many of the graduates of West Point were good—I would not be positive of the exact language—to marry millionaires' daughters; that the millionaires would throw their daughters, figuratively speaking, at the heads of the graduates, and the girls had no trouble at all falling in love with men wearing brass buttons. And as the youngsters who married millionaires' daughters had no need to think of their future financially, or to prepare themselves for the battle of life, the general said, they didn't make very much of a record.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP268General Hancock also said he wished he could promote Richard W. Young. But as that was out of the question he was pleased that he could do one thing for him, and that was to choose him as one of his own staff officers. He remarked: "Lieutenant Young, you are chosen on my staff with the rank of major."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP268I was in New York City at the funeral of ex-President U. S. Grant. As I recall it, the procession was over five miles long. I was watching the procession from one of the insurance offices on Broadway, and it filled my heart with pride and gratitude to see a grandson of Brigham Young riding with the commanding general on the first line of that great five mile funeral procession.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP269After graduating as a lawyer, Richard still kept in mind his wish to return to Salt Lake City, to be at home with his mother and to help take care of her but feared that with the limited salary he was getting after graduation from West Point he could do little or nothing for her.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP269Subsequently, when the permanent Judge Advocate-General had been given a special assignment at Washington, General Hancock appointed Richard temporary Judge Advocate-General of the eastern department of the army, and was working to have him permanently appointed Judge Advocate-General of the Missouri department at the time General Hancock died.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP269Richard then fell back to the rank of lieutenant, as another "Pharaoh," figuratively speaking, had arisen who did not know "Joseph." Richard came home on a vacation, and in the meantime I had become one of the apostles. He then asked me, also his uncle, Brigham Young, Jr., to plead with President Taylor to permit him to resign, as he had secured his education as a lawyer and wanted to come home and get behind him the starvation period of a young legal graduate.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP269Brother Brigham Young, Jr., and I argued to the best of our ability at a meeting in the old Endowment House for Richard to be released from the army. Some others spoke in favor of his resignation, and when we had finished our talks, President Taylor said: "The time has not yet arrived for that young man to resign from the army."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP269This was a very great disappointment to Richard. He wanted to know what the reasons were. I told him there were no reasons given, only that President Taylor said he ought not to resign.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP269He said: "I would like to have some reasons."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP270I smiled and said: "Richard, he did not give any reasons when he told you to stay in the army, and you secured your education free of debt and were paid a salary by the government while you were doing so, and upon graduating you were honored by being chosen on the staff of General Hancock. I think you can now well afford to take the advice of President Taylor."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP270He said: "Oh, I wouldn't think of doing anything else, but I wish there were some reasons."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP270I assured him that when Brother Taylor said, "Your young friend ought to stay in the army," I had an impression that that was exactly the right thing.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP270Richard was on his way to his new assignment—I have forgotten to what place he was assigned—when he met one of his fellow students who had graduated in the same class and he was bewailing his fate because he had to come way out to Utah. He thought Richard—as I remember the expression—was a lucky dog, in having the appointment which had been assigned to him, having previously had the best place in the army, namely, Governor's Island, and then getting another fine appointment.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP270Richard suggested to his fellow graduate that they apply to the Secretary of War for an exchange of assignments. They did so. The exchange was made, and Richard was stationed at Fort Douglas for four years and was able to be in the law office of his relative, the late LeGrand Young, and get through what is known as the starvation period of four years as a young lawyer, drawing a good salary from the government and having a fine residence at Fort Douglas without expense.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP270The day that the announcement was made that Richard's assignment at Fort Douglas had expired I called at President John Taylor's office—I have forgotten for what purpose—and he said, "I see by the morning paper that your dear friend, Richard W. Young's term has expired at Fort Douglas and he is about to go East. You may tell him that the time has now arrived for his missionary labors in the army to end, and he is at liberty to resign."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP270Faith, we are told, is a gift of God, and Richard had the faith to accept the counsel and advice of President Taylor, and it is little less than wonderful that he should have secured the finest post, so considered, in the army, secured his education without running into debt, and received a salary from the government while securing it.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP270Certainly God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP271My experience is that men who have sufficient faith to trust in God come out of difficulties, financial and otherwise, in a most miraculous and wonderful way.—Era, 39:131-132.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TPII. ANOTHER STORY ON FOLLOWING COUNSEL

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TPI have related the wonderful blessing that my dear friend, Richard W. Young, received by obeying the advice and counsel of President John Taylor. But the remarkable record of good fortune that resulted from following the advice of President Taylor was no more wonderful than the result of Richard's obeying the counsel of President Wilford Woodruff, successor to President Taylor.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP271Richard W. Young, like me and many others, invested quite heavily in Utah-Idaho Sugar stock which, at the time, paid a very generous dividend. . . .

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP271When the trouble broke out between the United States and Spain I was visiting Richard in his office. He remarked that as a graduate of West Point it was his duty to volunteer again to enter the army. He thought that he would probably have the rank and pay of a major, and stated that his compensation as a major would not pay one-half of the interest on his debts, but honor and duty demanded his return to the army.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP271I replied that it would take ten times as much courage to remain home and not enter the army, and I advised him to consult President Wilford Woodruff and take his advice, stating that if President Woodruff advised him to remain at home, I felt he ought to accept that advice notwithstanding the ridicule that might come to him by doing so. I said: "There may be some special labor that the Lord has for you to perform that is of more importance than for you to volunteer and go to the Philippines where perhaps you might lose your life."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP271He said that he would not think of such a thing as to speak to President Woodruff about returning to the army, and further remarked: "He is one of the most tender-hearted men in the world. He is as tender-hearted as a woman. I feel sure he would not advise me to volunteer."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP272I replied: "Do you accept me, Richard, as an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, with authority to call people on missions?"

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP272He answered: "I certainly do."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP272I said: "All right, as an apostle, I call you on a mission to go to President Wilford Woodruff, and ask for his advice as to your returning to the army, and your mission is to follow that advice and counsel, no matter how much you dislike to do so. I will stay right here in your office until you return and report."

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP272He said: "Darn you, Heber Grant." He picked up his hat and went to see President Woodruff, looking anything but happy.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP272He returned smiling and said: "President Woodruff is as full of fight as an egg is full of meat. He remarked, 'If you don't go back to the army, Brother Young, after graduating from West Point, you will disgrace the name you bear, and it will be a reflection upon your dear, dead grandfather, President Brigham Young.' "

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP272Richard was very happy. He took President Woodruff's advice, joined the army, and went to the Philippines, notwithstanding the fact that he was heavily in debt and was very much concerned about leaving his unsettled obligations. But while he was still in the Philippines one of the corporations in which Richard had twelve thousand dollars' worth of stock at par value, and which was worth only nine thousand when he joined the army, paid a special cash dividend of one hundred percent and during Richard's absence paid dividends of from ten to twenty percent regularly. Soon after his return home it paid a special dividend of forty percent. These two special dividends, to say nothing of the large regular dividends that were paid, netted him enough to cancel all of his debts and leave him a home and some other valuable property in addition.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP272The increase in the value of Richard's securities while he was in the Philippine Islands was very remarkable. The war with Spain lasted but a short time. After the war he was appointed by the governor-general of the Philippine Islands, William H. Taft (afterwards president of the United States), one of the Supreme Court Judges of the Islands, and he was also appointed to write the code for the islands. He made an excellent record while in the Philippines, and gained the love and confidence of that splendid man, William H. Taft, who ever afterwards was a friend not only of Richard W. Young, but of the Mormon people.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP273When Richard returned to Utah, he resumed his law practice and was one of the prosperous, successful lawyers of our state. Subsequently, as we all know, he was blessed of the Lord by being chosen to preside over the Ensign Stake of Zion, one of the important stakes of the Church, and he made a splendid stake president.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP273When the World War broke out, he again returned to the army, and was made a brigadier-general. Because of his experience and education at West Point, he was detailed to train soldiers, and was in charge of one of the large training camps, Fort Kearney. I had the pleasure of visiting with him and the late Brigham H. Roberts, the chaplain, while they were at Kearney.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP273Richard was only a short time in Europe when he wrote a fine article for The Improvement Era. The armistice having been signed almost immediately after Richard's arrival overseas, he did not actively participate in the World War, except in the training camp.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP273In my former article regarding Richard W. Young, I quoted from the hymn "God Moves in a Mysterious Way." Certainly God did move in a very wonderful and mysterious way in blessing my near and dear friend when he followed the advice of President Taylor, and also I feel to a much greater extent when he followed the advice of President Woodruff.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP273Faith is a gift of God, and when people have faith to live the gospel, and to listen to the counsel of those who preside in the wards and stakes and of the General Authorities of the Church, it has been my experience that they have been abundantly blessed of the Lord, and that many of them have come out of great financial and other difficulties in a most miraculous and wonderful way.

Following the Brethrena-Grant, Heber J.TP274"Obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams."—Era, 39:331-332.

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TPIII. JOHN CODMAN AND THE MORMON MISSIONARIES

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TPI was talking once with Captain John Codman, who owned a sailing vessel before the time of steam. He had sailed over many seas. He had had all kinds of adventures and experiences and was acquainted with all kinds of people. He also had become quite a noted magazine writer, furnishing articles to many of the leading magazines of the country. Finally he suffered from asthma, and he discovered he was better at Soda Springs, Idaho, than at any other place. And having abundance of money, he bought four or five horses, bought a little cottage there, and used to come to Soda Springs just as early as he could in the spring, and stay just as late as he could on account of the cold and snows.

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP274He averaged spending about seven months a year at Soda Springs, and I became acquainted with him here in Salt Lake City; had some business dealings with him, and it so happened that the money that he placed in my hands as a young man of twenty-two or three, to invest for him, turned out very well. In one investment of about two thousand dollars, he made some twenty thousand out of it, and we became very familiar.

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP274During the three years I was at Soda Springs every summer with a sick wife, I became quite intimate with him, and he said to me once, "Grant, the greatest education in the world comes from your missionary system." "Why," he said, "there is nothing like it; I am convinced that the average Mormon boy who goes out for three years to proclaim your gospel comes home improved better than he would have been if he had gone through the best university in all the world; there is nothing like it. I never was more astonished in my life than to discover the growth in your young men who go out as missionaries."

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP275He gave me an example. He said, "There was my stable boy, currying my horses. Why, when I heard he was called on a mission to Germany, I laughed and said, 'That boy will never even learn the German language; he is not bright enough to learn a difficult language, I am sure.' He had been away about a year and a half when I got a letter from him. He had run across some of my relatives over there who had gone to Germany to live for a few years to put their children in school to get certain education and to acquire the German language practically, by coming in contact with the actual Germans. When he heard they were relatives of mine, he thought he would get a letter of introduction from me to them, and I thought of what my cultured relatives would think of him, and I said, 'I am not going to give the ignoramus a letter.' But afterwards I thought if he was fool enough to ask for it, I would give it to him. So I sent it.

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP275Pretty soon I got a letter in answer from my folk, thanking me for introducing the young Mormon; that he was a very bright, intelligent young fellow, and they had thoroughly enjoyed his visit.

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP275I decided when he returned home I would go and hear him preach. I thought it would be a joke. He came home in another year and a half, and I went to hear him speak. He gave as logical a sermon and made his points from the standpoint of your faith as well as any one could. Why, he was away ahead of fellows who go to theological seminaries for years, and I was astounded. Now I always go to hear the boys from Soda Springs when they come back from missions. I have never been disappointed. It is wonderful."

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP275I said, "It is not so wonderful when you stop to think that they are taught by the inspiration of the Lord."

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP275He said, "Rubbish, rubbish."

Missionary Worka-Grant, Heber J.TP275"Well," I said, "you say they progress more rapidly than in the finest universities in the world; where do they get the progress, if it is not from the spirit of the living God that attends them in their labors?"—YWJ, 30:357-358.

Templesa-Grant, Heber J.TPIV. THE SACREDNESS OF THE TEMPLE

Templesa-Grant, Heber J.TPAs is generally known, prior to the dedication and opening of the Salt Lake Temple for ordinance work, a party not of our faith was permitted to go through the building.

Templesa-Grant, Heber J.TP276This circumstance tried my brother's feelings, and he was greatly astonished later to be greeted by an attorney, one of those who had had the privilege of going through the temple—who said that he had never in his entire life had such an impression made upon him as that which he received while in the temple. He felt that he was in very deed "treading upon holy ground," and that he was near his Creator. He had never taken any interest whatever in religious matters; had been rather skeptical. But such a profound impression had been made upon him during his visit to the temple, that he would gladly travel around the world for the privilege of again entering its sacred precincts. As he was passing through the building, one of the persons with him stepped up to a table upon which were our Church works, and inquisitively opened one of the books. This act of irreverent curiosity so outraged his feelings that he felt almost as though he could strike the man. It aroused such a feeling of antagonism against the person who had carelessly handled the books in this sacred edifice that he never could have the same kindly feelings toward him thereafter.

Templesa-Grant, Heber J.TP276When I heard the above incident related, I asked myself the question:

Templesa-Grant, Heber J.TP276"Do the Latter-day Saints who have the privilege of entering our holy temples, appreciate the great blessing that is given to them, and do they, in very deed, realize, as did this man of the world inclined to skepticism, that they are treading upon 'holy ground'?"

Templesa-Grant, Heber J.TP276We receive so many blessings from the Lord, among the greatest of which is the privilege of officiating in the temples, that I sometimes think these blessings become commonplace, and are not fully appreciated. Our hearts do not go out, as they should, in gratitude to God for His blessings to us.—Era, 11:361-362.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TPV. THE PIONEER EXODUS AND "COME, COME, YE SAINTS"

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TPMy father-in-law, the late Oscar Winters, said to me one day while visiting at my home:

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP277"Brother Grant, I do not believe that the young people today fully appreciate what a marvelous inspiration it was to the Saints in crossing the plains to sing, almost daily, the hymn 'Come, Come, Ye Saints.' If the young people of the Church today understood all that it meant to the early Pioneers, while crossing the plains, to sing this hymn nearly every night around the campfires, I do not believe they would be guilty of singing only three verses. I have never yet heard a choir sing more than three verses, and yet to my mind the fourth verse is the climax to its splendid prayer."

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP277He then related the following incident:

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP277"One night, as we were making camp, we noticed one of our brethren had not arrived. A volunteer party was immediately organized to return and see if anything had happened to him. Just as we were about to start, we saw the missing brother coming in the distance. When he arrived, he said he had been quite sick. So some of us unyoked his oxen and attended to his part of the camp duties.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP277"After supper, he sat down before the campfire on a large rock, and sang in a very faint but plaintive and sweet voice, the hymn, 'Come, Come, Ye Saints.'

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP277"It was a rule of the camp that whenever anybody started this hymn all in the camp should join. But for some reason this evening nobody joined him. He sang the hymn alone. When he had finished, I doubt if there was a single dry eye in the camp.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP277"The next morning we noticed that he was not yoking up his cattle. We went to his wagon and found that he had died during the night. We dug a shallow grave, and after we had covered his body with the earth we rolled the large stone to the head of the grave to mark it, the stone on which he had been sitting the night before when he sang:

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP278" 'And should we die before our journey's through, Happy day! all is well! We then are free from toil and sorrow too; With the just we shall dwell. But if our lives are spared again To see the Saints their rest obtain, O how we'll make this chorus swell— All is well! All is well!' "

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP278I noticed tears in my father-in-law's eyes when he finished relating this incident. And I imagined the reason he did not relate to me another far more touching incident to him was the fear that he might break down.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP278I subsequently learned that after he had been located for some time in Pleasant Grove, he came to Salt Lake with his team with a cheerful heart to meet his mother. When the company arrived, he learned that she, too, had died before her journey's end and was sleeping in an unknown grave on the vast plains between here and the Missouri River.

Hymnsa-Grant, Heber J.TP278Some years later when engineers of the Burlington Railroad were surveying the route in Nebraska, they ran across a piece of wagon tire sticking in the ground with the word "Winters" chiseled upon it. They immediately surmised, knowing that they were on the old Mormon Pioneer trail, that this piece of wagon tire must mark the grave of one of the Pioneers. So they very considerately went back several miles and changed the line of the road so as to miss the grave, and sent an account of what they had discovered to the Deseret News, asking if anyone knew about the grave. The railroad company have since built a neat little fence round the grave, and the Winters' family have erected a little monument of temple granite on which is chiseled the fourth verse of "Come, Come, Ye Saints."—Era, 17:781-784.

VI. THE EIGHTEEN NINETY-THREE CHOIR STORY

I rejoice in the statement made that if we had had justice given to us way back in 1893 (at the Chicago World's Fair) we would have won the first prize for the best chorus of two hundred fifty voices.

279The manager of one of the greatest booking agencies in New York—Major Pond—said after the concert:

279"My, I am glad I was not the judge; I would have had to give the prize to those awful Mormons."

279The Scranton Choir engaged fifty voices from Wales because they were afraid of our choir. The choir was permitted to give concerts to help pay their expenses before the contest, and the Pennsylvania people were so frightened that they hired the fifty best voices from Wales to help them out. And the major said: "Those fifty voices upset the perfect harmony of the four parts, and it was not so good a choir with those voices as it was without them."

279And that is the exact criticism that I received from one of my lifelong nearest and dearest and most closely associated friends, the late Horace G. Whitney, who managed the choir upon that occasion. I was in New York; the panic was on; and I was there laboring to obtain money with which to keep myself and others alive financially. Horace wrote to me and said:

279"Heber, I would have been satisfied had they put the one thousand dollar and the five thousand dollar prizes together and divided the amount, but it was an outrage to give the first prize to the other choir. We were better than the other choir."

279I wrote and said: "My dear Bud: You know they say, love is blind, and cannot smell nor hear. You came up as a child under Stephens' training. You learned to love him with all your heart; you love the choir; and I shall have to vote—seeing you would have been satisfied with half the amount if they had put the two prizes together—I shall have to vote with the committee that gave it to Scranton."

279Two days later—being in New York at the time, and being the president of the Salt Lake Theater and familiar with musical people,—I learned of Major Pond's criticism. So I wrote to Bud: "You can hear, and you can smell, and you made a fair decision."—CR, October, 1939: 127-128.

VII. WHEN BRIGHAM YOUNG WATCHED A WALTZ

The winter before it was completed, a party was arranged in every ward in the city for the benefit of the St. George Temple. Every ward had a dance, and that is when we were allowed to have only three round dances in an evening. But Bishop Woolley of the Thirteenth Ward would not allow any round dances. They had had a dance there, and it did not pay.

280In those days they had no smooth floors; there were just ordinary boards, and we used to whittle wax candles and wax the floor, but Bishop Woolley would not let us wax the Thirteenth Ward floor. He said, "I am not going to have people falling down and breaking their necks." In those days Olsen's band played the "Danube Waltz" and the other popular dance numbers to perfection, but the flute player got drunk once in the Thirteenth Ward and the bishop wouldn't have this band. He sent for me and said, "Now, I want you to get up a party; you have more friends among the young people than anyone; I want you to choose your own committee and arrange the whole thing and turn over the proceeds to us for the benefit of the St. George Temple. I want you to make a success of it. We generally lead every other ward in everything we try to do. I want you to be sure to beat them all."

280I said: "I will do my best, but you must agree to pay the loss if there is one."

280"Loss?" he said.

280"Yes, you cannot have the party in the Thirteenth Ward and make any money; the young people won't come any more. In other places they allow them to have three round dances, and you won't have any. I would rather dance three round dances and throw all the rest away. You have got to have three waltzes."

280"All right," said Bishop Woolley, "take the three waltzes."

280Then I said: "You won't allow Olsen's Quadrille Band; they are the only people who can play the "Blue Danube Waltz" well; that is one of the things that draws the crowd. When you say Olsen's full band, that means the finest cornetist in Salt Lake will be there to give some cornet solos during the evening."

281The bishop said: "Take Olsen's Quadrille Band; take your three round dances; wax your floor."

281Then I said: "There is another thing I would like; I won't insist on it—you won't allow a Gentile to come; I would like the United States Marshal and one or two high-principled gentlemen to come and let them see how Mormon boys and girls can behave themselves. There will be no rowdyism; there will be a crowd of the finest kind of young people."

281He said: "Invite whom you please."

281I said too: "I am going to charge $1.50 instead of a dollar."

281"Oh, the people won't pay that."

281"Yes, they will, with Olsen's full Quadrille Band."

281We secured the finest tickets we could get. I chose Eddie Woolley as my assistant, and we got down on our knees and took the screws out of the desks in the east wing; he borrowed rugs and made it a fine drawing-room and had President Young's picture and others there, full-size.

281I got one of the Young boys on the committee to get the Young family to come. I got Nelson Empey on the committee, and he agreed to get the boys in Z. C. M. I. I got Hyde Young who was down at the Utah Central Railroad to get the railroad boys. I went to Z. C. M. I. to Captain Hooper and said, "Captain Hooper, I would like very much to have you come to a party in the Thirteenth Ward."

281He said, "I never go to parties."

281But I said, "There are two important things about this party, and this is one of them—it is for the benefit of the St. George Temple; and this is the other—tickets are $1.50," and he laughed and handed me $1.50, and said, "Go sell it to Eldredge." I went to Brother Eldredge, and he said: "I do not go to parties any more." I told him the same story about this party, and he gave me $1.50. I have forgotten whom he sent me to, but I sold the ticket five or six times.

282People had to show their tickets to get in, and there was a list of all the people who had tickets, and no one could go to the party who did not have a ticket and whose name was not on the list. I sat there with the alphabetical list, checking the tickets as they came in. I told Hon Young to sell his father ten, that we would like ten of his boys to come. His father said: "Let the boys pay for their own tickets."

282President Young came, however, and said: "This is for the benefit of the St. George Temple, isn't it?"

282"Yes."

282"Is that enough to pay for my ticket?" and he threw down ten dollars.

282I said, "Plenty." I do not know whether or not he expected any change, but he did not get any. The next morning President Young sent to Bishop Woolley and wanted a list of the people who attended the party. The bishop went up with the eighty odd dollars and handed him the list and the money. No other ward got much more than half that amount. We scooped the town, and we had four round dances. The fourth round dance was a waltz quadrille. I said, "I am going to sit by the president and see what he says."

282"I said to the leader of the band: "Now when you get through with the waltz quadrille, stop playing."

282President Young said: "They are waltzing."

282I said, "No, they are not waltzing; when they waltz they waltz all around the room; this is a quadrille."

282He turned to me and laughed and said: "Oh, you boys, you boys." Era, 44:654. As told to Rachel G. Taylor.

Honoring Father and Mothera-Grant, Heber J.TPVIII. THE BOY, THE MAN, AND THE CIGAR

Honoring Father and Mothera-Grant, Heber J.TPI happen to know of one instance of a boy who worked in a bank, today one of the leading banks of the city. The bank was owned almost exclusively by a non-member of the Church. The boy went into the bank with a cigar in his mouth, and the president of the bank said: "Young man, go and get your time, and go home."

Honoring Father and Mothera-Grant, Heber J.TP283"What is the matter? Haven't I done my work well?" the boy asked.

Honoring Father and Mothera-Grant, Heber J.TP283"Yes."

Honoring Father and Mothera-Grant, Heber J.TP283The boy said: "What is the matter, then, if I have done my work well?"

Honoring Father and Mothera-Grant, Heber J.TP283"You are smoking a cigar."

Honoring Father and Mothera-Grant, Heber J.TP283"You smoke—your boy smokes."

Honoring Father and Mothera-Grant, Heber J.TP283"Yes, and I drink, and my boys drink; but your parents have taught you to leave tobacco alone, that it is not good for you, that it will detract from your capacity and your ability to accomplish things in the battle of life, and that it will burn up, so to speak, part of your income. And I don't want any boy handling money in my bank who I believe is going contrary to the teachings of his father and his mother. I doubt very much if they know that you are smoking. I am inclined to think that you are smoking on the sly. Just get another job."—Era, 39:471.

IX. THE DEVIL AND THE HAM

I believe there is a great deal in the story that some of you may have read, in which a donation was requested, and a man decided to give a ham.

283He had a smoke-house full of hams and he had decided to give a ham to some poor person that needed a donation. When he went in there, he picked out a nice large ham, and the spirit came over him:

283"Now, that is a big ham; you don't need to give that person such a large ham; give him a little one."

283He said, "Shut up, Mr. Devil, or I will give him two hams," so he had no more trouble—none whatever.—Era, 44:56.

X. THE DEVIL AND THE COWS

I heard a story of a brother (I have forgotten his name now) who attended a meeting in the early days.

284President Brigham Young made an appeal for donations to send to the Missouri River to help the Saints gather to Zion. He wanted everybody who could afford it to give an ox or a cow or any other donations.

284One good brother jumped up and said, "I will give a cow." Another brother got up and said, "I will give a cow."

284The first brother had two cows and a large family. The other brother had a half-dozen cows and a small family. And, so the spirit came over the first man, "Now, look here, you cannot get along with your large family; you cannot possibly get along with one cow. Now, that other man has got a small family and six cows; he could just as well give two or three and still get along all right." As he started home, he walked four or five blocks, all the time getting weaker and weaker. Finally he thought, "I guess I won't," and then he realized the difference in the spirit that was tempting him and the one that had prompted his promise to the president of the Church that he would give a cow.

284Here was a spirit telling him to fail to fulfill his obligation, to fail to be honest, to fail to live up to his promise.

284He stopped short and turned around and said:

284"Mr. Devil, shut up or just as sure as I live, I will walk up to Brother Brigham's office and give him the other cow." He was not tempted any more.—Era, 44:56.

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TPXI. OVERCOMING BAD HABITS: THE STORY OF ANNA SNOW

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TPOne Sunday I attended a fast meeting in the morning, and another in the afternoon. One of the speakers at the latter meeting was Sister Anna Snow, an aged wife of the late Apostle Erastus Snow.

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TP284She had come from Scandinavia and from her childhood had been addicted to the use of coffee, and thought she could hardly live without it. But finally, after reaching the age of eighty-two years, she was impressed that she had failed to do her duty in that regard and decided, on her eighty-third birthday, that she would keep the Word of Wisdom still more perfectly and stop drinking coffee. It nearly killed her, but she finally succeeded in overcoming the habit. And she stood up in humility before the people, confessing her failure at not having fully kept the Word of Wisdom and expressed her gratitude to the Lord for giving her the ability, even at this late date, to overcome her failing. And she testified to the benefit she had already received because of the improvement in her health by obeying this law of God.

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TP285I was profoundly impressed with her remarkable testimony. How I wish that every one of our good sisters, and our brethren as well, who, year after year, have gone on breaking this simple commandment of the Lord, could have been there and listened to her testimony.

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TP285I know a great many people have heard sermons on the Word of Wisdom for many years which have never made any impression upon them. I do not know how in the world we could make an impression upon some people. I know many individuals who have been labored with diligently in private, as well as by public teaching and admonition. But these labors have had no effect upon them. I feel in my heart that it is my duty to try to discover the weak points in my nature, and then pray to the Lord to help me overcome them. As I read the Word of Wisdom, I learn that it is adapted to the weakest of all the weak who are or can be called Saints. And I believe that it would be a wonderful aid in the advancement of the kingdom of God if all the Latter-day Saints would obey this simple commandment of the Lord. When I heard this aged sister testify that in her advanced years she had overcome, I wished that all Israel could have heard that testimony and been impressed by it.—CR, October, 1907: 22.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TPXII. JOHN TAYLOR'S SONGS OF THE HEART

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TPI recall one incident showing how song has the power to soothe irritated feelings and bring harmony to the hearts of men who are filled with a contentious spirit. It occurred many years ago and involved a quarrel between two old and faithful brethren whose membership dated back to the days of Nauvoo. These men had been full of integrity and devotion to the work of the Lord. They had been through many of the hardships of Nauvoo, and had suffered the drivings and persecutions of the Saints, as well as the hardships of pioneering incident to the early settlement of the west. These men had quarreled over some business affairs, and finally concluded that they would try to get President John Taylor to help them adjust their difficulties.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP286John Taylor was then the president of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. These brethren pledged their word of honor that they would faithfully abide by whatever decision Brother Taylor might render. Like many others, even in these days, they were not willing to accept the conclusions and counsels of their teachers, or bishops, or presidents of stakes, who would have been the authorized persons, in their order, to consult, and which would have been the proper course to pursue. But they must have some higher authority. Having been personally acquainted with President Brigham Young, in the days of Nauvoo, and feeling their importance in their own devotion to the work of the Lord, nothing short of an apostle's advice would seem to satisfy them.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP286Accordingly they called on President Taylor. They did not immediately tell him what their trouble was, but explained that they had seriously quarreled and asked him if he would listen to their story and render his decision. President Taylor willingly consented. But he said: "Brethren, before I hear your case, I would like very much to sing one of the songs of Zion for you."

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP286Now President Taylor was a very capable singer, and interpreted sweetly and with spirit, our sacred hymns.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP286He sang one of our hymns to the two brethren.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP286Seeing its effect, he remarked that he never heard one of the songs of Zion but that he wanted to listen to one more, and so asked them to listen while he sang another. Of course, they consented. They both seemed to enjoy it; and, having sung the second song, he remarked that he had heard there is luck in odd numbers and so with their consent he would sing still another, which he did. Then in his jocular way, he remarked: "Now, brethren, I do not want to wear you out, but if you will forgive me, and listen to one more hymn, I promise to stop singing, and will hear your case."

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP287The story goes that when President Taylor had finished the fourth song, the brethren were melted to tears, got up, shook hands, and asked President Taylor to excuse them for having called upon him, and for taking up his time. They then departed without his even knowing what their difficulties were.

Taylor, Johna-Grant, Heber J.TP287President Taylor's singing had reconciled their feelings toward each other. The spirit of the Lord had entered their hearts, and the hills of difference that rose between them had been leveled and become as nothing. Love and brotherhood had developed in their souls. The trifles over which they had quarreled had become of no consequence in their sight. The songs of the heart had filled them with the spirit of reconciliation.—Era, 43:522.

XIII. SELF-JUDGMENT

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TPI want to reprint a poem that nearly sixty years ago was repeated to me in Idaho, or, rather, it was not repeated as a poem; it was sung as a song by the late Francis M. Lyman.

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP287It so happened that from Tooele I had to travel thirty-six miles to Salt Lake City and then on through Davis County, Weber County, and up to Brigham City, and then two and three-fourths days' journey west out to Oakley, to what was then a branch of the Grantsville Ward of the Tooele Stake of Zion over which I presided. (The first motion I made as an apostle was to present that whole country to the Box Elder Stake of Zion.) Now, when I was on that trip, Brother Lyman sang a song to me, and that very night I sat down and asked him to repeat it to me while I wrote it down, and the next day I learned it:

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP287Let each man learn to know himself; To gain that knowledge let him labor To improve those failings in himself Which he condemns so in his neighbor. How lenient our own faults we view, And conscience' voice adeptly smother; Yet, oh, how harshly we review The selfsame failings in another! And if you meet an erring one Whose deeds are blamable and thoughtless,

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP287Consider, ere you cast the stone, If you yourself are pure and faultless. Oh, list to that small voice within, Whose whisperings oft make men confounded, And trumpet not another's sin; You'd blush deep if your own were sounded. And in self-judgment if you find Your deeds to others are superior, To you has Providence been kind, As you should be to those inferior. Example sheds a genial ray Of light which men are apt to borrow; So first improve yourself today And then improve your friends tomorrow.

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP288I did some work for a man once, and he sent me a check for five hundred dollars with a letter apologizing for not sending me a thousand. Subsequently, I did for another individual some work which was ten times harder, involved ten times more labor and a great deal more time; and he sent me a check for one hundred fifty dollars, and told his friends he had rewarded me handsomely.

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP288I wrote him a letter about as follows: "My dear friend: Enclosed find your check. Please take it and go to 'H'," and then I drew a long line, but never added the '1's' and I never mailed the letter. Subsequently, I showed that check to a dear friend of mine, first explaining the work I had done and asking him how much it was worth. He said: "Ten thousand, three hundred dollars."

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP288I pulled the check out of the drawer and handed it to him. I said: "It is only ten thousand, one hundred fifty dollars short."

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP289He said to me: "Mr. Grant, you are a young man. 'Old men for counsel and young men for war'; I want you to give me your word of honor that you will take my advice."

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP289I said: "I will make no such promise, but if I can take it without violating my conscience, I will try."

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP289He said, "O your conscience will be all right. Deposit that check quickly."

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP289Then he said: "Did that man intend to insult you?"

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP289I said: "No. He told my friends he had rewarded me handsomely."

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP289To this he replied, "A man's a fool who takes an insult that isn't intended. I have prolonged your life; I have rendered you a great service, because you could never look at that check but what you wanted to swear, and I believe it is worse to keep it in than to let it out. I have heard that anger creates a fluid in the body that poisons the blood and shortens the length of life. Now, you have promised to do what I say, if you can in good conscience. When you go home tonight get down on your knees and say: 'O Lord, I am a man who can generally express myself so that everybody understands me; I am not usually at a loss for words; I have sufficient vocabulary so that I can generally talk my ideas into the other fellow. But, O Lord, tonight I am utterly and absolutely at a loss to find the words to express my gratitude to you that when you made me you gave me a bigger heart than you gave that fellow who sent me a check for one hundred fifty dollars.' "

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP289I immediately opened the drawer where I kept scores of copies of this poem, which I have distributed from Japan to the Hawaiian Islands, from the midnight sun country down to Italy, and all over the United States—I immediately took this poem out and gave it to this man, and said: "I have not had sense enough to learn but one-half of the words; this part I have overlooked:

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP289'And in self-judgment if you find Your deeds to others are superior, To you has Providence been kind As you should be to those inferior.' "

Self-Knowledgea-Grant, Heber J.TP290Those four lines have been of more value to me since that man pointed out to me the force of them. Why, I had been preaching that poem and distributing it and had not learned to apply it to myself. I have since tried to remember this, and commend these lines to all my friends and brethren.—Era, 44:137.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TPXIV. "THREE QUESTIONS": A FAVORITE STORY

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TPWhen I was in England many years ago, I purchased a book entitled The Young Man and the World. The book was written by the late senator from Indiana, Albert J. Beveridge. It was written originally as a series of contributions to The Saturday Evening Post, after which it was compiled in book form.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP290In one chapter, "The Young Man and the Pulpit," the author said that a certain individual with a very splendid opportunity of securing answers to interrogations, during an entire summer vacation asked every minister with whom he came in contact three questions:

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP290First: "Yes or no; do you believe in God the Father, God a person, God a definite and tangible intelligence—not a congeries of laws floating like a fog through the universe; but God, a person in whose image you were made? Don't argue; don't explain; but is your mind in a condition where you can answer yes or no?"

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP290Not a minister answered, "Yes," but they all gave a lot of explanations to the effect that we could not be sure about such things.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP290What is the condition of the Latter-day Saints? Suppose a man were to stand up and say, "I do not believe that God ever visited the Prophet Joseph Smith." We would say, "Well, wait until you do believe it," before we would baptize him. Every true Latter-day Saint believes beyond the shadow of a doubt that God did appear to Joseph Smith.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP290The next question was: "Yes or no; do you believe that Christ was the Son of the living God, sent by Him to save the world? I am not asking whether you believe that He was inspired in the sense that the great moral teachers are inspired—nobody has any difficulty about that. But do you believe that Christ was God's very Son, with a divinely appointed and definite mission, dying on the cross, and raised from the dead—yes or no?"

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP291Again, not a single minister answered, "Yes." The sum total of their answers was that He was the greatest moral teacher that ever lived. I maintain that He could not possibly have been a moral teacher if He were not the Son of God, because that was the foundation of His teachings. He came as the Son of God to do the will of God, and He announced that those who had seen Him had virtually seen God, because He was in the image of God.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP291Again, no man would be baptized into this Church who did not believe that God Himself introduced His Son to the boy Joseph Smith as His well-beloved Son, and told the boy to listen to Him. Do you think we would baptize a man who would say, "I do not believe in the revelations that Joseph Smith received; I do not believe that Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple?"

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP291We believe that He appeared to him there. We believe that not only did Jesus Christ appear there, as recorded in the one hundred tenth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, but that Moses, and Elias, and Elijah appeared, and that they gave Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery all the keys of the dispensations of the gospel that have existed upon the earth. We announced these things to the people of the world.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP291Senator Beveridge's third question was: "Do you believe that when you die you will live again as a conscious intelligence, knowing who you are and who other people are?"

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP291Again, not a man answered, "Yes." They hoped so, rather believed so, but there were some rather serious objections, and they said we could not know such things.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP291Is there a Latter-day Saint living who has been in the temple and been married there for time and eternity who could not answer that question in the affirmative? It would be ridiculous and absurd to go through the temple and have such a ceremony performed if we did not have an unshakable knowledge and conviction that we would exist as separate individualities beyond the grave.

292Referring to these ministers, Senator Beveridge said that they were particularly eminent ministers. One of them had already won a distinguished reputation in New York and the New England States for his eloquence and piety. Every one of them had had unusual success with fashionable congregations.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP292I remember as I read this book while in England—it is my custom with many books to write comments on the margin of the pages—I wrote: "Albert Beveridge was the man who asked those questions."

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP292When I got home I made inquiry and found that I was correct. They were altogether too much to the point to be hearsay. I learned that not only did he ask the questions of the ministers he met, but he wrote letters to ministers, the sum total being about three hundred, all of which brought indecisive answers.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP292When I think of the knowledge that we possess as individuals, then think of these men, professed teachers of Christianity, professed ministers of the gospel of Jesus Christ lacking knowledge, I cannot help feeling thankful for the testimony that we have, and my gratitude for this knowledge is far beyond my power of expression.

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP292Beveridge said that these men acknowledged that there was a decay of faith among the people; that the churches were becoming empty, so to speak, and he went on to say: "How could such priests of ice, warm the souls of men? How could such apostles of interrogation convert a world?"

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP292There is no interrogation with us. We have the truth. We are spending our time preaching it. Every true Latter-day Saint can say: "I know that God lives; I know that Jesus Christ lives, that He is the Redeemer of the world; I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God."

Trutha-Grant, Heber J.TP292How I do rejoice in the knowledge of the Latter-day Saints concerning these things. Knowledge is what counts in this world, and the Latter-day Saints have it. We declare what we know and what God has revealed to us. We declare to the world that the everlasting part of us has been converted to the divinity of the work in which we are engaged.—Era, 43:394, 438.

XV. DIVIDENDS IN HUMAN VALUES

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TPI have often related an experience of Doctor Karl G. Maeser. He told how a poor widow had come to him with her son. She announced to Brother Maeser that this was her only son; that she had gone out washing to save the necessary money to send him to Brigham Young University because she had heard that Brother Maeser was able to reform wayward boys. She told Brother Maeser that she could not handle the boy, and that the bishop and his counselors could do nothing with him and that they all looked upon him as a bad boy.

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP293The boy started school and was soon in trouble. Brother Maeser told how he violated all the rules of the school. The teachers could do nothing with him, and his influence was bad in the school. Brother Maeser hesitated about expelling him because he thought of that poor widow who had gone out washing in order that her only son might come to school; so he put up with this careless, wayward boy until he could stand it no longer. Then he finally expelled him from school.

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP293The next morning at eight o'clock, as soon as Brother Maeser had reached his office, there was a knock at the door. When he opened the door, there stood this boy. Brother Maeser said that when he looked at the boy and thought of all the trouble he had caused in the school, he felt "just like hitting him, right between the eyes." That was his first thought with reference to the boy who had been expelled the day before.

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP293The boy said: "Brother Maeser, give me just one more chance."

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP293Brother Maeser said: "I stood there paralyzed to think that boy would ask for another chance. He did not think I would give him another chance; and he said: 'Brother Maeser, Brother Maeser—give me one more chance.'"

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP294Brother Maeser's voice broke, as he rushed into the extended, pleading arms of the boy and embraced him and kissed him, and promised him a hundred chances.

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP294"Now," said Brother Maeser, "what do you think—that boy is a bishop's counselor in the very town where once he was a spoiled egg!"

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP294I remember also an incident I heard related by Brother George H. Brimhall. He said that on his way to one of our conference meetings he collected one of the finest dividends that he had ever received in life—not of money, but of something more valuable than money. A man had made the confession that Brother Brimhall had reformed him from a careless, wayward, and indifferent boy and made a man of him, and now that man was in attendance at a general conference of the Church as one of the presidency of the stake in which he resided.

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP294These are the kinds of dividends that count—dividends of human values. The patient, untiring, prayerful labors we devote to our young people who need help, and to those generally who for some cause or another have withdrawn themselves from us, often return to reward us in unspeakable joy and satisfaction in the years to come.

Worth of Soulsa-Grant, Heber J.TP294May we labor long and unceasingly, with patience, and forgiveness, and prayerful determination among all such who need our help!—Era, 43:205.

Judging Othersa-Grant, Heber J.TPXVI. THE SPIRIT AND THE LETTER

Judging Othersa-Grant, Heber J.TPThere stand out in my life many incidents in my youth, of wonderful inspiration and power through men preaching the gospel in the spirit of testimony and prayer. I call to mind one such incident when I was a young man, probably seventeen or eighteen years of age. I heard the late Bishop Millen Atwood preach a sermon in the Thirteenth Ward. I was studying grammar at the time, and he made some grammatical errors in his talk.

Judging Othersa-Grant, Heber J.TP294I wrote down his first sentence, smiled to myself, and said: "I am going to get here tonight, during the thirty minutes that Brother Atwood speaks, enough material to last me for the entire winter in my night school grammar class." We had to take to the class for each lesson two sentences, or four sentences a week, that were not grammatically correct, together with our corrections.

Judging Othersa-Grant, Heber J.TP295I contemplated making my corrections and listening to Bishop Atwood's sermon at the same time. But I did not write anything more after that first sentence—not a word; and when Millen Atwood stopped preaching, tears were rolling down my cheeks, tears of gratitude and thanksgiving that welled up in my eyes because of the marvelous testimony which that man bore of the divine mission of Joseph Smith, the prophet of God, and of the wonderful inspiration that attended the prophet in all his labors.

Judging Othersa-Grant, Heber J.TP295Although it is now more than sixty-five years since I listened to that sermon, it is just as vivid today, and the sensations and feelings that I had are just as fixed with me as they were the day I heard it. Do you know, I would no more have thought of using those sentences in which he had made grammatical mistakes than I would think of standing up in a class and profaning the name of God. That testimony made the first profound impression that was ever made upon my heart and soul of the divine mission of the prophet. I had heard many testimonies that had pleased me and made their impression, but this was the first testimony that had melted me to tears under the inspiration of the Spirit of God to that man.

Judging Othersa-Grant, Heber J.TP295During all the years that have passed since then, I have never been shocked or annoyed by grammatical errors or mispronounced words on the part of those preaching the gospel. I have realized that it was like judging a man by the clothes he wore, to judge the spirit of a man by the clothing of his language. From that day to this the one thing above all others that has impressed me has been the Spirit, the inspiration of the living God that an individual had when proclaiming the gospel, and not the language; because after all is said and done there are a great many who have never had the opportunity to become educated so far as speaking correctly is concerned. Likewise there are many who have never had an opportunity in the financial battle of life to accumulate the means whereby they could be clothed in an attractive manner. I have endeavored, from that day to this, and have been successful in my endeavor, to judge men and women by the spirit they have; for I have learned absolutely, that it is the Spirit that giveth life and understanding, and not the letter. The letter killeth.—Era, 42:201.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TPXVII. THE PRIVILEGE OF OBEDIENCE

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TPI remember as a young man I had fifty dollars in my pocket on one occasion which I intended to deposit in the bank. When I went on Thursday morning to Fast meeting—the Fast meetings used to be held on Thursdays instead of Sundays—and the bishop made an appeal for a donation, I walked up and handed him the fifty dollars. He took five of it and put it in the drawer and gave the forty-five back to me and said that was my full share.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP296I said, "Bishop Woolley, by what right do you rob me of putting the Lord in my debt? Didn't you preach here today that the Lord rewards fourfold? My mother is a widow and she needs two hundred dollars."

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP296He said: "My boy, do you believe that if I take this other forty-five dollars you will get your two hundred dollars quicker?"

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP296I said: "Certainly."

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP296Well, he took it.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP296While walking from that Fast meeting to the place where I worked, an idea popped into my head. I sent a telegram to a man asking him how many bonds of a certain kind he would buy at a specified price within forty-eight hours and allow me to draw a draft on him through Wells-Fargo's bank. He was a man whom I did not know. I had never spoken to him in my life, but I had seen him a time or two on the streets of Salt Lake. He wired back that he wanted as many as I could get. My profit on that transaction was $218.50.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP296The next day I walked down to the bishop and said:

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP297"Bishop, I made $218.50 after paying that $50.00 donation the other day and so I owe $21.85 in tithing. I will have to dig up the difference between $21.85 and $18.50. The Lord did not quite give me the tithing in addition to a four to one increase."

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP297Someone will say that it would have happened anyway. I do not think it would have happened. I do not think I would have got the idea. I do not think I would have sent the telegram.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP297I feel in my heart that we grow financially, spiritually, and in every way, as Latter-day Saints, by doing our duty. When we are obedient to the commandments of the Lord and generous with our time and our means, we grow in the spirit and testimony of the gospel, and I do not believe that we are ever poorer financially. I am a firm believer that the Lord opens up the windows of heaven when we do our duty financially and pours out upon us blessings of a spiritual nature, which are of far greater value than temporal things. But I believe He also gives us blessings of a temporal nature.—Era, 42:457.

XVIII. PATRIARCH JOHN ROWBERRY'S DREAM

I was out in Tooele at a quarterly stake conference. The patriarch of the stake, Brother John Rowberry, had told me many years before of having had a dream (as I remember it, thirty years before), in which he was on a great vessel, and every once in a while somebody fell overboard, and he finally fell overboard himself. When he struggled through the water he came out into the most beautiful country that he had ever seen, and he met Brother Orson Pratt there. He asked Brother Pratt: "Where am I?" and Brother Pratt said: "You are in heaven, Brother Rowberry."

297Brother Pratt happened to be out in Tooele at that particular time, visiting the various wards in that stake. Brother Rowberry told him of this dream, praying to the Lord that Brother Pratt would not ask him who the man was that he met in his dream. He did not want to tell him that he, Brother Pratt, had to die first. Brother Pratt said: "I will pray about it and if I get the interpretation I will give it to you."

298Just before leaving (he was there several weeks), Brother Pratt said:

298"Well, I prayed about your dream, Brother Rowberry, and I got the interpretation. The people on that vessel represented the people of the world. You said that the majority of the people who fell overboard you did not know. If you will write down a list of those you did know in the order in which they fell overboard I promise you that they shall die in that exact order, and I promise you that when you shall go to heaven you shall meet the identical man that you met in your dream, and when you meet him tell him that the dream was from the Lord and the interpretation was also from the Lord through Brother Orson Pratt."

298And Brother Rowberry said: "Brother Pratt, I will tell him."

298While I was still in Tooele as president of the stake, I received a telegram to the effect that Brother Orson Pratt was in a very serious condition of health and requested that we hold a prayer meeting in both Grantsville and Tooele for his recovery. We did so, and as we were going into the prayer circle room in Tooele, Brother Rowberry said to me: "Heber, do you remember my dream?"

298I told him, "Yes."

298He said: "Well, it is Brother Pratt's turn next." And indeed, that proved to be Brother Pratt's last illness.

298Some years later I was out in Tooele at a stake conference at which Brother Rowberry was one of the speakers. He was in very good health, although he was an aged man at the time. He spoke with a great deal of power and vigor and expressed his gratitude for the gospel. After the meeting he said: "Brother Grant, do you remember my dream?"

298I said, "Yes."

298He said: "The people have died in the exact order in which they fell off the vessel. They are all gone, and it is my turn next and I am the happiest man in all Tooele County. I am anxious to meet Brother Pratt and to meet your father and other men and women I have loved with all my heart. By the way, I will tell your father, Brother Grant, that you are doing very well as an apostle."

299The next time I went to Tooele he had passed on.—Era, 41:712.

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TPXIX. THE PROMISES OF A PATRIARCH

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TPAs a baby only six months old, my daughter, Lucy, was very, very ill out in Tooele, and I sent for Brother Rowberry to come and administer to her. After he had blessed her he turned to me and said: "Did you get the witness of the spirit that your baby should live?"

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP299I said: "No, I did not."

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP299He said: "I did, and I know she is going to live. Go to your desk and get a piece of paper and let me give her a Patriarchal blessing."

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP299He gave her a blessing, and he made many remarkable promises to her, many of which have been fulfilled to the very letter.

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP299Some time later he met me, and said: "Brother Grant, I want you to come to my office." (He was the Probate Judge out there.) "I have a blessing in my heart for you of a Patriarchal nature."

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP299He gave me a most wonderful and marvelous blessing, nearly all of which has been fulfilled to the very letter, and he made the remark:

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP299"Brother Grant, I saw something that I dared not put in your blessing."

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP299I then had the impression (I was just twenty-four years of age when he made that remark and had not been made an apostle) that I should live to preside over the Church. I have felt that is what he saw. I never spoke of it in my life until I became the president of the Church, and I tried to persuade myself at that time and through all the following years that it could not be—that I was mistaken.

Patriarchal Blessingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP299Some of the things Brother Rowberry promised me in that patriarchal blessing I could hardly believe would come true, but they have done so.—Era, 41:712.

Revelationa-Grant, Heber J.TPXX. A. W. IVINS' CALL TO MEXICO

Revelationa-Grant, Heber J.TPI was feeling as blue, financially speaking, as I ever did in my life when my cousin, Anthony W. Ivins, was called to go to Mexico. He had been marvelously successful in running ranches. He and I owned half of a fifty thousand dollar ranch that for years paid a twenty-five percent dividend regularly. The panic had come on, and some institutions in which I had money were not paying dividends. The twelve thousand five hundred dollars I owned in this ranch was paying the interest at six percent on fifty thousand dollars of my debts.

Revelationa-Grant, Heber J.TP300I was sitting in the temple, feeling heartbroken (although I was one of the committee that nominated Brother Ivins to go into Mexico because I felt impressed that he was needed there and that the Lord wanted him to go there), when it came to me as plainly as though a voice had declared it:

Revelationa-Grant, Heber J.TP300"You have no need of feeling sad because of your cousin's going to Mexico. He is going right where the Lord wants him to go, and you shall have the exquisite joy of welcoming him back into this room of the temple as an apostle of this last dispensation."

Revelationa-Grant, Heber J.TP300I immediately shed some tears of joy and gratitude. And this promise also was fulfilled.—Era, 41:712.

Worldlinessa-Grant, Heber J.TPXXI. THE MAN WHO WOULDN'T GIVE

Worldlinessa-Grant, Heber J.TPI call to mind a man, who, with his family, emigrated to this country through the assistance rendered by the Perpetual Emigration Fund. He did not have enough money to come here otherwise. After he had been here a short time, the ward teachers called on him for a donation, and he made an abject apology. He said: "My heart is with you; I wish to the Lord I could help you. I would gladly do it, but I simply cannot do it! I am a poor man."

Worldlinessa-Grant, Heber J.TP300Years rolled on, and he became wealthy. The same teachers again called on him for a donation, and he refused. They called his attention to what he had said years before, and he replied: "Yes, then I had the desire; I wanted to help you; my spirit was with you, but I did not have the means. Today I have the means, but I have not the desire."

Worldlinessa-Grant, Heber J.TP301This man who would not give a donation although abundantly able to do so, finally apostatized from the Church. So also did nearly all of his family that he brought with him to Utah. He probably would have been a poor man in the old country but for the missionaries of the Church and the help of the Perpetual Emigration Fund. The gospel brought him here, and he grew to be a wealthy man financially. But he lost his faith. And most of his family lost their faith because they, too, set their hearts on the things of this world instead of the things of God.—Era, 41:585.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TPXXII. WHERE MUCH IS GIVEN

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TPWhile in Europe, I remember reading an article telling of a man who embraced the gospel up in the midnight sun country of Scandinavia. He heard one of our missionaries preach on the first principles of the gospel and bear fervent testimony regarding the divinity of the work in which we are engaged, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the true and living God. The man embraced the gospel and came to Utah. He had never heard of the law of tithing, until the bishop came to him and said:

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP301"My dear brother, you are making money and you are not paying tithing. You should pay one-tenth of what you make to the Church."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP301He said: "One-tenth? Why, men do not save one-tenth of their wages. Nobody could do that."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP301The bishop said: "Do you believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God?"

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP301"Yes, I do."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP301"Do you believe in the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants?"

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP301"Yes."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302"Don't you know there is a revelation in that book to the effect that tithing is a law of God?"

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302And he converted him to that principle. After a while the bishop came around again and said:

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302"You are not paying any fast donations."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302The man said: "Fast donations? Heavens on earth, Bishop! Isn't tithing enough?"

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302The bishop said: "No. It does not cost you anything to pay fast day donations. Consult your doctor, and he will tell you that it will improve your health if you abstain from two or three meals once a month. All that we ask is that you give us at least the equivalent of the two meals and do without them, and by so doing gain spiritual growth and physical benefit. It will not cost you anything to pay fast day donations."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302And so the man concluded to pay fast day donations.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302Later the bishop came around and said: "We are building a ward meetinghouse."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302He said: "Why, the Church ought to build the meetinghouses."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302"No, they only pay one-fourth of the cost." (That is all they gave in those days.) "The Saints have to do three-quarters of it."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302He "hemmed and hawed," but he finally came through, as he wanted a good meetinghouse in which to worship the Lord.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302Soon the bishop came around again, and said: "We are building a stake house."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303And the brother complained again, but he finally made a donation.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP302In those days we had no high schools, and a stake academy was being built in the stake where this man resided. He was requested to make a donation towards the cost of its erection. He complained again, but he was anxious that his children should have greater opportunities than he had had, and so he contributed again.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303The time came when we were completing a temple in Salt Lake City. This man thought that the Church ought at least to build the temple, but he happened to have a large list of his ancestors for whom he desired to have work done and concluded he would do his part to help build the temple.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303Finally his boy graduated from the academy, and the bishop said: "My dear brother, that boy of yours has graduated from the academy, is well informed, is an intelligent, fine young man, a good Latter-day Saint. I am going to send his name in to the president of the Church as worthy to go on a mission, and you will have to pay about thirty or thirty-five dollars a month to support him."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303He said: "That settles it, Bishop. That is the straw that breaks the camel's back. I expected that boy to earn seventy-five or a hundred dollars a month to help me out. I have given him an education, and I expected something in return. I want to say to you that he can go on a mission, and I am willing to give up the seventy-five or a hundred dollars that he could earn, but I will not pay one single dollar to support him on a mission. The Church can have him for nothing, but they have got to send him and maintain him on a mission."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303The bishop said: "Let's change the subject."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303So they talked for an hour or more about different things. The bishop kept leading him on and on, and finally he got to telling of the cold, hard country from which he had come; how difficult it was to make a bare living in the midnight sun country of Scandinavia, and he told the bishop how grateful he was that the gospel of Jesus Christ had found him; that he now had a fine home here, and how prosperous he had become, and what a wonderful blessing financially the gospel had been to him.

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303The bishop said: "By the way, my dear friend, whom do you love more than anybody else in all the world except your own family and your own flesh and blood?"

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303"Why, Bishop, I love more than anyone else the man who came away up to the cold country of the midnight sun and brought to me the gospel of Jesus Christ, the plan of life and salvation, and under the inspiration of God bore witness of the divinity of the work and of the mission of the Prophet Joseph. I love him with all my heart and soul."

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP303"By the way," said the bishop, "wouldn't you like somebody to love your boy just like that?"

Generositya-Grant, Heber J.TP304He said: "Bishop, you have beaten me fairly and squarely. The boy can go and I will pay for his mission."—Era, 41:455.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TPXXIII. BISHOP LEWIS OF LEWISTON

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TPWe sing and have done so constantly, "We thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet to guide us in these latter days."

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP304There are a great many who ought to put a postscript to that and say: "Provided he guides us to suit our own fancies and our own whims."

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP304The prophets of God, from Joseph Smith to the present day, have guided us and they have guided us aright, when we have listened to that guidance. The mistakes which have been made have been because of our failure to listen to the prophet whose right it is to guide the people of God. I will give you one practical incident:

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP304Brigham Young stood in front of the home of the late apostle, at that time bishop, Marriner W. Merrill, in Richmond. He pointed over to the sandy country where Lewiston now stands, and he said to Bishop Merrill: "Call some man to go over there and be a bishop, and organize a ward there. That will be the most valuable part of this valley, agriculturally, the greatest grain-producing part of this country."

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP304Brother Merrill told me this, standing upon the spot where Brigham Young stood, and he said, "I called Brother Lewis to go over there, and he was subsequently ordained as a bishop, and set apart to preside at Lewiston. After he had been there one season and ploughed up the ground, a windstorm came and took all his fine soil and piled it up in a heap by the fence. He came back and said, 'Bishop Merrill, I would not give my little twenty-acre farm here at Richmond for the whole country over there and I want to come back.' "

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP304Brother Merrill said: "Well, you will not come back with my consent. If you come back you will have to run away from the call that has been placed upon you. I will not release you. The prophet of God has said that is to be the granary of Cache Valley and you go back there. And Brother Lewis went back disheartened and discouraged."

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP305Brother Lewis, who afterwards became the president of the Benson Stake of Zion, no doubt thanked Brother Merrill that he did not let him run away, seeing that during the last few years of his life, he harvested over ten thousand bushels of wheat a year.

Obediencea-Grant, Heber J.TP305I know that the path of safety for the Latter-day Saints is not only to sing, "We thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet, to guide us in these latter days," but to be ready and willing and anxious to be guided.—CR, October, 1913: 88.

Conversiona-Grant, Heber J.TPXXIV. THE CONVERSION OF R. M. BRYCE THOMAS

Conversiona-Grant, Heber J.TPI rejoice that many men of great intelligence have been converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ—men of great experience and knowledge.

Conversiona-Grant, Heber J.TP305I rejoiced exceedingly while I was in Europe in distributing, or at least in urging upon the elders to distribute a tract known as, "My Reasons for Leaving the Church of England and joining the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." This document was written by Col. R. M. Bryce Thomas, a retired officer in the British army.

Conversiona-Grant, Heber J.TP305While traveling around the world and stopping here in Salt Lake City, in the old Templeton Hotel, his wife was taken sick. Sitting in the sick room looking across the street, he saw constantly in front of him, on the old adobe building that was torn down to make room for the Hotel Utah, the sign "Mormon Publications for Sale Here." He kept seeing it daily, and seeing it till it got on his nerves. He finally went and purchased some Mormon publications, read them, and he studied the people. He found that they were sober; he found that they were industrious. He learned from those not of us that we were particularly kind to the poor; that there was no class distinction. He found many commendable things; and among other things that he found, he said, was the most magnificent choir that he had ever listened to in his life. He went away from here impressed with the people, with their devotion, with their honesty, with their integrity. And he pursued his study of the gospel and became converted—absolutely converted.

Conversiona-Grant, Heber J.TP306It has been said that the tenderest part of a man's anatomy is his pocket; and this man has also been absolutely converted in his pocket, as the presidents from the time of his conversion until the present time who have presided over the London conference can testify—because on a certain day each month, a remittance of one-tenth of that man's income reaches the London conference, in addition to a donation for the benefit of the poor.

Conversiona-Grant, Heber J.TP306His pamphlet of thirty-odd pages gives his reasons for joining this Church. They are reasons that cannot be answered and that cannot be gainsaid and that stand out prominently and solidly for the divinity of the work in which you and I are engaged. They are substantial reasons for leaving the church with which he had been affiliated all the days of his life.—CR, April, 1912: 29.

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TPXXV. A CALL THAT WAS NEVER FULFILLED

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TPI had a very great disappointment in my life by not listening to an inspiration that came once to John Henry Smith, my senior by two years in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. I was appointed by President Lorenzo Snow to go to the City of Mexico and reopen the Mexican Mission, and it was a very great pleasure to me to have that appointment because my cousin, Anthony W. Ivins, was president of the Mexican colonists of the Juarez Stake of Zion. Also, I had never met Diaz. A great many people looked upon President Diaz as one of the greatest rulers in all the world, considering the conditions under which he had to rule, and I had always had a strong desire to meet him.

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP306When this appointment came I was, therefore, very much delighted, and told President Snow that I was very pleased, but, I said, "Brother Snow, my mother, my wife and my daughters, most of them, are at Pacific Grove. I have been in the Council of the Twelve for nearly twenty years, and I have never taken a holiday, and I would very much appreciate it if I could have two or three weeks holiday and go down and celebrate my mother's eightieth birthday. I have arranged to be at Pacific Grove for this occasion and when I return, I will go to the City of Mexico."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307President Snow replied, "That will be all right, Brother Grant; you are perfectly welcome to that holiday."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307After the meeting in the temple, Brother John Henry said, "Heber, I have an impression that you should not go and celebrate your mother's eightieth birthday." He continued, "If you do go to California you will never have the privilege of seeing Diaz, and you will not have the privilege of opening that mission for the preaching of the gospel to that nation."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307I asked, "Why not?" and he replied, "If you go to California, you will not have that privilege."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307I said, "Well now, Brother John, if you think you are going to frighten me from having a pleasant, delightful visit with my mother and the first holiday I have had in nineteen years, you are mistaken."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307He said, "All right, you will never see Diaz, and I'll have to go and open the Mexican Mission. Of course, I've seen Diaz two or three times, but I'll be glad to see him again."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307The day after I returned home from California I was called to go to Japan to open the mission there, and President Snow said to me, "Now, Brother Grant, you are engaged in many different businesses, and we will give you a whole year to arrange your affairs before you start on this mission, if you need it. If you can get ready in four, five, or six months, do so; but do not hurry; get out of your various business obligations as best you can, without too much sacrifice, and then go on your mission."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307In response to these instructions, I said: "The first thing I want to do is to go down to the city of Mexico with my cousin and organize that mission."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307President Snow replied, "There is no need of your doing that; there are plenty of men who can do that as well as you, and we will send somebody else."

Inspirationa-Grant, Heber J.TP307"But," I said, "I want to do it." And then President Snow without hesitation replied, "Oh, that doesn't make any difference; we will appoint someone else—whom shall we appoint?" He looked around and said, "John Henry, you go and do that." And when John Henry returned from filling my appointment in Mexico, he told me that he had had a very wonderful visit with Diaz. Ofttimes our brethren in positions of responsibility receive inspiration that a certain thing should be done, and it is a wise thing, I have discovered, to carry it out, and not urge contrary views to the calls and directions that come to us from those in authority.—Era, 44:585.

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TPXXVI. W. C. STAINES AND GEOLOGY

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TPOne thing I remember very distinctly was the great pleasure I had as a young man in conversing with the late William C. Staines. I have sat and talked with Brother Staines until one and two o'clock in the morning. I think he was the most gifted conversationalist and one of the most inspiring men to speak and listen to that it ever fell to my lot to know.

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP308He was emigration agent for the Church, and in that capacity traveled in a single year between thirty and forty thousand miles, as I remember it. He made trip after trip across the ocean, down to New York, and back and forth several times. He was a man with whom everybody acquainted with him, loved to visit and talk, because of his great fund of knowledge and remarkable conversational powers.

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP308I remember one experience he related to me. On one occasion a great geologist whom he had known in New York came out to Salt Lake and was having dinner with him. During the dinner this geologist remarked: "Staines, you are a wonderfully intelligent and well-bred man. I am astonished that a man so well informed as you are should believe in the Bible."

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP308"Well," Brother Staines said, "I do not know why you should be."

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP308"If you would just study geology you would have to cast the Bible to one side."

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP309"Well," he said, "I am rather old; my parents believed in the Bible and I believe in it; and I would have to study a long while to become a geologist; so I guess I will just stay with my belief in the Bible. You say that you can prove the earth is so much older than the record given in the Bible and demonstrate that it is ridiculous to believe in it; but we will just stop discussing geology and I will go on believing in the Bible. Pass your plate and have some plum pudding."

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP309And the man then passed his plate and got some pudding. Brother Staines said: "A man so wise that he can tell how old the earth is, when it was created, and all about it, certainly should be wise enough to tell me when that plum pudding was created."

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP309"Oh," he said, "that is easy. I taste of it and it is hot. I see it steaming. Mrs. Staines just created it. It has just been made." This was in the winter.

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP309Brother Staines took his fork and picked out a raisin and held it up, and said: "My friend, that raisin may have been raised last summer, and perhaps that raisin is five years old. It may be that that raisin is ten years old. If it is ten years old, according to your geological scientific fact, that pudding is ten years old." He continued, "The trouble with you, my friend, is that you started on the theory that God is a being without body, parts, or passions; that He sits on the top of a topless throne, beyond the bounds of time and space, and that He created the earth out of nothing. Whereas we know by the inspiration of God to a prophet that God created the earth out of the elements that existed, and that element is eternal and indestructible."

Creationa-Grant, Heber J.TP309When Joseph Smith first taught that doctrine they said he was a fool, because everybody professed to know that elements were not eternal, and that you could take some coal and burn it up and that was the end of it. Now they have found that the elements of that coal cannot be destroyed. You can take a silver cup, drop it into a certain acid, and it will dissolve and disappear. And yet it is there. You can take other ingredients and get that identical silver out again and mould it into another silver cup. Joseph Smith is now absolutely vindicated in saying that matter is eternal and indestructible.—GM, 17:95-97.

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TPXXVII. RIGHT LIVING AND HEALTH

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TPA distant relative of mine went all the way to Chicago to consult a doctor. Although he was born in the Church and baptized as a child, he made no pretense of believing in the gospel. When he died, he was not buried from any ward, but from one of the fraternal organizations to which he belonged. On the occasion to which I refer, as I remember it, he had to pay fifty dollars for a short interview with a specialist in stomach troubles, etc.

Word of Wisdoma-Grant, Heber J.TP310When the doctor learned that he was from Utah, he said: "All you need to do is to go back to Utah and live the Mormon Word of Wisdom." I could have saved him the fare to Chicago and back again, and that fifty dollars, but he did not even carry out the advice of the doctor.—CS, June 25, 1932.

Healingsa-Grant, Heber J.TPXXVIII. THE SHOOTING OF JOSEPH W. McMURRIN

Healingsa-Grant, Heber J.TPIn the days of the "underground" when more than a thousand of our men went to the penitentiary for living with their wives whom they had married in good faith, a man by the name of Joseph W. McMurrin [^1] was guarding the servants of the Lord.

Healingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP310The brethren were holding a meeting in the Social Hall. A deputy U. S. marshal came to the back door where Joseph W. McMurrin was standing, and Joseph put his arms around him to keep him from going through that door. The deputy finally got his hand loose and took his pistol and, pressing it against Brother McMurrin's body, fired two bullets clear through his vitals. Those bullets lodged just under the skin in his back. He was attended by Dr. Joseph Benedict who told Joseph W. McMurrin that no man could live after two bullets had passed through his vitals, and then added: "If you wish to make a dying statement you should do so immediately."

Healingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP311I went with John Henry Smith to Brother McMurrin's home and saw where the flesh was burned away around those terrible gaping wounds. I saw where the bullets had gone clear through him. I heard John Henry Smith say, "By the authority of the Priesthood of the living God which we hold, and in the name of the Lord, Jesus Christ, we say that you shall be made absolutely whole, and that there shall be no physical weakness left upon your body because of these terrible wounds that you have received while guarding the servants of the living God."

Healingsa-Grant, Heber J.TP311Joseph W. McMurrin is alive and well, and has never had any physical weakness because of those terrible wounds. Tell me that sickness is not cured by spiritual power, by the power of God, in the Church of Jesus Christ! I know that it is as well as I know that I live.—CS, November 21, 1931.

XXIX. TOBACCO AND GOOD MANNERS

There is something in the use of tobacco that blunts the finer susceptibilities, the gentlemanly instincts of men. I say nothing about destroying the finer, admirable, wonderful qualities of ladies, that every true man almost worships.

311I know of some fine, gentlemanly men in all other respects, who forget and actually light their pipes or their cigars in the presence of ladies. I am sure they would not do it if they stopped to reflect, because they must know that it is obnoxious to them. I have known of men who claimed to be gentlemen who became angry when it was suggested that they do not smoke in a banquet held in the Utah Hotel on ladies' night.

311You know they have made their own homes smokehouses and their wives have become accustomed to living in smokehouses. So, they think everybody's wives ought to like a smokehouse.

312You know I like to sit in the rear car, the observation car, when I am traveling, but I cannot do it. I cannot take my wife out to enjoy the scenery. Why? Because the gentlemen who smoke go out there and smoke and have not enough regard for the ladies and gentlemen who do not smoke.

312I wanted to write a telegram, the last time I was on the train. I went into the observation car to do it, but before I got through writing, just a telegram of fifty words, I picked up my telegram-blank and went back and wrote it on my knee because the observation car was like a smokehouse, chuck full of smoke.

312The smokers talk about their privileges being taken away from them. Why, do you know there is a smoking compartment in each car? There were eight cars on that train and there was not anybody in those eight compartments, which were provided specially for smokers. But they occupied the car that ought to be for ladies and for gentlemen who do not smoke. If they want to smoke they ought to have enough gentlemanly instinct to go into one of the other eight cars and do their smoking and then come back and join the ladies and those who do not smoke.

312Thank fortune, there will be a few public places where they can't smoke in the future, because of our anti-tobacco law—some ministers to the contrary notwithstanding.

312When I went to Japan [1901] there was not a first-class hotel in the United States of America that allowed smoking. When I returned home I was astounded to find a few that allowed it. I went to England for three years, and when I came home they all permitted it.

312I remember the first time I stopped in the Windsor, which was the best hotel in Denver, that they had a very magnificent smoking room. I remember that when one man visited there—Phil Robinson, who wrote the book entitled, Sinners and Saints—he said he was delighted to find one hotel in America that had some regard for smokers. I would be glad now to find one that had some regard for non-smokers. He said he afterwards learned that that particular hotel was built by English capitalists who must have their big, nice comfortable place for the smokers. When I arrived in England I often found, if I entered a non-smoking compartment in any car where there was a gentleman and his wife, he would take out his cigar and start to smoke. When I protested she would say, "Oh, I don't object," and I would say, "Well, I do, and inasmuch as there are twice as many compartments in these cars where smokers can go, as there are places where non-smokers can go, I will be much obliged to your husband if he will please go where he belongs."

313Why, I had more than one English woman, and on the continent likewise, who looked at me as if she would like to bite my head off because I had the audacity to go where there was "No smoking allowed" and to "call the fellow down" who was smoking.

313I first asked the gentleman if he could read. He said:

313"Yes."

313"Did you read the sign on the door 'No smoking'?"

313"Yes."

313"Well then, will you kindly put out your pipe" or "your cigar?"

313The wife would speak up and say: "Oh, I don't object."

313But I always objected. If they would put a sign in observation cars, "No smoking," I would object double-quick and suggest that as there is a smoking room or compartment on every sleeper, where a man can go and take his smoke, that he go where he belongs.—Era, 24:876-877.

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TPXXX. "AGE IS A QUALITY OF MIND"

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TPI can prove that age is a quality of mind. I went up to Scotland, when I was presiding over the European Mission, and an old lady asked me my age. I told her that if I lived so many weeks I would be fifty. She said: "Oh, nae, nae, nae, nae! President Grant will never see sixty-five again."

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP313Brother Charles W. Penrose arrived in Liverpool to take my place as the president of the European Mission, and he brought with him many elders, twenty-five or thirty, and we had about the same number of missionaries going back to their homes that very day. In those days we used to send one hundred and one hundred fifty emigrants to America in a company. They could come here and go up into Idaho and other places, preempt a piece of ground at a dollar and twenty-five cents an acre and have a fine farm that afterwards became worth one hundred dollars an acre or more. But that is all stopped now. We had a company going to America that very day, and we were very busy.

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP314At night the shipping firm with whom we had done business for many years sent us four tickets to the Shakespeare Theatre. When Sir Henry Irving, and Ellen Terry, or some other great actor was there, they would send us tickets. They did this two or three times a year and even oftener. I turned to my wife and said: "I wouldn't go to the finest theatre on the face of the earth. I am tired. I am going to bed to rest and sleep. You take a missionary to bring you home from the theatre, and a couple of the daughters, and use these tickets."

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP314Brother Penrose spoke up and said, "Sister Grant, let the old man go to bed; I will take you to the theatre."

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP314(I had just purchased, with the approval of President Joseph F. Smith, a very fine home, much better than anything we had had while I was there. He came over to England. I told him what I wanted to do, and took him to the place. The minute he went into it, he said: "Buy it quick, Heber, before they change their minds." I had written to him, pleading with him to let me come home, that I had something to tell him, and I felt I could not do it by mail. I was afraid that I would not be able to get what I wanted. And, lo and behold, he was on the ocean at the time I wrote that letter. He said I should not only buy the place, but I should get all the furniture I could at the same time.)

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP314We were so busy that day, with one hundred or more emigrants and twenty-five or more new missionaries, and twenty-five or more elders going home, that I did not even have an opportunity to show Brother Penrose his new home, although all we had to do was to walk up a few steps and over a wall, and we were in the back yard of the new place. Immediately after breakfast the following day, I took him to the new home, and somebody asked the man who was moving the furniture out to guess our ages. He looked us over carefully, and said: "I should say that Mr. Grant is sixty-five, and that Mr. Penrose is sixty." [President Grant was then fifty and President Penrose seventy-five.]

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP315I said: "I have heard that a man is no older than he feels, and a woman no older than she looks. I felt so old that I went to bed last night, because I was tired, and this old man here—twenty-five years older than I am (so you have only made a mistake of thirty years), took my wife and daughters to the theatre."

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP315The next Sunday I thought I would get that corrected. I did not appreciate those three compliments. While at Birmingham I asked the president of the branch who he thought was older, Brother Penrose or myself—expecting a correct answer—and he said: "The idea of asking such a ridiculous question! Anybody can see you are very much older than Brother Penrose."

Aginga-Grant, Heber J.TP315I hit the table and said: "That settles it. No old man will ever take my wife to the theatre again." And he never has.—CR, April, 1937:17-18.

Later a member of the First Council of the Seventy.

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Chapter Six, "Church Administration" for charges to Church officers and teachers.
