Heber J. Grant, G. Homer Durham, Gospel Standards: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Heber J. Grant ( 1941)

369ADDENDA

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP369[The following is a reprint of President Grant's address referred to in the preceding account entitled "My Brother's Conversion."—Editor.]

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP369DIVINITY OF JOSEPH SMITH'S MISSION ABUNDANTLY ATTESTED

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP369Remarks made at the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, Sunday, January 26, 1896, by ELDER HEBER J. GRANT

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP369I have been interested in listening to the remarks of Brother Milton Bennion and the testimony which he has borne to us this afternoon. It affords deep interest, no doubt, to all the Latter-day Saints who are here, as well as to those who are not members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to listen to a recital that has any bearing upon the life and labors of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It is a remarkable fact that we can never read of the labors which He performed, or listen to others speaking of the great work which He accomplished, without taking pleasure in it, while on the other hand, there is nothing so interesting in the life and history of any other individual but what by hearing or reading it time and time again we become tired of it. I can bear testimony, from my own personal experience, that the oftener I read of the life and labors of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the greater are the joy, the peace, the happiness, the satisfaction that fill my soul in contemplating what He did. It is a story that never becomes old to me. There is ever a new charm comes to me in contemplating the words of our Lord and Savior and the plan of life and salvation which He taught to men during His life upon the earth. It is also a source of unbounded joy to me and fills my heart beyond my power of expression to contemplate the fact that God our Heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus Christ have visited the earth and again revealed the gospel to man; and it fills me with thanksgiving and gratitude, far beyond my power to tell, that He has blessed me with a knowledge of the divinity of the work in which we are engaged. My constant and earnest prayer to Him is that my mind may never become darkened, that I may never depart from the path of rectitude and right, but that as I grow in years I may increase in understanding, that the light and inspiration of the Spirit of God may burn in my heart and enlighten my understanding and keep me firm and faithful in serving my Heavenly Father. I desire by the labors that I shall perform, by the good deeds that I shall accomplish, to show my appreciation unto my Heavenly Father for the manifestations of His goodness to me in blessing me with a testimony of the work in which we are engaged. And there is nothing in connection with the latter-day work that fills my heart with more joy and gratitude than the knowledge that the Latter-day Saints throughout these valleys of the mountains are blessed with that same testimony, and with that abiding faith that they are engaged in the work of God, that I am in possession of. The Lord in this regard has been no respecter of persons. The humble, the poor, the unlearned (so far as the education of this world is concerned) have been as abundantly blessed of God with this testimony as those that have had more abundantly of the things of this world. From Canada on the north to Mexico on the south, throughout this Rocky Mountain region, we find settlements of the Latter-day Saints; and in these settlements we find people that have been gathered from all the nations of the earth, in fulfillment of the prophecies that were uttered thousands of years ago, that the Saints should be brought to the tops of the mountains and that the Lord would establish His work here; and this people, dwelling in settlements stretching from north to south for over a thousand miles, are blessed with a testimony of the divinity of the work in which they are engaged.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP370It has seemed to me a marvel how men of intelligence and ability, understanding the things of the world and the affairs of men, can look upon the great miracle to be seen in the life and labors of the Latter-day Saints without realizing and appreciating the fact that God has gathered this people together. The Savior said that the doctrines which He taught would make those who accepted them, one. He told His followers that He desired they should be one with Him, even as He was one with the Father. It was predicted that when the gospel should again be restored to the earth in the last days the people of God should be gathered from all the nations of the earth, "one of a city and two of a family," and be brought unto Zion, where they should be led and guided by God. The Latter-day Saints are a living testimony of the fulfillment of that prediction. Men and women have gathered to Zion from the different nations of Europe and from the islands of the sea, and no matter where they came from they have been blessed with the self-same spirit; and in affection, in thought, in faith, in love and devotion for God they are one, even as Jesus is one with the Father. That love and that brotherly affection which was promised to those who would desert father or mother, even all that was near and dear to the natural heart of man, has been and is enjoyed by this people. Those who have gathered here and have left all their relatives and friends behind can stand up and testify that God has filled the vacant place, and that He has blessed them with brothers and sisters in the gospel. I say that no power upon the face of the earth, not the wisdom of all the wise men combined, could ever have united the hearts and the souls of the Latter-day Saints as God has united them; and they stand today as a living testimony to the world of the divinity of the work in which they are engaged. I maintain that without the Spirit of God, without that love and inspiration that comes from above, man could not unite together people of different nationalities and make them of one heart, one testimony and one desire, as the Latter-day Saints are.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP371While I was visiting in St. George and talking with the president of the St. George Stake of Zion, I was forcibly reminded of the faith that burns in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints. He was speaking of his early experience, and he told me that one day President Young said to him, "Brother McArthur, within ten days I wish you to prepare to go on a mission to Europe, and I expect you to be absent for four and perhaps seven years." The very day that he was told to get ready he had a child born, and when he returned home the child was over four years of age. In going upon this mission he did not have the means to go, but he sold some property that was worth three or four times as much as he was able to get for it; in fact, some few months after it changed hands for about four times more than what he sold it for. He made this sacrifice, and without one dollar of reward he went to the nations of the earth and spent four years of his life proclaiming the gospel, declaring that the angel that was seen flying through the midst of heaven having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwelt on the earth had come, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God who testified of this. Brother McArthur told me of many incidents of his mission that were truly remarkable. Among other things, he said the Prophet Joseph Smith visited him while he was on this mission. And I say to you today that you can travel from Canada to Mexico and thousands, yes, tens of thousands of men and women will stand up and testify, as Brother McArthur did to me, that God our Heavenly Father has blessed them, that He has given them manifestations of His approval of their labors which have been inspired by the Holy Ghost; and they will, in all solemnity and without any excitement, testify to you that they do know for themselves that they are engaged in the work of God.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP371The labors and accomplishments of the Latter-day Saints in this country give evidence of the inspiration of the Spirit of God that prompted those men who came here as Pioneers and established the people in these mountains. In addition to the evidences that are to be found on all hands of the inspiration and the uniting influences of the Spirit of God among the Latter-day Saints, the very gathering of this people to these mountains is a direct fulfillment of the promises made through the Prophet Joseph Smith. More than once I have heard President Wilford Woodruff say, in private and in public, that he has listened to the Prophet Joseph Smith stating to them the fact that the Latter-day Saints would yet come to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains and become a great and a prosperous people. We stand today as a living evidence to the world of the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Why? Because our very presence in these mountains is a fulfillment of the predictions of that inspired man. Joseph Smith has been ridiculed and characterized as "old Joe Smith." I stand before you today a mere boy, and yet Joseph Smith was martyred when he was a year younger than I am. This "old" man accomplished in a very few years a great and a marvelous labor. When we contemplate what he did, considering the opportunities of education that he had, it is indeed a marvel and a wonder. In speaking of this I am reminded of a little item that I read some twelve years ago from a book that Brother Brigham Young [Jr.] had with him on the train as we were going to Arizona. The book was written by Josiah Quincy, who was a statesman and a philanthropist. In it was the following statement:

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Grant, Heber J.TP372"It is by no means improbable that some future textbook, for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet." (From Figures of the Past, by Josiah Quincy.)
