“Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, …

“And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers.” (D&C 2:1, 2.)

The promise the Lord made through his prophets was that a time would come when everyone, living or dead, would have the opportunity for baptism and temple blessings.

About 900 years before Christ, Elijah had the keys, or authority, to use priesthood sealing powers on earth and in heaven. In the latter days his mission was to bring that authority back to earth so that genealogy and temple work could be done.

Read the statements about Elijah, then number the pictures to match the statements.

1. Because the people were wicked, Elijah sealed the heavens so that it wouldn’t rain.

2. Ravens brought food to Elijah during the famine.

3. A widow shared her last flour and oil with Elijah and was promised her supply would last.

4. The widow’s son became sick and died. God answered Elijah’s prayers, and the boy lived again.

5. Elijah called down fire from heaven in a contest with the wicked priests of Baal, hoping the people would then believe in the true God.

6. Elijah divided the waters of the Jordan River by hitting the water with his mantle, or cloak.

7. Elijah did not die, but was taken to heaven in a chariot of fire.

8. About 400 B.C. the prophet Malachi prophesied that Elijah would return the power and keys for sealing to the earth.

9. On September 21, 1823, Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith. After telling Joseph about the golden plates, Moroni quoted Malachi and foretold Elijah’s coming.

10. On April 3, 1836, Elijah came to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple in Ohio. Because the prophecy of Malachi was fulfilled, families can now be sealed for eternity, and genealogy and temple work is done for the dead.

1. Tell story, and have children arrange pictures in correct order.

2. Plan a scripture chase to present entire story of Elijah. (Read particularly 1 Kgs. 17–18 and 2 Kgs. 2.)

3. Discuss with children Elijah’s mission as they cut out pictures and glue them in the correct order on a separate piece of paper.
