The Apostles’ Creed How the Apostle’s Creed Helps Us Know What We Believe The Apostles’ Creed APOSTLES’ CREED SUMMARY OF MEANING creed . It expresses the beliefs that unite all Christians. APOSTLES’ CREED I believe in…

(Isa. 44:6) The Apostles did not write the Apostles’ Creed. No

The Apostles did not write the Apostles’ Creed. No I believe in… The basic meaning of The words that follow preserve the teaching of the Apostles.

One ancient and important heresy that still thrives today is Gnosticism. The word

Gnosticism is derived from the Greek word one knows for certain when this creed was written. God, the Father Almighty one knows for certain when this creed was written. God, the Father Almighty gnosis, meaning “knowledge.” Gnosticism

Not just belief in an impersonal force or in many gods, but rather, a deep

References to and quotation of similar statements— (Isa. 44:6)

References to and quotation of similar statements— (Isa. 44:6)

emphasized secret knowledge and secret rituals. Salvation consisted of experiencing the

trust in a personal, caring, loving God.

secret knowledge and rituals. known as the “Rule of Faith”—can be found in writings Maker of heaven and earth. known as the “Rule of Faith”—can be found in writings Maker of heaven and earth.

as early as the second century AD. The name “Apostles’ (Gen. 1:1; John 1:1) God is powerful. Just as God created the universe, God can heal, save, as early as the second century AD. The name “Apostles’ (Gen. 1:1; John 1:1)

guard, comfort, and guide us. The whole universe is his.

Ancient Gnosticism incorporated many beliefs from different religions. As Christianity

Creed” means that the creed contains the Apostolic

spread throughout the Roman Empire, Gnostics quickly adopted some Christian practices And in Jesus Christ, his only Creed” means that the creed contains the Apostolic

tradition. The Apostles’ Creed is the most universal of Son, (John 9:38; 20:28) We believe Jesus is the promised Messiah. Believing in God is also believing And in Jesus Christ, his only

and terminology. However, Gnosticism completely contradicts Christianity and opposes

in Jesus. tradition. The Apostles’ Creed is the most universal of Son, (John 9:38; 20:28)

all the creeds. Most Christian denominations continue

all the creeds. Most Christian denominations continue

the biblical understanding of creation and God himself.

to recite and teach it.

to recite and teach it.

Our Lord; (Phil. 2:9–11) No nation, no king, no Caesar comes fi rst: only Jesus is Lord. He has all Our Lord;

In the fi rst two centuries AD, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, and many

authority and power; only he deserves praise and worship.

Early creedal statements were very helpful for new

Early creedal statements were very helpful for new

others challenged specifi c forms of Gnosticism and wrote powerful critiques to

Christians in understanding their faith. These early Who was conceived by the Jesus’ birth and life were a miracle. By being fully human, Jesus has given Who was conceived by the

demonstrate how Gnosticism contradicted biblical Christianity. Partly due to the Gnostic Holy Spirit, and born of the Christians in understanding their faith. These early Holy Spirit, and born of the

creedal statements were used in baptism. New believers Virgin Mary; us an example of life, taken upon himself the penalty of sin, and given us a (Luke 1:35) creedal statements were used in baptism. New believers Virgin Mary;

new life and a new future. memorized and studied them before being baptized. It

heresy, these three areas became critical for the early church to defi ne:

memorized and studied them before being baptized. It

that Pilate decided Jesus’ death. Jesus died an innocent man. Pilate’s

• Salvation • The books of the New Testament is quite possible that from these baptismal “formulas,” Suffered under Pontius Many have blamed Jews for Jesus’ death. The Creed makes it clear the ancient church developed what we now call the Pilate, (Luke 23:23–25) is quite possible that from these baptismal “formulas,” Suffered under Pontius

injustice contrasts with God’s justice; Pilate’s arrogance contrasts with

• The nature and work of Jesus Apostles’ Creed.

Jesus’ humility. Apostles’ Creed. the ancient church developed what we now call the Pilate,

© Leah-Anne Thompson TOPIC GNOSTIC BELIEF

BIBLICAL BELIEF Was crucifi ed, died, and These events really happened. Jesus’ crucifi xion and death were not merely Was crucifi ed, died, and

buried © Leah-Anne Thompson (1 Cor. 15:3–4) staged; Jesus’ death was real and a sad necessity for our sake.

buried

A form of pantheism—a belief that identifi es God created all things. The

The meaning of this line is not clear; some think it refers to 1 Peter 3:19:

Cosmogony (Origin God with the universe. God and creation Creator and the creation

He descended into hell; “He went and preached to the spirits in prison.” It is also possible to

He descended into hell;

of the universe) are one. The material world fl ows out of the are separate.

TRADITION divine essence. However, this god is not the tradition, they may mean (1 Peter 3:18–19) translate this line as “he descended to the dead,” emphasizing the reality of (1 Peter 3:18–19) God of the Bible, but a fallen god.

When contemporary Christians speak of

TRADITION Jesus’ death. The phrase was not in the oldest available copy of the creed. , they may mean

When contemporary Christians speak of tradition

a human teaching that is not found in the Bible; in this sense, traditions cannot have On the third day he rose Jesus’ resurrection is fundamental. His resurrection points to the fulfi llment On the third day he rose God is real, but the material world is an The material world is as real

a human teaching that is not found in the Bible; in this sense, traditions cannot have

Cosmology

(1 Cor. 15:4) among the dead” (Col. 1:18).

(Nature, order, the same authority as the Bible. illusion. The material world is evil. The as God. The world is not good and from the dead; the same authority as the Bible. of all justice and the hope for all believers. Jesus is the “fi rstborn from from the dead; human soul, a remnant of the divine, is evil—God called it

imprisoned in the body, which is part of the blessed it.

Th e early church did not use the word tradition in this way. Th e Apostle Paul wrote,

evil world. Humans have forgotten about traditions ] we passed on to you, whether by is seated at the right hand of Jesus’ authority over the whole creation. traditions ] we passed on to you, whether by is seated at the right hand of

“Stand fi rm and hold to the teachings [or

, of the universe) and function Th e early church did not use the word tradition in this way. Th e Apostle Paul wrote, He ascended into heaven and Ascending to heaven and sitting at the right hand of the Father demonstrate He ascended into heaven and

their divine inner being. Tradition meant the handing down of the the Father; “Stand fi rm and hold to the teachings [or Tradition meant the handing down of the the Father; (Luke 24:51)

word of mouth or by letter” (2 Th ess. 2:15). Human sin originates with From thence he will come Apostles’ teachings. For the earliest church, the Scriptures were the Old Testament word of mouth or by letter” (2 Th ess. 2:15).

One dominant form of Gnosticism was based

Apostles’ teachings. For the earliest church, the Scriptures were the Old Testament

Jesus’ second coming will not be like a humble lamb. He will return like a From thence he will come

on the myth of Sophia, who lusted after the pride and disobedience.

Origin of Evil books—the New Testament did not yet have a fi nal form. Creation is not evil, although to judge the living and the triumphant king and judge. With his authority, he will judge all of creation. to judge the living and the

“First Father.” Matter is the fruit of her sin.

The physical world is evil.

(2 Tim. 4:1; John 5:22) Christians rest assured that there is “no condemnation for those who are in dead.

Christ Jesus” (Rom. 8:1).

Around one hundred years aft er the death of Jesus, Gnostics produced many it has been corrupted as a dead. books—the New Testament did not yet have a fi nal form. result of human sin.

Around one hundred years aft er the death of Jesus, Gnostics produced many

I believe in the Holy Spirit, Jesus promised to send us a comforter, guide, equipper, and advocate. The I believe in the Holy Spirit,

writings similar to those in our New Testament; some of those writings claimed

Salvation comes through experiential God is rescuing humanity

Holy Spirit is God’s presence in our midst.

(John 15:26; 16:7–14)

to have apostolic authorship—these writings are called the “Gnostic Gospels.” Th e

knowledge—a secret knowledge that teaches through the work of Jesus, (John 15:26; 16:7–14) writings similar to those in our New Testament; some of those writings claimed

to have apostolic authorship—these writings are called the “Gnostic Gospels.” Th e

one how to escape the evil of a physical not through any special,

God has called his people out of sin and death; it is a group separated

church realized the need to identify and make offi cial the writings that faithfully

world. Its ultimate goal is a return to the hidden knowledge.

The holy catholic church, church realized the need to identify and make offi cial the writings that faithfully

(holy) and from the whole world and throughout all time (catholic, or

The holy catholic church,

contained the Apostles’ teachings. Th is became urgent when the infl uential heretic

Salvation original condition of being one with the First

(Gal. 3:26–29) contained the Apostles’ teachings. Th is became urgent when the infl uential heretic

universal). The church is a people bought with the precious blood of Jesus (Gal. 3:26–29)

Marcion questioned the authority of most writings that church fathers accepted.

Father. In Christian-infl uenced Gnosticism,

Marcion questioned the authority of most writings that church fathers accepted.

on the cross.

Jesus is the one teaching this secret

knowledge. The knowledge of people’s divine

MARCIONISM inner being is the main secret knowledge.

Marcion was born around ad 85 and was condemned around The communion of saints, In Jesus, all believers from all places and all times are brothers and sisters; The communion of saints, (Heb. 10:25) MARCIONISM we all share the same fellowship, the same Spirit, and the same Lord. We, Rose Publishing has more than 100 Bible reference pamphlets. Marcion was born around ad 85 and was condemned around (Heb. 10:25)

who were many, are now one people in Jesus.

ad 144. Marcion rejected the Old Testament. He taught that the God of the Old He is the second person of the

Jesus is not really a human at all; he just

ad 144. Marcion rejected the Old Testament. He taught that the God of the Old Author: Benjamin Galan, MTS, ThM, Adjunct Professor of

Testament was angry and vengeful. He taught that the Old Testament God had real, full human, who atoned (Heb. 8:12; Luke 7:48) Testament was angry and vengeful. He taught that the Old Testament God had Special thanks The forgiveness of sins, another. Jesus has reconciled us with God, freeing us from our sin

Jesus appeared to be one. He was an aeon, an Trinity. He was incarnated as a The forgiveness of sins, Sin had broken our relationship with God, with creation, and with one OT Hebrew and Literature at Fuller Seminary.

intermediary between the real world (the

(Heb. 8:12; Luke 7:48)

nothing to do with the God of the New Testament, who is loving and forgiving. for the sins of humanity on

world of the spirit) and this evil reality, the

nothing to do with the God of the New Testament, who is loving and forgiving. Seminary in Louisville, Kentucky; and Paul Carden, Executive Director, and death.

Marcion even threw out all writings that agreed, quoted, or referenced the Old the cross.

material world.

Marcion even threw out all writings that agreed, quoted, or referenced the Old Centers for Apologetics Research (CFAR).

Testament! Marcion rejected the Epistle of James and all the other books except

The resurrection of the body, Unlike the Gnostics who viewed every physical reality as evil, Christians Note: The text of the Apostles’ Creed and the Nicene Creed were

believe that they will receive new bodies and a new creation. Jesus’

Gnosticism became such an infl uential belief system that it has continued to appear

and the life everlasting. Testament! Marcion rejected the Epistle of James and all the other books except modifi ed from The resurrection of the body,

resurrected body was real (he could eat and could be touched); our

and the life everlasting.

Luke and the Pauline epistles. Marcion had rejected the full Apostolic teaching, so

over the centuries in people’s ideas about God and the world. Much of today’s popular (1 Thess. 4:16; John 10:28) Luke and the Pauline epistles. Marcion had rejected the full Apostolic teaching, so Other products available from Rose Publishing:

the church rejected Marcion’s teachings.

the church rejected Marcion’s teachings. resurrection bodies will also have a physical nature. And we will live with (1 Thess. 4:16; John 10:28) 609X Essential Doctrine Made Easy

Jesus forever in a new creation.

spirituality is Gnostic in its orientation.

410X The Trinity

404X Christianity, Cults & Religions

This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet Creeds and Heresies: How Early Christians Explained the Gospel ISBN 9781596363489. © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but do not post on 692X Tough Questions about Christianity

This page is just a small portion of the 5 4Creeds and Heresies pamphlet, a beautiful 14-page pamphlet containing the full text of the © 2011 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, but do not post on the

The full-color, glossy, and easy-to-understand pamphlet contains the full text of the Apostles Creed and Nicene Creed, and explains why 6 5 the internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for Free Rose

Apostles’ Creed and Nicene Creed, and an explanation of why they are important today. The pamphlet also gives the biblical basis for each internet or send via email.Your friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible

they are important to learn today. Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

Bible eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

phrase in the creeds. ISBN: 9781596363489

eCharts & Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

The Trinity

The Trinity is one of the most basic doctrines in

Christianity—and one of the key doctrines that

separates Christianity from other religions. This glossy,

full-color pamphlet explains the Trinity in clear terms

and illustrations, and also answers misunderstandings

that cults and other religions may have.

Pamphlet ............ 9781890947026 ...........$3.99

Also available as PDF, Wall Chart, Spanish and Power-

Point®.

What Christians Believe at a Glance

What Christians Believe At a Glance examines 16

essential Christian doctrines, including the Trinity, the

claims of Jesus, resurrection, salvation, and heaven,

and also looks at the Apostles’ Creed, Nicene Creed,

and much more!

Book............9781596364141............$14.99

Also available as PDF.

Creeds and Heresies: How Early

Christians Explained the Gospel

In 14 pages you will take a simple easy-to-understand look back to

Christianity, Cults & Religions

the historical teachings of the church, and bring them to life for today’s

Christianity, Cults & Religions contains a side-by-

believers. During the time of the early church (AD 30-AD 400) some key

side comparison of more than 40 world religions,

beliefs were misunderstood by Gnostics and other religious groups. The

cults and sects. This release from our Rose Bible

pamphlet shows that many of the questionable teachings of 2000 years

Basics collection is a well-researched introduction on

ago are still around. Understanding how the church dealt with these issues

comparative religions from a Christian viewpoint.

in the past helps us to deal with those same issues today.

Book ................... 9781596362024 ...........$14.99

Pamphlet ....................9781596363489 ................$3.99

Also available as PDF and eBook.

Quantity discounts available.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
