Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

PART I

Your Temple Blessings

Elijah window in the Salt Lake Temple

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. [^1]

The seen and the unseen worlds are closely connected. One assists the other. Those who fail to partake of the privileges and blessings of temple work deprive themselves of some of the choicest gifts within the keeping of the Church. Temple work begins with genealogy. (John A. Widtsoe)

1

Come to the Temple

If one of the temples might be singled out as being somewhat different from the rest it would be the Salt Lake Temple at the headquarters of the Church. Here are the council rooms of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and of the First Quorum of the Seventy. Here each week the Brethren assemble to sit in council. First the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles meets; later in the morning the First Presidency arrives and the Council of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles is convened. Here the Brethren wrestle with the weighty matters of the kingdom of God upon the earth, for its management is upon their shoulders. Here, dressed in the proper way for temple ordinance work, they approach the altar in the true order of prayer to seek divine guidance and inspiration as they consider these matters. The Presidents of the Seventy meet in their council room as well.

Hidden away in the central part of the temple is the Holy of Holies, where the President of the Church may retire when burdened down with heavy decisions to seek an interview with Him whose Church it is. The prophet holds the keys, the spiritual keys and the very literal key to this one door in that sacred edifice.

Here on the fifth floor is the large assembly room, with the series of pulpits at each end like those constructed in the first temple at Kirtland, Ohio. Here special meetings have been held-solemn assemblies, special testimony meetings for leaders who have come on call from the Brethren. The missionaries used to be instructed here.

Here are the ordinance rooms and the sealing rooms. In some sealing rooms opposite walls are adorned with large mirrors so that one may stand near the altar and view on either side a corridor of diminishing images. It gives one the feeling of looking into infinity; into the eternities. For the images in that corridor never end. You can see as far as you can see, and you have the feeling that if you could move to the limit of your vision you yet could see on "forever."

And below the level of the gardens and streets that surround the temple is the baptismal font, where vicarious baptisms for the dead are performed, with young people acting as proxy for those who have gone beyond the veil.

As you move from room to room and set your hand to turn the knob you find that pioneer craftsmen have carefully fashioned the design of the latch and lock. The tribute "Holiness to the Lord" is engraved in circular fashion on each knob. When you enter this or any dedicated temple you are in the house of the Lord.

Jesus Christ Directs His Servants

Central to the message about temples is the fact that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, the Only Begotten of the Father; that He lives; that He directs His servants upon this earth. It is His priesthood which has been restored, defined as the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. (See D&C 107:2-4.) Before the foundation of the earth He was chosen. That event is dramatically portrayed by Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Let me quote from "Elect of Elohim."

In solemn council sat the Gods; From Kolob's height supreme, Celestial light blazed forth afar O'er countless kokaubeam. And faintest tinge, the fiery fringe Of that resplendent day, Lumined the dark abysmal realm Where Earth in chaos lay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . "Father? the voice like music fell, Clear as the murmuring flow Of mountain streamlet trickling down From heights of virgin snow, "Father," it said, "since One must die, Thy children to redeem From worlds all formless now and void, Where myriad life shall teem;

"And mighty Michael foremost fall That mortal man may be; And chosen Savior yet must send, Lo, here am I-send me! I ask, I seek no recompense, Save that which then were mine; Mine be the willing sacrifice, The endless glory Thine!" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Still rang that voice, when sudden rose Aloft a towering Form, Proudly erect as lowering peak Lumed by the gathering storm; A presence bright and beautiful, With eye of flashing fire, A lip whose haughty curl bespoke A sense of inward ire.

"Send me!"—coiled 'neath his courtly smile A scarce-concealed disdain- "And none shall hence, from Heaven to Earth, That shall not rise again. My saving plan exception scorns. Man's will?-nay, mine alone. As recompense, I claim the right To sit on yonder Throne!"

Ceased Lucifer. The breathless hush Resumed and denser grew. All eyes were turned; the general gaze One common Magnet drew. A moment there was solemn pause— Listened Eternity, While rolled from lips omnipotent The Father's firm decree:

"Jehovah, thou my Messenger! Son Ahman, thee I send! And one shall go thy face before, While twelve thy steps attend. And many more on that far shore The pathway shall prepare, That I, the First, the last may come, And Earth my glory share. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . "Go forth, thou chosen of the Gods, Whose strength shall in thee dwell! Go down betime and rescue Earth, Dethroning Death and Hell. On thee alone man's fate depends, The fate of beings all, Thou shalt not fail, though thou art free- Free, but too great to fall.

"By Arm divine, both mine and thine, The lost shalt thou restore, And man, redeemed, with God shall be, As God forevermore.

Return, and to the parent fold This wandering planet bring, And Earth shall hail thee Conqueror, And Heaven proclaim thee King." 'Twas done. From congregation vast, Tumultuous murmurs rose; Waves of conflicting sound, as when Two meeting seas oppose. 'Twas finished. But the heavens wept; And still their annals tell How One was choice of Elohim, O'er One who fighting fell.

(Voices from the Mountains, n.p., n.d.)

The Father came, Elohim, with his son, Jehovah or Jesus Christ, to open the dispensation of the fullness of times. In a lesson on delegation that few have noted, the Father in seven words commissioned the Son to represent him. In seven words it was done: "This is my Beloved Son, Hear Him." We are free not to do it. We are free to listen to one another. We are free to heed those of the world. We are free to listen to perverse or wicked spirits. But if we want to know what counsel would be given from Elohim Himself we must seek our direction always "in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ." The Church is named for Him, as it was anciently.

After the First Vision the Lord sent other heavenly messengers; at times of crucial moment He accompanied them to introduce them. This was true on April 3, 1836, when the house of the Lord had been completed and the keys were to be given; the Lord Himself appeared, standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, to give consummate approval and authority for what was to occur.

Ordinances Performed Only in Temples

It is my hope to enlarge your understanding as to why the temples are built and as to why the ordinances and ceremonies are performed there; as to why we do some of the things we do with reference to the holy temples and why we do not do some other things concerning them. As I say in the introduction, I will not discuss the sacred ordinances and ceremonies of the temple further than has previously been published about them by the Church. But the things that are included in this book will, I hope, deepen your reverence for and appreciation of the holy temple.

We do not single out the one temple, the Salt Lake Temple, as being better in any respect than any of the others. It is bigger than most, but in its purpose, in the ceremonies that take place within, in the ordinances that are performed, and in the authority by which they are done it is the same as the others; exactly and precisely the same. The smallest of the temples in the most remote place on earth will be quite as much the house of the Lord as the one most central to the headquarters of the Church.

In the Church we build other buildings of many kinds. In them we worship, we teach, we find recreation, we organize. We can organize stakes and wards and missions and quorums and Relief Societies in these buildings or even in rented halls. But, when we organize families according to the order that the Lord has revealed, we organize them in the temples. Temple marriage, that sealing ordinance, is a crowning blessing that you may claim in the holy temple.

Redemption for the Dead

Around the turn of the century two missionaries were laboring in the mountain region of the southern part of the United States. One day, as they were walking along a ridge in the hill country, they saw people gathering in a clearing near a cabin some distance down the hillside. Because in the hill country the people were scattered, the missionaries did not often have a congregation to whom they might preach. They were attracted by this gathering and made their way down to the clearing.

They discovered that there was to be a funeral. A little boy had been drowned. His parents had sent for the minister to "say words" at the burial of the little fellow. The minister, who rode the circuit, only occasionally would visit these isolated families. But when there was to be a wedding, or when there was trouble, they would send for him.

The elders stayed in the background to watch the proceedings. The little fellow was to be buried in the grave already opened near the cabin. The minister stood before the grieving father and mother and the others gathered and began his funeral sermon. If the parents expected to receive consolation from this man of the cloth, they would be disappointed.

He scolded them severely for not having had the little boy baptized. They had put it off because of one thing or another, and now it was too late. He told them very bluntly that their little boy had gone to hell. He told them that it was their fault, that they were to blame—they had caused their son endless torment.

After the sermon was over and the grave was covered, the friends, neighbors, and relatives left the scene. The elders approached the grieving parents: "We are servants of the Lord," they told the sobbing mother, "and we have come with a message for you."

As the grief-stricken parents listened, the two teenage elders unfolded to their view something of a vision of the eternities. They read from the revelations and they bore to these humble, grief-stricken parents their testimony of the restoration of the keys for the redemption of both the living and the dead.

I do not berate the itinerant preacher. Indeed, I have some sympathy for him, for he was doing the best he knew how to do with such light and knowledge as he had received. But there is more than he had to give. There is the fullness of the gospel.

The elders came as comforters, as teachers, as servants of the Lord, as authorized ministers of the gospel of Jesus Christ. They came, having been "called of God by prophecy and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

One of those humble elders, when a very old man, told me of this experience. More than half a century had passed. He bore testimony and expressed his gratitude that we have so much to share. The path he pointed out to those humble folk was more than conversion and repentance and baptism; for, to those who will follow, in due time that path leads to the sacred rooms of the holy temple. There members of the Church who make themselves eligible can participate in the most exalted and sacred of the redeeming ordinances that have been revealed to mankind. There we may be washed and anointed and instructed and endowed and sealed. And when we have received these blessings for ourselves, we may officiate for those who have died without having had the same opportunity. In the temples the sacred ordinances are performed for the living and for the dead alike.

Without those sacred ordinances and the truth they represent, those humble elders might have given little more comfort than the poor minister who had no knowledge of the Restoration. But we in the Church have that knowledge, and it rests upon us as a great responsibility.

Privilege of Temple Attendance

It is a privilege to enter the holy temple. You should know the things that are required of you and understand the doctrine that underlies the work that is performed in the house of the Lord. This may inspire you to move forward with your individual part of that work. You will gain something of a vision of what lies ahead for those who participate in those sacred ordinances, for those who keep their covenants, and for those for whom they officiate.

As we proceed to review the subject of the holy temples and the blessings each of us may claim within them, do not be surprised if you notice some repetition. This is intended. You may find a particular concept or doctrinal point discussed in more than one context, a scripture or a statement from one of the prophets used in more than one chapter. For this no apology is offered. It is deliberate. For did not Moroni repeat three times in one night his message to the Prophet Joseph Smith and then return the next day to repeat it a fourth time?

You should come to the temple. You really should! It may be that you look forward to the once-in-a-lifetime privilege of going there to receive your own endowment, to receive your own blessings, and to enter into your own covenants with the Lord. It may be that you have been there once or twice already. It may be that you go frequently. It may even be that you are an officiator. Whatever the circumstances may be, you should come to the temple.

If you are eligible by the standards that are set, by all means you should come to receive your own blessings; and thereafter you should return again and again and again to make those same blessings available to others who have died without the opportunity to receive them in mortality.

You should not come to the temple until you are eligible, until you meet the requirements that the Lord has set, but you should come; if not now, as soon as you can qualify.

Transcendent Doctrine

The doctrine that underlies the work in the holy temple, more than any other thing, sets The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints apart from and transcendent above every other religious organization on the face of the earth. We have something that no other religious denomination has. We can give something that they cannot extend.

What is represented by the humble elders comforting the grieving parents before that modest cabin is central to the doctrines of this Church and to the work that takes place in the holy temple. We have something to give that can be obtained in no other place. We have an answer to the question that can be found with none else.

A few years ago a mother came to my office seeking help and comfort with some weighty problems. She told me the story of her life before she joined the Church. It had been a hard life. She had been abandoned by her husband and left to raise a little boy. When he was nine years old he contracted a fatal disease. He came to know, in his little boy mind, that he would not live. And for the last two or three weeks of his life he would cling to his mother and say, "Mama, you won't forget me, will you? Mama, please don't forget me. Mama, I won't be forgotten, will I?"

I was deeply moved, for I sensed that exposed in the pleadings of this little boy is something of the feeling of every soul who has ever lived We hope that, somehow at least, we will be remembered. We hope that there will be something about us worth remembering.

This mother would never forget her little boy. Our Heavenly Father does not forget, and he has provided, through the ministry of His Son, the way that all may be remembered and all can be redeemed.

The question on the mind of this little boy and the anguish in the hearts of those grieving parents can be satisfied only in the doctrines of this Church. The doctrines center on the holy temple.

When the Lord was upon the earth He made it very clear that there was one way, and one way only, by which man may be saved. "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6.) To proceed on that way, two things emerge as being firmly fixed. First, in His name rests the authority to secure the salvation of mankind; "for there is none other name under heaven given... whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.) Second, there is an essential ordinance-baptism-standing as a gate through which every soul must pass to obtain eternal life.

The Lord was neither hesitant nor apologetic in proclaiming exclusive authority over those processes, all of them in total, by which we may return to the presence of our Heavenly Father. This ideal was clear in the minds of His apostles also, and their preaching provided for one way, and one way only, for men to save themselves.

Over the centuries men saw that many, indeed most, never found that way. This became very hard to explain. Perhaps they thought it to be generous to accept the idea that there are other ways. So they tempered or tampered with the doctrine.

This rigid emphasis on "one Lord and one baptism" was thought to be too restrictive and too exclusive, even though the Lord Himself had described it as being narrow, for "strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life." (Matthew 7:14.)

The Proselyting Assignment

Since baptism is essential, there must be an urgent concern to carry the message of the gospel of Jesus Christ to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. That proselyting assignment came as a commandment from Him.

His true servants will be out to convert to the principles of the gospel all who will hear, and they will offer them that one baptism which He proclaimed as essential. The preaching of the gospel is evident to one degree or another in most Christian churches. Most of the adherents, however, are content to enjoy whatever they can gain from membership in their church without any real effort to see that others hear about it.

The powerful missionary spirit and the vigorous missionary activity in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints becomes a very significant witness that the true gospel and the authority are possessed in this church. We accept the responsibility to preach the gospel to every person on earth. And if the question is asked, "You mean you are out to convert the entire world?" the answer is, "Yes. We will try to reach every living soul."

Some who measure that challenge say quickly, "Why, that's impossible! It cannot be done!"

To that we simply say, "Perhaps, but we shall do it anyway."

Against the assertion that it cannot be done, we are willing to commit every resource that can be righteously accumulated to this work. Now, while our effort may seem modest when measured against the challenge, it is hard to ignore when measured against what is being accomplished, or even what is being attempted, elsewhere.

Presently we have tens of thousands of missionaries serving in the field—and paying for the privilege. Any one of them would be evidence enough if the source of the individual conviction that each carries were recognized.

We ask no relief of the assignment to seek out every living soul, teach them the gospel, and offer them baptism. And we are not discouraged, for there is a great power in this work, and that can be verified by anyone who is sincerely inquiring.

Baptism Must Be Offered Also to Dead

There is another characteristic that identifies the Lord's church and also has to do with baptism. There is a very provoking and a very disturbing question about those who died without baptism. What about them? If there is none other name given under heaven whereby man must be saved (and that is true), and they have lived and died without even hearing that name, and if baptism is essential (and it is), and they died without even the invitation to accept it, where are they now?

That question is hard to fathom. The itinerant preacher we spoke of earlier had no answer. That situation describes most of the human family.

There are several non-Christian religions larger than most of the Christian denominations, and together those religions are larger than all of the Christian denominations combined. Their adherents for centuries have lived and died and never heard the word baptism. What is the answer for them?

That is a most disturbing question. What power would establish one Lord and one baptism and then allow it to happen that most of the human family never comes within the influence of its doctrines? With that question unanswered, the vast majority of the human family must be admitted to be lost, including the little boy who drowned-and against any reasonable application of the law of justice, or of mercy, either. In those circumstances, how could Christianity itself be sustained?

If a church has no answer to this dilemma, how can it lay claim to be the Lord's church? Surely He is not willing to write off the majority of the human family because they were never baptized while on earth.

In all reason, those who admit in puzzled frustration that they have no answer to this question cannot lay claim to authority to administer the affairs of the Lord on the earth, or to oversee the work by which all mankind must be saved.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said very tersely:

One dies and is buried, having never heard the Gospel of reconciliation; to the other the message of salvation is sent, he hears and embraces it, and is made the heir of eternal life. Shall the one become the partaker of glory and the other be consigned to hopeless perdition? Is there no chance for his escape? Sectarianism answers "none." Such an idea is worse than atheism. The truth shall break down and dash in pieces all such bigoted Pharisaism; the sects shall be sifted, the honest in heart brought out, and their priests left in the midst of their corruption. (Joseph Smith, Jr., History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1949], 4:425-26; hereafter cited as HC.)

Since they had no answer concerning the fate of those who had not been baptized, many Christians came to believe that baptism itself was not critical in importance, and that the name of Christ may not be all that essential. There must, they supposed, be other names whereby man could be saved.

The answer to the puzzling challenge could not be invented by men. It had to be, and was, revealed. Revelation too is an essential characteristic of His church. Communication with Him through revelation was established when the Church was established. It has not ceased, and it is constant in the Church today.

Whenever I address myself to the question of those who died without baptism, I do so with the deepest reverence, for it touches on a sacred work. Little known to the world, we move obediently forward in a work that is marvelous in its prospects, transcendent above what man might have dreamed of, supernal, inspired, and true. In it is the answer.

In the earliest days of the Church the Prophet Joseph Smith was given direction through revelation that work should commence on the building of a temple akin to the temples that had been constructed anciently. There was revealed ordinance work to be performed there for the salvation of mankind.

Then another ancient scripture, ignored or overlooked by the Christian world in general, was understood and moved into prominence: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Corinthians 15:29.) Notice the way this verse is handled in other translations of the Bible.

If the dead will not come back to life again, then what point is there in people being baptized for those who are gone? Why do it unless you believe that the dead will some day rise again? (The Living Bible.)

Again, there are those who receive baptism on behalf of the dead. Why should they do this? If the dead are not raised to life at all, what do they mean by being baptized on their behalf? (The New English Bible.)

Otherwise, if there is no such thing as a resurrection, what is the meaning of people getting baptized on behalf of their dead? If dead men do not rise at all, why do people get baptized on their behalf? (A New Translation of the Bible, Moffatt.)

If the dead are not raised, what about those who have themselves baptized on behalf of the dead? If the raising of the dead is not a reality, why be baptized on their behalf? (The New American Bible.)

The whole point of this biblical passage is that baptism for the dead is meaningless unless there is to be a resurrection. This point is well expressed by the Reverend J. R. Dummelow: "The Resurrection alone gives an adequate motive for (a) baptism for the dead...." (A Commentary on the Holy Bible [New York: Macmillan Company, 1936], page 919.)

Roy W. Doxey wrote:

If you assume that there is no validity to the practice of baptism for the dead as understood by the Corinthians, you will be unable to explain why Jesus in the interim between his death and resurrection went into the spirit world and preached the gospel. (1 Peter 3: 19-20; 4:6.) For what purpose? It is plain from Paul's writings that the purpose of the Savior's preaching to the spirits in prison was to give people who have never had an opportunity to receive the atoning sacrifice of Jesus in mortality an opportunity to hear the gospel, that vicarious baptism might then be performed for them.

When Paul discussed salvation regarding those who lived before the time of Christ, he gave us to understand clearly that though faith existed among many of these people, they were given the promise that God's people ("us") would provide the means whereby "they" (the dead) might receive salvation. "And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise: God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect." (Hebrews 11:39, 40; italics added.) [From an unpublished letter. ]

Here, then, was the answer. With proper authority a mortal person could be baptized for and in behalf of someone who had not had that opportunity before passing on. That individual would then accept or reject the baptism in the spirit world, according to his own desire.

This work came as a great reaffirmation of something very basic that the Christian world now only partly believes-that there is life after death. Mortal death is no more an ending than birth was a beginning. The great work of redemption goes on beyond the veil as well as here in mortality.

The Lord said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live." (John 5:25.)

On October 3, 1918, President Joseph F. Smith was pondering on the scriptures, including this passage from Peter: "For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (1 Peter 4:6.)

There was opened to him a marvelous vision. In it he saw the concourses of the righteous in the spirit world. And he saw Christ ministering among them. Then he saw those who had not had the opportunity of the gospel in mortality, and those who had rejected the truth after receiving that opportunity. And he saw the work for their redemption. I quote from his record of this vision:

I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them;

But behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead. (D&C 138:29-30.)

We have been authorized to perform baptisms vicariously for the dead, so that, when they hear the gospel preached and desire to accept it, that essential ordinance will have been performed. They need not ask for any exemption from that essential ordinance. Indeed, the Lord Himself was not exempted from it.

Here and now, then, we move to accomplish the work to which we are assigned. We are busily engaged in that kind of baptism. We gather the records of our kindred dead, indeed insofar as possible the records of the entire human family; and in sacred temples, in baptismal fonts designed as those were anciently, we perform the sacred saving ordinances.

"Strange," one may say. It is passing strange. It is transcendent and supernal. The very nature of the work testifies that Jesus Christ is our Lord, that baptism is essential, that He taught the truth.

And so the question may be asked, "You mean you are out to make baptism available for all men?"

And the answer is simply, "Yes." For we have been commanded to do so.

"You mean for the entire human family? Why, that is impossible! If the preaching of the gospel to all who are living is a formidable challenge, then the vicarious work for all who have ever lived is impossible indeed."

To that we say, "Perhaps, but we shall do all that we can do." We do not know how many will accept the ordinance. Some may not be eligible to accept it.

The principles and ordinances of the gospel all point to the celestial kingdom. The Lord has not given us direction as to the lower kingdoms, save to warn us that by falling short of the higher mark we will inherit a lesser reward.

Baptism is required for entrance into the celestial kingdom. Some who have lived may be disqualified from entering there. Such matters are settled beyond the veil.

The Lord has not shown us the way to judge those who have lived before. We are to do the work for them to the limits of our resources. We are to see that none will be denied the opportunity to choose because of our failure.

And once again we certify that we are not discouraged. We ask no relief of the assignment, no excuse from fulfilling it. Our effort today is modest indeed when viewed against the challenge. But we have come to know that our accomplishments, so far as they have gone, have been pleasing to the Lord. We do not suggest that the size of the effort should be impressive, for we are not doing nearly as well as we should be. But already we have collected hundreds of millions of names, and the work goes forward in the temples and will go on in other temples that will be built.

Those who thoughtfully consider the work inquire about those names that cannot be collected. "What about those for whom no record was ever kept? Surely you will fail there. There is no way you can search out those names."

To this I simply observe, "You have forgotten revelation." Already we have been directed to many records through that process. Revelation comes to individual members as they are led to discover their family records in ways that are miraculous indeed. And there is a feeling of inspiration attending this work that can be found in no other. When we have done all that we can do, we shall be given the rest. The way will be opened up.

Every Latter-day Saint is responsible for this work. Without this work, the saving ordinances of the gospel would apply to so few who have ever lived that the gospel could not be claimed to be true.

Probably no point of doctrine sets this Church apart from the other claimants as this one does. Save for it, we would, with all of the other churches, have to accept the clarity with which the New Testament declares baptism to be essential and then admit that most of the human family could never have it.

But we have the revelations. We have those sacred ordinances. The revelation that places upon us the obligation for this baptism for the dead is section 128 in the Doctrine and Covenants. Consider two or three of the closing verses of that section.

Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison....

Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! . . .

. . . Let us, therefore, as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple . . . a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation. (D&C 128:22-24.)

Come to the Temple

But temple opportunities differ in the worldwide Church, and some members presently look toward the temple with very little hope that it will be their privilege to enter that holy house. Some live at such a distance from a temple and are so pressed financially that it does not seem possible for this blessing to be theirs. Others may be tied by bonds of marriage and by bonds of love to a companion who does not yet sense the meaning of the word temple. That companion may have little sympathy, and may even show antagonism, toward the yearning to enter the house of the Lord. Some may be frail in health and wonder if they will ever recover and be able to enter the temple. Some are aged and feel that in this life that dream will not be realized. And there are others whose lives are troubled, who are tainted with transgression and who have lived through a complicated history of mistake followed by mistake.

To all of you I say, "Come to the temple." If not now, come then. Pray fervently, set your lives in order, save whatever you can in hopes that that day may come. Start now that very difficult and sometimes very discouraging journey of repentance. For some of you at great distances the temples will come to you before you might come to them. I urge you all to keep your faith and your hope and determine that you will come-that you will be worthy and that you will come to the temple.

It has been my observation that the temple transforms the individual and makes abundantly worthwhile any efforts made to get there. Let me recount an experience.

In 1979 I dedicated a small chapel in San Andreas Itzapa, Guatemala. The chapel is located on the end of a street near the edge of the city. It is a modest chapel, but the thriving branch was joyous at moving from the makeshift shelter where they had been holding meetings. For the most part the branch members were very humble people with very little in the way of material blessings. My impression of the experience there centered on a tiny woman, the mother of the branch president.

Before the meeting she came forward. She did not come up to my shoulder. She had lost most of her teeth and she appeared to be very old. She was radiant! She looked different from most of the others. There was something about her that was just aglow. She looked clean and intelligent and happy. As she came to shake hands she embraced me. She hugged me very tightly with her head pressed against my chest, and the first words she spoke I understood, even with my meager knowledge of Spanish. "Yo a tengo a el templo"—I have been to the temple!

We conversed to the limits of my meager Spanish, and as she was about to return to her seat she pointed to the branch president and said, "This is my son. He also has been to the temple." He stood there in a white suit with his lovely wife, who was dressed in modest, appropriate, refined clothing. They impressed me-surely they would fit in at a reception of dignified community leaders in one of the large cities of Latin America. They were set apart-not only by virtue of his calling as a branch president, but by virtue of the fact that they had been to the temple.

I cannot imagine their financial sacrifice in getting to the temple. But I know something of the trip they must have taken on rickety buses, traveling sometimes day and night, north through the jungles of Central America, the full length of Mexico, across the deserts and mountains, through the border at Nogales and on to Mesa, Arizona-a trip of many days and many nights with no air conditioning, no comforts or conveniences. But what did it matter? They were going to the temple! I have organized stakes where not one of the officers had been to the temple-no member of the stake presidency, no members of bishoprics, no auxiliary officers. But they would get there-eight days and nights across the Andes from Santiago, Chile, through Argentina to Brazil.

I was told in South America how impressed some of the temple officials were with the spiritual dedication of the humble people who traveled from the far reaches of Latin America to come to the temple in Brazil. They were greatly impressed because many of the visitors apparently were determined to fast the entire time they were at the temple. And then one day we learned that it was not entirely a matter of devotion. They had so meager a budget to get them to the temple and return that, apart from their bus ticket, they had very little money, and they could not eat on those days simply because they could not afford it.

I hope these examples of dedication and sacrifice will touch the hearts of you for whom temple attendance is a much easier matter. Whether you need to put your personal life in order to obtain a temple recommend or whether you are just careless about this work and have allowed worldly matters to take precedence-whatever the reason, be moved to make the change. Firmly resolve now that you will do everything you can do to aid temple work and the genealogical work that supports it and to assist every living soul and every soul beyond the veil in every way you can with every resource at your disposal.

Come to the temple!

Trifle not with sacred things. (D&C 6:12.)

---
Notas:
[^1] (Words spoken by Moroni, the angel, to Joseph Smith the Prophet, while in his father's house at Manchester, New York, on the evening of September 21, 1823.)
