Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

2

These Things Are Sacred

A careful reading of the scriptures reveals that the Lord did not tell all things to all people. There were some qualifications set that were prerequisite to receiving sacred information. Such things were to come "line upon line, precept upon precept," as people were able to receive them.

Temple ceremonies are not something that we try to limit to a restricted number of people. With great effort we urge every soul to qualify and prepare for the temple experience. Everyone who comes within the influence of the gospel is urged to prepare to go to the temple and participate fully in the sacred ordinances which are available there.

Our reluctance to speak of the sacred temple ordinances is not in any way an attempt to make them seem more mysterious or to encourage an improper curiosity about them. The ordinances and ceremonies of the temple are simple. They are beautiful. They are sacred. They are kept confidential lest they be given to those who are unprepared. Curiosity is not a preparation. Deep interest itself is not a preparation. Preparation for the ordinances includes preliminary steps: faith, repentance, baptism, confirmation, worthiness, a maturity and dignity worthy of one who comes invited as a guest into the house of the Lord.

In order that you may understand and respect the need to hold in confidence the detailed nature of the temple ceremonies, let us explore the question of why the Lord would direct us to refrain from talking about them outside of that sacred building. It is a matter of preparation. We must be prepared before we go to the temple. We must be worthy before we go to the temple. There are restrictions and conditions set. They were established by the Lord and not by man.

Preparation for Higher Instruction

Most educational programs require the completion of basic or prerequisite courses before one can register for advanced courses. At a university you cannot register for a graduate course in chemistry, or even an advanced course, until completing the basic or elementary courses. This principle of prerequisites is well understood in everyday life. It should not surprise anyone when it is applied to the ordinances of the gospel. That is common sense. Without the fundamental principles of chemistry, an advanced course may well be a mistake. To understand advanced chemistry, a brilliant mind would need to know about basic elements, atoms and molecules, about electrons and protons, about compounds, properties-formulas and equations-and solutions and suspensions and mixtures.

Chemistry might be called a vertical field. A foundation of must be built before one can proceed upward. Someone may think himself a genius who could register for a graduate course in chemistry and, without the prerequisite courses or even an introduction to the fundamentals, survive and pull down a top grade. That would take a genius indeed! If you attempt to master the advanced course first, you will end in confusion. You will learn to dislike the subject, perhaps the teacher, and wonder about a school that would subject you to such misery.

This elementary principle of prerequisite courses applies to virtually every discipline and relates to virtually all subject matters. I recall taking a course in statistics in the early days of my master's program. It wasn't my favorite subject, for somewhere in elementary or secondary schooling I had missed some of the basics of mathematical computations. After considerable struggle I passed the course with an adequate grade. I avoided the subject after that, compensating in other areas. But finally, as it will, came the day of reckoning. Nine years later there stood between me and the degree of doctor of education a single course-advanced statistics. I struggled to remember things that really I hadn't previously learned, and it was a special kind of suffering. How I struggled with those formulas, writing them on the blackboard at night, trying to photograph them on my mind so I could produce an acceptable copy on a test paper before the instructor! I passed the course but I learned how important it is to learn fundamentals before moving to advanced work. This is true of most activities of life.

Now, not all of us are going to use the higher rules of statistics or chemistry. Most of us may manage quite well without having had an advanced course in these subjects. But there are some courses that must universally be mastered if we are to find happiness and fulfillment in life. Essential life activities must be mastered in the same way, fundamentals first and then more advanced ideals built on the foundations of the basic principles.

It should not seem unusual, then, that the Lord has decreed in His church that admission to the temple comes only after certain prerequisites have been filled. It should not seem unusual that certain preparation and worthiness should be established before these privileges are given.

Sacredness Requires Confidentiality

There are some blessings which can be bestowed only in the Lord's temple, and we do not talk of them outside the temple. But all who are worthy and qualify in every way may enter the temple, there to be introduced to the sacred rites and ordinances. This is not the secrecy of restrictiveness. Rather it is the sacredness required for covenants offered to all of God's children in His way. Clearly there is much difference between treating something as sacred and keeping something secret.

It is not unusual that the Lord told Joseph Smith, "Make not thy gift known unto any save it be those who are of thy faith. Trifle not with sacred things" (D&C 6:12).

It is not unusual that He repeated this counsel after He had shown Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon "great and marvelous . . . works of the Lord, and the mysteries of his kingdom" (D&C 76:114). Of these the Prophet recorded:

Which he commanded us we should not write while we were yet in the Spirit, and are not lawful for man to utter;

Neither is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him;

To whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves. (D&C 76:115-17.)

The Lord has every right and authority to direct that matters relating to the temple be kept sacred and confidential.

Questions about the temple ceremony usually meet with the response, "We are not free to discuss the temple ordinances and ceremonies." Those who have not been to the temple sometimes ask, "Why is it so secret?"

If "secret" means that others are permanently prevented from knowing of them, then secret is the wrong word These things are sacred.

It was never intended that knowledge of these temple ceremonies would be limited to a select few who would be obliged to ensure that others never learn of them. It is quite the opposite, in fact. Those who have been to the temple have been taught an ideal. Someday every living soul and every soul who has ever lived shall have the opportunity to hear the gospel and to accept or reject what the temple offers. If this opportunity is rejected, the rejection must be on the part of the individual himself.

In the Church we continually stress the highest standards of worthiness. The youth of the Church are urged to prepare themselves for temple marriage. In the most reverent terms we talk about temples and what they mean. And across the Church we continually schedule meetings for married couples who have not yet been to the temple. These meetings, under various titles, embrace the theme of preparation for the temple.

When a member reports to the bishop seeking an initial temple recommend, the bishop gives counsel regarding what will be expected in the temple. Always this is in the most general terms. While we make reference to washings and anointings, sealings and endowments, we do not discuss the details.

In the Book of Mormon, Alma instructs Zeezrom in these words:

And now Alma began to expound these things unto him, saying: It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him.

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell. (Alma 12:9-11.)

Sometimes nonmembers become very inquisitive as to what goes on in the temples. They quickly learn that members of the Church are not willing to talk about those matters, and they wonder what the nature of the ceremonies might be. Lacking knowledge, some have developed strange explanations about the work of our temples.

Some things concerning the temple ordinances have been published by apostates who seek to injure or destroy the Church. Their accounts do not assist understanding, partly because the accounts are usually distorted. In any case the temple ordinances cannot be understood without the feeling and the spiritual presence that surrounds them in the temple. They must make very dull reading indeed for the enemy who has no right to the Spirit of the Lord.

President Joseph Fielding Smith told of a person who directed an attack upon the Church and cited the so-called secrecy about temple ordinances as evidence that things were not in order. The critic quoted from the Savior's words in the New Testament: "Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing. Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said." (John 18:20-21.)

Then, making reference to our unwillingness to discuss the temple ordinances, the critic said: "Christ was not afraid of any revealments. He stood there among His enemies, defying them to find any fault with His teachings." The critic asserted that Brigham Young was not willing to reveal "his doctrine and secret works" and asked the question, "Did he represent Christ?" (Joseph Fielding Smith, Origin of the "Reorganized" Church and the Question of Succession [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1929], page 97.)

Members of the Church all over the world face similar questions. These questions need not disturb nor shake the faith of anyone. Those who take the position of this critic have not read the scriptures carefully. When we consider other statements of the Lord another dimension is added, for there are scriptures, equally as valid as John 18, which broaden our understanding and show us that the Lord did indeed restrict some information, giving it only to those who were prepared and qualified.

On the Mount of Transfiguration, Peter, James, and John saw the Lord transfigured before them. With Him were two personages whom they knew to be Moses and Elias (Elijah). An important point may be made in the present context. "And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead." (Matthew 17:9; italics added.)

Commenting upon this subject, President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

We are told that the Book of Mormon contains the fullness of the Gospel, yet the greater parts of the teachings of the Savior to that people are not yet revealed, because of the unbelief of the people. This from Third Nephi, the 26th chapter:

"And now there cannot be written in this book even a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people;

"But behold the plates of Nephi do contain the more part of the things which he taught the people.

"And these things have I written, which are a lesser part of the things which he taught the people; and I have written them to the intent that they may be brought again unto this people, from the Gentiles, according to the words which Jesus hath spoken.

"And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be manifest unto them.

"And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation.

"Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people." (3 Nephi 26:6-11.) (Origin of the "Reorganized" Church, pages 99-100.)

In the same context President Smith made reference to the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon plates and quoted the following verses:

Behold, I have written upon these plates the very things which the brother of Jared saw; and there never were greater things made manifest than those which were made manifest unto the brother of Jared.

Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me to write them; and I have written them. And he commanded me that I should seal them up; and he also hath commanded that I should seal up the interpretation thereof; wherefore I have sealed up the interpreters, according to the commandment of the Lord.

For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become dean before the Lord. (Ether 4:4-6.)

On one occasion the Prophet Joseph Smith was instructing some of the Brethren in the upper part of his store in Nauvoo. The room they were in was his "office," because it was there that, as he said, "I keep my sacred writings, translate ancient records, and receive revelations." The Brethren present included Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards. He was "instructing them in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church. . . ."

And then the Prophet Joseph said this:

The communications I made to this council were of things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual minded: and there was nothing made known to these men but will be made known to all the Saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the Saints; therefore let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple, and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, knowing assuredly that all these things referred to in this council are always governed by the principle of revelation. (HC, 5:2; italics added.)

I quote again from President Joseph Fielding Smith:

In the book of Abraham (See Pearl of Great Price) published by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Times and Seasons in 1842, is given a facsimile of hieroglyphics with an accompanying translation by Joseph Smith, as far as he was permitted to translate. These figures are numbered from 1 to 20. Here are some of these translations and comments of the Prophet:

Figure 3.-Is made to represent God, sitting upon His throne, clothed with power and authority; with a crown of eternal light upon His head; representing also the grand key-words of the Holy Priesthood, as revealed to Adam, etc. Figure 7.-Represents God sitting upon His throne revealing through the heavens, the grand keywords of the Priesthood, as, also, the sign of the Holy Ghost unto Abraham, in the form of a dove. Figure 8.-Contains writing that cannot be revealed unto the world, but is to be had in the Holy Temple of God. Figures 9, 10, 11, the Prophet says "Ought not to be revealed at the present time; if the world can find out these numbers, so let it be. Amen." Figures 12 to 20, "Will be given in the own due time of the Lord." Then the Prophet concludes: "The above translation is given as far as we have any right to give, at the present time."

Here, then, we find things that were to be taught to the Saints in the Temple of the Lord, but were not to be revealed to the world; for they are sacred and holy, and can only be had in the Temple of God, for the Lord through Joseph Smith declared it.

Again, in verse 28 (see 124), the Lord says: "For there is not a place found on earth that he may come and restore again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the fullness of the Priesthood." Therefore, we learn that only in the Temple of the Lord can the fullness of the Priesthood be received by His people. (Origin of the "Reorganized" Church, page 103.)

Temples Before and After Dedication

The restriction preventing nonmembers from visiting the dedicated temples does not suggest that there is anything about the building or its appointments that they should not see. Prior to the dedication of temples in each case an open house is held. This is continued for as many days as it is reasonably expected that people will want to tour the temple. Tours are arranged so that those who enter can see samples of most, if not all, of the rooms of the temple. The tours could visit every room in the temple except for the matter of convenience in conducting the tours. Therefore service areas and other areas of less interest to the visitors are generally not seen. Prior to the dedication of a temple the privilege to visit the temple is widely advertised with the hope that all within the area, member and nonmember, will visit the temple and become familiar with the building.

Even worthy members are not invited to the temple after dedication just to be in the building. Members with recommends do not go to the temple unless they have a specific purpose for going there, a specific ordinance in which to participate. There is a practical reason for not inviting everyone to come to the temples. If all who took a fancy to do so, whether nonmembers or members, were allowed to tour the temples, the temple work would be disrupted and delayed.

Consider the definition of the word dedication as it applies to temples. When a developer prepares a tract of land for the building of homes, he makes provision for streets. But the streets will not be the property of homeowners. These are deeded to the community. The process of deeding that property to the community is called dedication. A street that is "dedicated" becomes the property of the community, which has some responsibility to maintain it and to set the conditions under which the public might use it. In simple terms, the developer gives his ownership of that property to the community.

Something similar to that happens when we dedicate a temple. While members of the Church may have contributed the money to build the temple and may themselves have labored to construct it, it is not theirs once it is dedicated. The dedication of a temple, in a real way, gives the building and all of the landscaping and structures related to the temple site to the Lord. The temple itself becomes literally the house of the Lord. The word temple comes from the word ten, plum, which is defined as the abode of Deity or simply the house of the Lord.

Elder James E. Talmage defines the temple as "a building constructed for and exclusively devoted to sacred rites and ceremonies." (James E. Talmage, The House of the Lord [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1962], page 1.)

After a temple is dedicated we do not feel we own it. It is the Lord's house. He directs the conditions under which it may be used. He has revealed the ordinances that should be performed therein and has established the standards and conditions under which we may participate in them. He has full control over the authority of the priesthood by which the ordinances are performed and the standards pertaining to who may be ordained to the offices of the priesthood and under what conditions. Those who are called as sealers in the temple are set apart only by direct authority held by the President of the Church. This should illustrate the deep regard in which these ordinances are held and the limitations that the Lord has set upon who may perform them. It should not be surprising that there should be limitations as to those who may receive them and those who may witness them. It should not, therefore, seem strange that the temples are held sacred, for all who will prepare themselves by repentance, by baptism, by preparation in worthiness to meet the qualifications, may enter therein to participate in the ordinances offered in the house of the Lord. When we go there we go as His servants.

Few words in the revelations have more meaning for the temple ordinances and ceremonies than these words from the second chapter of First Corinthians.

But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him.

But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man.

For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ. (1 Corinthians 2:9-16.)

Without the spiritual atmosphere of the temple itself, and without the worthiness and preparation required of those who go there, the temple ceremonies would not be quickly understood and might be quite misunderstood. Therefore I am content with the restrictions the Lord has placed on them.

While we cannot discuss in detail the temple ordinances and ceremonies, there is much we can discuss in this book-and we will.

But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him (1 John 2:27)
