Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

3

Taught from on High

Come to the temple to learn. The temple is a great school. It is a house of learning. In the temples the atmosphere is maintained so that it is ideal for instruction on matters that are deeply spiritual. The late Dr. John A. Widtsoe of the Quorum of the Twelve was a distinguished university president and a world-renowned scholar in his field. He had great reverence for temple work and said on one occasion:

The temple ordinances encompass the whole plan of salvation, as taught from time to time by the leaders of the Church, and elucidate matters difficult of understanding. There is no warping or twisting in fitting the temple teachings into the great scheme of salvation. The philosophical completeness of the endowment is one of the great arguments for the veracity of the temple ordinances. Moreover, this completeness of survey and expounding of the Gospel plan, makes temple worship one of the most effective methods in refreshing the memory concerning the whole structure of the gospel.

Another fact has always appealed to me as a strong internal evidence for the truth of temple work. The endowment and the temple work as revealed by the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith fall clearly into four distinct parts: The preparatory ordinances; the giving of instruction by lectures and representations; covenants; and, finally, tests of knowledge. I doubt that the Prophet Joseph Smith, unlearned and untrained in logic, could of himself have made the thing so logically complete. (John A. Widtsoe, "Temple Worship," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 12 [April 1921]: 58.)

Temple Instruction Symbolic

Before going to the temple for the first time, or even after many times, it may help you to realize that the teaching of the temples is done in symbolic fashion. The Lord, the Master Teacher, gave much of His instruction in this way. That is why there is so much in the scriptures. That is why there is so much in the New Testament. That is why the teachings have so many applications to so many facets of our lives.

Many years ago I taught seminary with President Abel S. Rich. He was the second seminary teacher hired in the Church and was an authority on the gospel, well-versed in the scriptures. He had been a stake president, a mission president, and a community leader. He had taught the Book of Mormon for thirty-six years and had read it many, many times from cover to cover. He had read in and quoted from it frequently.

We shared an office at the seminary building. As a new teacher I needed careful preparation and would come an hour, sometimes two, before the opening of school to get my lessons in order. He invariably had preceded me there. During that fall he was reading the Book of Mormon again. I had difficulty in preparing my lessons because he would interrupt me. "Listen to this!" he would say, with some excitement in his voice. And then he would read a passage from the Book of Mormon. "Isn't that marvelous!" he would exclaim. "I wonder when they put that in there?"

It was a new book to him and it will be new as many times as any of us can read it, for the scope of it touches the eternities.

The temple ceremony is like that. It constantly is renewing itself in the minds of those who participate. Have you ever wondered why it is that many patrons of the temple can go session after session, week after week, month after month, year after year, and never become bored or tired or resistant? At the end of that time they are quite as anxious to go as they were in their beginning days.

That is a testimony indeed. By that time, you might imagine, they could have the entire endowment memorized. Yes, they could, and I suppose some of them do, particularly those who are temple workers. How, then, could they continue to learn? The answer to that lies in the fact that the teaching in the temple is symbolic. As we grow and mature and learn from all of the experiences in life, the truths demonstrated in the temple in symbolic fashion take on a renewed meaning. The veil is drawn back a little bit more. Our knowledge and vision of the eternities expands. It is always refreshing.

To quote again from Elder Widtsoe's article:

The wonderful pedagogy of the temple service, especially appealing to me as a professional teacher, carries with it evidence of the truth of temple work. We go to the temple to be informed and directed, to be built up and to be blessed. How is all this accomplished? First by the spoken word, through the lectures and conversations, just as we do in the class room, except with more elaborate care, then by the appeal to the eye by representations by living, moving beings; and by pictorial representations [and, we would now add, filmed presentations] in the wonderfully decorated rooms. . . . Meanwhile the recipients themselves, the candidates for blessings, engage actively in the temple service. . . . Altogether our temple worship follows a most excellent pedagogical system. I wish instruction were given so well in every school room throughout the land, for we would then teach with more effect than we now do.

For these reasons, among many others, I've always felt that temple work is a direct evidence of the truth of the work reestablished by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It may be that the temple endowment and the other temple ordinances form the strongest available evidence of the divine inspiration of the Prophet Joseph Smith. ("Temple Worship," page 59.)

Spiritual truths are sometimes very difficult to teach. The most conclusive certification of man's intelligence is his ability to recreate in symbolic form the world in which he lives. He has produced the alphabet of the language, which is a system for sound and for writing. Through it he is able to write and then to read his writing. He can also verbalize the symbols and write and read and speak-all in symbols. But in using the symbols of language we become used to restricting some things to dimensions. We convey ideas by describing them in terms of size, shape, color, texture, weight, position, and a number of other features.

The reason the teaching of the gospel ofttimes is so difficult is that ideals in the gospel are such intangible things as faith, repentance, love, humility, reverence, obedience, modesty, and so forth. The dimensions of size and shape and color and texture just do not serve us there.

In teaching the gospel we do not re-create the material world around us; we deal with the intangible world within us. It is far easier to re-create the visible, tangible world around us in alphabetical symbols than to re-create the spiritual ideals and have them understood. And yet it can be done, and it can be done most effectively by using symbols.

Again quoting from Elder Widtsoe's comments:

We live in a world of symbols. We know nothing, except by symbols. We make a few marks on a sheet of paper, and we say that they form a word, which stands for love, or hate, or charity, or God or eternity. The marks may not be very beautiful to the eye. No one finds fault with the symbols on the pages of a book because they are not as mighty in their own beauty as the things which they represent. We do not quarrel with the symbol G-O-D because it is not very beautiful, yet represents the majesty of God. We are glad to have symbols, if only the meaning of the symbols is brought home to us. I speak to you tonight; you have not quarreled very much with my manner of delivery, or my choice of words; in following the meaning of the thoughts I have tried to bring home to you, you have forgotten words and manner. There are men who object to Santa Claus, because he does not exist! Such men need spectacles to see that Santa Claus is a symbol; a symbol of the love and joy of Christmas and the Christmas spirit. In the land of my birth there was no Santa Claus, but a little goat was shoved into the room, carrying with it a basket of Christmas toys and gifts. The goat of itself counted for nothing; but the Christmas spirit, which it symbolized, counted for a tremendous lot.

We live in a world of symbols. No man or woman can come out of the temple endowed as he should be, unless he has seen, beyond the symbol, the mighty realities for which the symbols stand. ("Temple Worship," page 62.)

If you will go to the temple and remember that the teaching is symbolic you will never go in the proper spirit without coming away with your vision extended, feeling a little more exalted, with your knowledge increased as to things that are spiritual. The teaching plan is superb. It is inspired. The Lord Himself, the Master Teacher, in His own teaching to His disciples taught constantly in parables, a verbal way to represent symbolically things that might otherwise be difficult to understand. He talked of the common experiences drawn from the lives of His disciples, and He told of hens and chickens, birds, flowers, foxes, trees, burglars, highwaymen, sunsets, the rich and the poor, the physician, patching clothes, pulling weeds, sweeping the house, feeding pigs, threshing grain, storing into barns, building houses, hiring help, and dozens of other things. He talked of the mustard seed, of the pearl. He wanted to teach his hearers, so he talked of simple things in a symbolic sense. None of these things is mysterious or obscure, and all of them are symbolic.

Light and Truth from Temple Ceremony

The temple ceremony will not be understood at first experience. It will be partly understood. Return again and again and again. Return to learn. Things that have troubled you or things that have been puzzling or things that have been mysterious will become known to you. Many of them will be the quiet, personal things that you really cannot explain to anyone else. But to you they are things known.

In the temple we face the sunlight of truth. The light of the temple, that understanding, shines upon us as does the light of the sun. And the shadows of sin and ignorance and error, of disappointment and failure, fall behind us. Nowhere quite equals the temple.

I learned something about our responsibility as patrons of the temple from an experience I have recorded elsewhere:

A number of years ago I served on a stake high council in Brigham City. On one occasion the stake presidency and members of the high council and their wives attended an evening temple session in the Logan Temple. One of the workers was participating in the instruction for the first time and did very poorly. He had difficulty in remembering his part and was obviously nervous and flustered. He mixed up his presentation in a way that in other places would have been considered humorous. He struggled through, however, and was gently coached and corrected by those who were with him. As much dignity and reverence was maintained as would be possible considering his difficulty.

After the session was over, the brethren from the stake presidency and the high council were standing on the walkway from the temple, waiting for our wives to meet us. One of the brethren commented in some amusement that he surely wouldn't have wanted to be that man, that night. "He really went through an ordeal," he said. "It was like being put on trial before all those people."

President Vernal Willey, characteristically a quiet man, said with some firmness, "Hold on, brethren, let's get one thing straight here. It wasn't that man that was on trial here tonight. We were." (Teach Ye Diligently [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1975], page 288.)

What we gain from the temple will depend to a large degree on what we take to the temple in the way of humility and reverence and a desire to learn. If we are teachable we will be taught by the Spirit, in the temple.

The temple itself becomes a symbol. If you have seen one of the temples at night, fully lighted, you know what an impressive sight that can be. The house of the Lord, bathed in light, standing out in the darkness, becomes symbolic of the power and the inspiration of the gospel of Jesus Christ standing as a beacon in a world that sinks ever further into spiritual darkness.

That light is symbolic too of another kind of light-spiritual light. The first temple to be dedicated in this dispensation was that in Kirtland, Ohio. It had been built at great cost and sacrifice to the relatively small number of members of the Church in that day. The design of the temple was preliminary. It was built as a house wherein the Lord could reveal Himself to His servants, where other heavenly beings could restore priesthood keys essential to the salvation of mankind, and where the faithful Saints would be blessed with an increase of spiritual power and enlightenment. The dedication of the temple was attended by a marvelous spiritual manifestation, some features of which were witnessed by many who were not members of the Church.

There are in the standard works no fewer than 128 references to light used symbolically to represent things that are spiritual. Here are samples from each of the standard works. From the Old Testament:

Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. (Psalm 119:105.)

The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? (Psalm 27:1.)

In the New Testament, perhaps the classic reference is in John:

Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. (John 8:12.)

From the Doctrine and Covenants:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I am the life and the light of the world. (D&C 11:28.)

The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth. Light and truth forsake that evil one.

Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God.

And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers.

But I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. (D&C 93:36-40.)

From the Book of Mormon:

And I will also be your light in the wilderness; and I will prepare the way before you, if it so be that ye shall keep my commandments; wherefore, inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments ye shall be led towards the promised land; and ye shall know that it is by me that ye are led. (1 Nephi 17:13.)

For the reward of their pride and their foolishness they shall reap destruction; for because they yield unto the devil and choose works of darkness rather than light, therefore they must go down to hell. (2 Nephi 26:10.)

Of the many references to light contained in the Pearl of Great Price, none is more symbolic than the light that attended the Father and the Son in the First Vision, a light that caused the suffocating darkness to release the boy Prophet and to depart.

We frequently talk in the Church of the light of revelation, the light of inspiration, the light of the gospel, the light of truth, the light of testimony, the inner light; all in an effort to use something we know-physical light and darkness-to stand symbolically for spiritual things that are otherwise difficult to describe. The light of the temple fits well into such manner of teaching. Although the temple is but a building framed up of the same materials used to build other buildings, it is not the same. It is separated from all of the others by the intensity of the light of which we have been speaking.

How much spiritual light we may absorb as part of the learning process depends on our receptivity. The Prophet Joseph Smith described the challenge of teaching the Saints concerning spiritual matters relating to the sacred work we are discussing.

But there has been a great difficulty in getting anything into the heads of this generation. It has been like splitting hemlock knots with a corn-dodger for a wedge, and a pumpkin for a beetle. Even the Saints are slow to understand.

I have tried for a number of years to get the minds of the Saints prepared to receive the things of God; but we frequently see some of them, after suffering all they have for the work of God, will fly to pieces like glass as soon as anything comes that is contrary to their traditions: they cannot stand the fire at all. How many will be able to abide a celestial law, and go through and receive their exaltation, I am unable to say, as many are called, but few are chosen. (HC, 6:184-85.)

We are now more than a century removed from 1844, when the Prophet gave that appraisal, and we have had the benefit of further revelations since that time plus a climate of their acceptance by Church members. We also now have the temple and all that means in our learning experience. Interestingly, not only spiritual but also what we think of as temporal learning develops in us through the temple experience. The instruction given in the endowment provides a firm perspective, a point of reference by which a person may gauge all his learning and wisdom, both spiritual and temporal; by which he may gather things together, determine their true meaning and significance, and fit them into their proper places.

It is at the temple that we may begin to see into the eternities. Go to the temple to learn, and you will be fulfilling on your part the commandment given by the Lord when He said:

And I give unto you, who are the first laborers in this last kingdom, a commandment that you assemble yourselves together, and organize yourselves, and prepare yourselves, and sanctify yourselves; yea, purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands and your feet before me, that I may make you clean;

That I may testify unto your Father, and your God, and my God, that you are clean from the blood of this wicked generation; that I may fulfil this promise, this great and last promise, which I have made unto you, when I will.

Also, I give unto you a commandment that ye shall continue in prayer and fasting from this time forth.

And I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom.

Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms-

That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you. (D&C 88:74-80.)

In observing this commandment you will be seeking out light and truth for yourself and your family. "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth. Light and truth forsake that evil one." And again, "I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth." (D&C 93: 36-37, 40.)

This light and truth is knowledge from on high. When you have the opportunity to attend an endowment session in the temple or to witness a sealing, ponder the deeper meaning of what you see demonstrated before you. And in the days following your visit keep these things on your mind; quietly and prayerfully review them and you will find that your knowledge will increase. Remember the statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith, "A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge." (HC, 4:588.) And, of course, he particularly meant gospel knowledge.

When I taught the Church History course in seminary I learned that the most useful procedure was to present during the first week of school the entire course in brief form. This consisted of a concise discussion of the ministry of Christ, the great apostasy, the restoration of the gospel, the early days of the Church, the persecutions of the Saints, the ultimate move west to the valleys of the mountains, and the expansion of the Church from there throughout the world. This touched in abridged form all we would consider during the course. I learned from the students that, when we followed this procedure, during the year they always knew where we were. They knew where any lesson fit into the great panorama of events.

One of the great values of the temple experience is that it does the same thing with our lives. It presents the broad, sweeping panorama of God's purposes relating to this earth. Once we have been through the temple (and we can return and refresh our memories) the events of life fit into the scheme of things. We can see in perspective where we are, and we can quickly see when we are off course.

So look toward the temple. Point your children toward the temple. From the days of their infancy, direct their attention to it, and begin their preparation for the day when they may enter the holy temple.

Meantime, be teachable yourself, be reverent. Drink deeply from the teachings-the symbolic, deeply spiritual teachings—available only in the temple.

Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord. (D&C 38:42; 133:5; 3 Nephi 20:41; Isaiah 52:11.)
