Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

4

Worthy to Enter

Once you have some feeling for the value of temple blessings and for the sacredness of the ordinances performed in the temple, you would be hesitant to question the high standards set by the Lord for entrance into the holy temple.

You must possess a current recommend to be admitted to the temple. This recommend must be signed by the bishop of your ward and the president of your stake. In the mission field, of course, the branch president, the district president, and the mission president have responsibility for issuing temple recommends. Only those who are worthy should go to the temple. The bishop has the responsibility of making inquiries into our personal worthiness. This interview is of great importance to you as a member of the Church, for it is an occasion to explore with an ordained servant of the Lord the pattern of your life. If anything is amiss in your life, the bishop will be able to help you resolve it. Through this procedure, as you counsel with the common judge in Israel, you can declare or can be helped to establish your worthiness to enter the temple with the Lord's approval.

The interview should be private in each instance. The bishop and stake president are reminded that in conducting these interviews they should realize and make it clear that they are representing the Lord in determining the worthiness of individuals to enter His holy house.

The Temple Recommend Interview

President N. Eldon Tanner, first counselor in the First Presidency, spoke to the general priesthood meeting about interviews. His counsel has meaning both for the Church leaders who conduct the interview and for the members who are to be interviewed. Consider carefully this counsel:

With all this evil present in the world today, it is most important that those who are responsible conduct proper interviews.

Let us always remember that our main purpose, assignment, and responsibility is to save souls.

It is important that those we interview realize that they are spirit children of God and that we love them, and let them know that we love them and are interested in their welfare and in helping them succeed in life.

It is a great responsibility for a bishop or a stake president to conduct a worthiness interview. There is equal responsibility, however, upon the member who is interviewed. Careful, searching interviews need to be conducted always individually and privately ....

Let [the member] know that if there is something amiss in his life, there are ways to straighten it out. There is a great cleansing power of repentance. ...

Remember, the interview is based on consideration, on sympathy and love. This is so important. Let the people know we love them and are only trying to help them.

You bishops and stake presidents might approach an interview for a temple recommend something like this:

"You have come to me for a recommend to enter the temple. I have the responsibility of representing the Lord in interviewing you. At the conclusion of the interview there is provision for me to sign your recommend; but mine is not the only important signature on your recommend. Before the recommend is valid, you must sign it yourself.

"When you sign your recommend, you make a commitment to the Lord that you are worthy of the privileges granted to those who hold such a recommend. There are several standard questions that I will ask [because you are instructed to do that]. You are to respond honestly to each one."

An associate of mine mentioned that some years ago, when he held a position in his ward, he went to the bishop for a temple recommend.

The bishop was busy and said, "Now, I know you very well, and I will not have to ask you the questions before signing your recommend."

This member responded: "Bishop, don't you have the responsibility to ask those questions? It is my privilege to answer them. I need to answer those questions to you and to the Lord and would appreciate your putting each question to me."

And so it is. The Lord gives the privilege to members of the Church to respond to those questions in such interviews. Then if there is something amiss, the member can get his life in order so that he may qualify for the priesthood advancement, for a mission, or for a temple recommend.

Now, after you have put those required questions to the applicant, you may wish to add something like this: "One who goes into the house of the Lord must be free from any unclean, unholy, impure, or unnatural practice."

. . . We who lead the Church are responsible to see that you are taught in plainness. ...

Surely no holder of the priesthood would feel worthy to accept advancement in the priesthood or sign his temple recommend if any impure practice were a part of his life.

If, perchance, one of you has been drawn into any degrading conduct, cast it away from you so that when you are subject to a worthiness interview you can answer to yourself, and to the Lord, and to the interviewing priesthood officer that you are worthy.

Remember, you who conduct worthiness interviews are representatives of the Lord and you must conduct the interviews as the Lord himself would conduct them.

That is, there must be nothing immodest or degrading in your interview. Our interviews are not to be indelicate, or offensive, or pornographic in any way.

May I say here that occasionally we receive reports that a bishop or a stake president has been very indiscreet or indelicate in an interview, especially of married members.

It is not in order for a priesthood leader to list in detail ugly, deviant, or bestial practices and then cross-examine a member of the Church as to whether or not such things are practiced.

One of the General Authorities once interviewed a young man who had gone into the mission home who had made confession of a transgression which disqualified him from missionary service.

The General Authority was amazed at the sordid nature of what the young man had done and asked, "Where on earth did you get the idea to do things like this?" He was shocked when the young man answered, "From my bishop."

During a preliminary interview for the young man's mission, the bishop had said, "Have you ever done this? Have you ever done that?" describing every unworthy and depraved act he could think of. Such things had never before entered the young man's mind, but they were in his mind now! The adversary put in his way the opportunity and the temptation-and he fell!

Brethren, our interviews must be conducted in love, in modesty. Ofttimes things can be corrected if you ask: "Would there be a reason you may feel uncomfortable or perhaps even dishonest to the Lord if you were to sign your own temple recommend?

"Would you like a little time to get some very personal things in order before you sign it? Remember, the Lord knows all things and will not be mocked. We are trying to help you. Never lie to try to obtain a call, a recommend, or a blessing from the Lord."

If you approach the matter as outlined above, the member has the responsibility to interview himself. The bishop or stake president has the fight to the power of discernment. He will know whether or not there is something amiss that ought to be settled before a recommend is issued.

How blessed we are to have the gift of discernment available to us as officers in the priesthood!

On occasion a bishop or a stake president will receive a confession from a member of the Church concerning a transgression that took place many, many years ago. That individual should have made confession long since but did not and, therefore, has suffered unnecessarily.

It is not always necessary to conduct a court in such cases. That is up to the bishop. You are entitled to inspiration and guidance, particularly if the individual has demonstrated through his conduct over the years that that mistake is not characteristic of his life.

How marvelous that inspiration and revelation may accompany us in our duties! Brethren, be worthy of that.

We frequently hear accounts of how bishops and stake presidents, motivated by consideration and love, have been inspired in conducting interviews and have been able, where problems were present, to help members of the Church correct their course in life so that they became completely worthy to fulfill missions, to be advanced in the priesthood, or to enter the house of the Lord. And that's what we are trying to do-help ... through love and understanding and interest, to do those things which are necessary in their lives for them to enjoy the blessings of the faithful.

Again I say, what a blessing that we have discernment and revelation and inspiration to guide us in our main purpose, which is to save souls, yes, even our own, and to help prepare our members to understand the purpose of their mission here upon the earth, and to prepare themselves to go back into the presence of our Heavenly Father! ("The Blessing of Church Interviews," Ensign [November 1978]: 40-43.)

The interview for a temple recommend is conducted privately between the bishop and the Church member concerned. Here the member is asked searching questions about his personal conduct and worthiness and about his loyalty to the Church and its officers. The person must certify that he is morally clean and is keeping the Word of Wisdom, paying a full tithing, living in harmony with the teachings of the Church, and not maintaining any affiliation or sympathy with apostate groups. The bishop is instructed that confidentiality in handling these matters with each interviewee is of the utmost importance.

Acceptable answers to the bishop's questions will ordinarily establish the worthiness of an individual to receive a temple recommend. If an applicant is not keeping the commandments or there is something unsettled about his life that needs putting in order, it will be necessary for him to demonstrate true repentance before a temple recommend is issued.

Benefits of the Interview

Members of the Church might well cherish the great privilege of going before the bishop for an interview-and not just when everything is all right, when you can say with a deep personal satisfaction that your life is in order. Particularly is this a privilege when some things are not right and there is an opportunity for a member of the Church to put his life in order.

Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil;

Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. (Isaiah 1:16-18.)

Sometimes it is difficult to talk about mistakes. But it is a great blessing in the Church for us to have the privilege of cleansing ourselves. One of the steps of repentance is to make proper confession, confession to the Lord in the normal course. And there are some things where confession to the bishop is a requirement.

Repentance is something like soap. It can cleanse us from our transgressions. Yet some people stay unclean when it is not necessary to do so.

What a privilege it is to be able to go to the bishop for a temple recommend! If we are fully repentant, it is an opportunity to put out from our lives things that may be amiss.

After the bishop has conducted such an interview, a member of the stake presidency likewise interviews each of us before we go to the temple. If we are going for the first time, ordinarily the stake president personally conducts the interview. It may be, on subsequent occasions, that he must delegate to one of his counselors that responsibility in order to attend to the many duties connected with presiding over the several thousand members in the stake.

I have come to know, in interviewing people who have made mistakes in their lives, that a very convincing evidence of repentance is that they are willing to do whatever is required of them. Occasionally, when a bishop is hesitant to issue a temple recommend, a member will resist the bishop and perhaps argue with him. That very attitude is a signal that the bishop may well need to consider very, very carefully whether or not someone with that spirit should be given the privilege of entering the house of the Lord. It indicates that member may not be quite ready.

Surely, when you appear to be interviewed for a temple recommend you would accept the judgment of him who is designated as the judge in Israel, who is responsible to represent the Lord in determining whether or not it is proper for you to enter this sacred place.

President John Taylor counseled members to consider very seriously the matter of worthiness interviews. Note that in his day, besides the bishop and the stake president, a member also had to be approved by the President of the Church before being admitted to the temple.

In the first place people desirous to go and attend to ordinances in these houses must have a recommendation from their Bishop. That is one of those. ... facts that must be faced. Then when they have obtained this recommendation from the Bishop, it must be endorsed by the President of the Stake, and after that have the sanction of the President of the Church. This is quite an ordeal for many men to go through. For men and women who are upright, virtuous and honorable, it is a very simple matter; there is no difficulty in their way at any time; but to those who have been careless of their duties, who have departed from the laws of God, and who have tampered with, or violated the ordinances of the Gospel-to such people it is a critical time.

However, there is something far more difficult than that yet to come. That is only a starting point in these matters. The things that are ahead are a great deal more difficult to accomplish. What are they? The time will come when we shall not only have to pass by those officers whom I have referred to-say, to have the sanction and approval of our Bishop, of the President of the Stake and of the President of the Church-but we are told in this book [the Book of Doctrine and Covenants] that we shall have to pass by the angels and the Gods. We may have squeezed through the other; we may have got along tolerably well, and been passed and acted upon, and sometimes a "tight squeak" at that; but how will it be when we get on the other side, and we have the angels and the Gods to pass by before we can enter into our exaltation If we cannot pass, what then? Well, we cannot, that is all. And if we cannot, shall we be able to enter into our exaltation? I think not. What do you think about it? (The Gospel Kingdom, comp. G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964], pages 290-91.)

Be grateful for the lofty standards of the Church. Remember the admonition of the Lord through the prophet Isaiah (52:11): "Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord."

Enter this door as if the floor within were gold; And every wall of jewels all of wealth untold; As if a choir in robes of fire were singing here; Nor shout nor rush but hush—for God is here. (From "Words of Life," page 45.)
