Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

5

First and Every Time

You may be preparing to go to the temple for the first time to receive your endowments. This may precede your temple marriage. It may be that you are returning to witness the marriage of a loved one. It may be that you are returning to do ordinance work for the dead. Whatever your circumstance may be, there are some practical things that you may wish to consider and some principles that may help you as you go there.

Because we sometimes overlook the obvious, I wish to point out several things that may seem to be very ordinary. However, consider these suggestions on deportment for temple attenders. If you need to make some improvement in your attitude or in your conduct, seek to put yourself in the proper spirit for temple blessings.

If you are going to the temple for the first time it is quite normal for you to be a little unsettled. We are naturally anxious about the unknown. We often become nervous over new experiences.

Be at peace. You are going to the temple. You will have someone to assist you at every turn. You will be carefully guided-be at peace.

Deportment in the Temple

When we enter the temple we should be reverent. Any conversations that are necessary ought to be conducted in very subdued tones. During the periods of instruction, of course, we are completely reverent and quiet.

There are few places now that offer an opportunity to meditate in quiet reverence. Before entering the temple to begin the ordinance work, the companies frequently will assemble in the chapel in the annex portion of the building. Here the members wait until the full company is assembled. Generally in life we would become impatient with waiting. To be first in a room and then be compelled to wait for the last to enter before proceeding would in other circumstances cause irritation. In the temple it is just the opposite. That waiting is regarded as a choice opportunity. What a privilege it is to sit quietly without conversation and direct the mind to reverent and spiritual thoughts! It is a refreshment to the soul.

Temples have become very busy places. As the Church grows, and more members come to receive their own ordinances or to participate in work for the dead, the temple may become a bit crowded. Surely no one would say "overcrowded!" In these circumstances the management of a temple becomes an increasingly important function. It requires that every person entering the temple contribute by responding to directions-by refraining from conversations, by acting in a reverent and disciplined fashion. The word discipline sometimes touches a slightly rebellious chord in our natures. Remember that it comes from the word disciple.

President Harold B. Lee was a man of quiet response to things that were humorous. Yet he enjoyed a very alert sense of humor and always had a ready story with some humorous twist to it. On one occasion while I was traveling with him he said that Elder Charles A. Callis had told him many years ago that loud laughter was a symptom of a vacant mind. He said, "I took that seriously, and since then I've tried to respond more quietly when I have been amused, not with an outburst of laughter."

When you come to the temple, remember that you are a guest in the house of the Lord. It is a time of joy, but a time of quiet joy. Sometimes when I perform a temple marriage it is necessary to remind the relatives and friends that their expressions of love and congratulations, and their greetings to family members whom they have not seen for a long period of time, should be given in a very quiet and subdued tone. Loud talking and loud laughter are not fitting in the house of the Lord.

Consider these verses from section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

Remember the great and last promise which t have made unto you; cast away your idle thoughts and your excess of laughter far from you. (D&C 88:69.)

Therefore, cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter, from all your lustful desires, from all your pride and light-mindedness, and from all your wicked doings. (D&C 88:121.)

Accept the direction of the workers in the temple. Someone will guide you as you proceed.

Occasionally a Church member will ask for special privileges or adjustments in temple procedure, or for special people to attend him. Remember that the temple is a place for complete unselfishness and cooperation. Let your visit there be on the Lord's terms rather than on yours.

Sometimes a member coming to the temple has requested administration for an infirmity or sickness. The member may feel that a blessing given in the temple will somehow be more powerful than a blessing given at the chapel or in a home. But this is not the purpose of the temples. Administrations to those who are sick or otherwise afflicted will be quite as powerful and effective if given in a home or at the chapel as they would be in the temple. The Brethren in times past have suggested that members not come to the temple for their administrations.

Occasionally members will ask special privileges at the temple, wanting to be together as a family or as a couple in one of the rooms for very private prayer and contemplation. These purposes also can be accomplished outside of the temple. With temples busily but reverently moving the companies through the ordinance work, such special requests would be difficult to honor. The fact that a person's quiet personal purposes can be achieved outside of the temple should be the consideration in this context.

Appropriate Authority Should Perform Ordinance

This matter of asking for special consideration or accommodation at the temple brings to mind a principle. Members who come to temples near Church headquarters frequently write or call General Authorities asking if they will perform the marriage ceremony. It seems they feel that there would somehow be additional authority and the ordinance would somehow be more binding in that case, or that there is additional prestige or perhaps honor attached to having the marriage ceremony pronounced by one of "the Brethren."

When I was first called as a General Authority it was a common thing for the Brethren to spend a good portion of their time in the temple performing temple marriages. As the Church grew, the General Authorities received additional responsibilities. In those days there were only two or three overseas stakes; now there are hundreds. It became more and more difficult to schedule marriages without conflicting with other meetings that we were required to attend. We found that many members of the Church were anxious to have a General Authority perform their sealings.

I was quite relieved when we had a letter from the First Presidency suggesting that the General Authorities leave the performing of sealing ordinances to the regularly ordained temple sealers. We were, of course, free to perform those for our own families and for others who may be very close to us for one reason or another. But we were counseled that our other duties were to take precedence over performing temple marriages. In that way the vital meetings held at Church headquarters were not constantly interrupted, as previously they had been.

We have been reminded of this counsel a time or two in the years since then, and a letter has been sent to the areas surrounding Church headquarters asking that members not request the General Authorities to perform their temple marriages. This instruction has been a disappointment to some who have been anxious that some "favorite" General Authority perform the marriage in their case.

This desire to have the "highest" possible official perform an ordinance-a General Authority or a temple president-brings us to a principle important for every member of the Church to learn. It applies to temples, as it applies to all of the ordinances of the Church. Perhaps we can illustrate it best by discussing the ordinance of administering to the sick.

The revelation says:

And whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy.

And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me. (D&C 42:43-44; see also D&C 66:9; 84:68; 124:98.)

In times of need, members of the Church naturally want the highest spiritual power available to them. It is natural for them, if they are close to Church headquarters or in a country where one of the General Authorities is a resident, to call upon them to perform the blessing, or to want the stake president or mission president or bishop to bless them.

Many years ago, long before I was one of the General Authorities of the Church, I had something to do with the construction of a chapel. President McKay had accepted the invitation to dedicate the building. (This, too, is another of the functions of Church authorities that is subject to the principle we are discussing.)

During the dedication, a young person who was critically ill and not expected to live was brought to the chapel and carried into one of the rooms. When the service was over a relative of the individual approached President McKay and explained the unfortunate plight of this person and asked if the President would give him a blessing.

I was standing with President McKay. Elder Spencer W. Kimball also was present. To my surprise, President McKay said, "Dear sister, if I performed all of the blessings for the sick that I am requested to do, I would not have the time nor the strength to do those things that only I can do with the authority of the office that I hold." He then turned to one of the local leaders and appointed him to give the blessing.

Although he was very kindly in his explanation and later extended a special blessing to the family, I did not understand why he declined to bless that person then. I thought he could almost have pronounced the blessing in the time it took to assign it to someone else. Why did he not do it?

As the years unfolded and I became more acquainted with Church administration, I learned. Indeed, it would be possible to fill the schedule of the President of the Church or other General Authorities with duties and responsibilities that many other holders of the priesthood could do quite as well. Some of them perhaps they could do even better. This is surely true when our local brethren are close to their people and know and understand their needs. Sometimes there are underlying needs that are not obvious to those who are not acquainted with the circumstances but are well understood by those who know the individuals concerned.

How glorious it is that the priesthood in the Lord's church is not confined to a few professional ministers who are trained in special seminaries and are thought to be the only ones competent to perform the sacred rites of the church!

Men are called from all walks of life who hold the priesthood and are given authority. Often they are unschooled, inexperienced, and certainly not trained in a professional ministry. That may seem dangerous to the prelates of the other churches and appear in their minds to be an awful problem fraught with the possibility of mismanagement and bungling of every kind. It is in truth a very strength to the Church. For the Lord said in the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants that it was His desire "that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world" (verses 2 and 20).

In the Church, therefore, we are quite content to call Church members to office to administer and direct and teach and carry on the work of the Lord. Keep that principle in mind as you prepare to go to the temple. Keep it in mind after you have been there a hundred times or more. Remember, you may go to the temple for your own wedding, or for that of a son or a daughter or a grandchild, and find a very ordinary man, not distinguished by being prominent in the world, standing at the altar dressed in white, officiating in the most sacred ordinances of the gospel. This is the very strength and the power of the Church. The Church is not jeopardized by the standard the Lord has set. Indeed, to do the opposite would be dangerous, for we would be moving along that road that led to the great apostasy in ancient times.

The Temple Wedding

Let me include a few words of counsel to those planning to go to the temple to be married.

It takes time to plan a temple marriage. It is worthy of careful planning. Not infrequently young couples who fall in love determine that they are going to be married and insist, against the pleadings of parents, that they want to be married right away, in just a week or two. The plea by parents for more time to prepare is sometimes interpreted by the young couple as being a disapproval of their marriage. They are afraid that if they wait something will interfere. Some young couples show themselves to be very immature and unkind when they press for immediate arrangements that can be met only with great difficulty and often result in an experience that is much less memorable than it might have been under other circumstances.

I have observed that, if things are too hurried or too pressured, something seems missing from the first visit to the temple, or from the wedding day in the temple. This first time through the temple or the sealing on a wedding day is a once-in-a-lifetime experience. It is worth preparing for. It is so significant that we should not let the little details of preparation, the little housekeeping chores, detract from it. For that reason, everything should be done beforehand. It can be a great frustration for some essential thing to be left untended until that day.

Occasionally when I am invited to speak in a meeting I like to get to the building before the people begin to arrive. Generally there are a few early comers, then most of the people come gathering just a short time before the meeting is to commence. Some few rush in at the last minute, and always there are a few tardy ones. If you go to a meeting early and sit in the chapel quietly and watch the people arrive, you see that they bring something with them. The spiritual temperature warms up and the room is changed as it is transformed from an empty room to a congregation, an audience of brothers and sisters who have come with a sense of expectancy. I find that I make a better presentation when I can do this; that it is as though something is given me to make me more qualified and inspired.

Now, in our busy days we cannot always do this when going to a meeting. But when I can I like to do it, and my family know that I am always quite restless to get there not just on time but early-and occasionally very early. It is because I am seeking something I need. And whatever is brought about by this approach to a meeting is doubly important when we go to the temple. This is especially true when we are going for the first time. We should get there early, very early.

As you see, this early attendance is not just for protection, for making sure that the recommends and other things are in order and that we can adapt ourselves to the new experience. It is more than that. It is to get into the right place in time to get calmly into the right spirit-to get ourselves prepared for what is to take place.

So when you go to the temple, be on time-in fact, be early. It is important.

We have been speaking in terms of the participants in the temple experience, but there are occasions when a temple wedding is being planned and some very close members of the family are not qualified for temple recommends. It may be that the groom or the bride is a convert and his or her parents are not yet in the Church; or, that they are too new in the Church to qualify for a temple recommend. Or it may be that the parents are members of the Church but one of them is not living the gospel standards sufficiently to receive a temple recommend. These limitations loom large at times of temple marriages. These are the times when families should be very close together, when they should be drawn together to share in these sacred moments of life. The withholding of a temple recommend to one who is not qualified, or the inability to invite a nonmember friend or relative to witness the sealing, can quickly present problems. This might cause unhappiness and contention at the very moment when there is a great need to have things serene, to have the greatest harmony.

What do we do in cases like that? I know what we would not do, and that is apply pressure upon a bishop. The bishop, by the standard he is obliged to keep as a common judge in Israel, could not in good faith issue a recommend to one not qualified. To do so could be a great disservice to the individuals involved. And it would not be fair to the bishop himself.

I repeat the statement, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say, but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." (D&C 82:10.)

When a temple marriage is scheduled and one of the parents or a very close relative is not able to enter the temple, careful planning may well make that an opportunity instead of a problem. Consider these suggestions. Invite the nonmember parent, or the member who is not eligible for a temple recommend, to come to the temple with the wedding party. There is a spirit and influence on the temple grounds that is not found in other places. Many of the temples have visitors centers. The temple grounds in every case are beautifully kept. All in all it is a place of peace and serenity.

Arrange to have someone wait with that family member. Surely you would not leave the person alone. I have known instances in which family members who were quite eligible to enter the temple to witness the marriage were content instead to spend the time on the temple grounds with those who could not. Here in the surroundings of the temple they have been able to explain the desire of the young couple to be sealed in the house of the Lord.

There can be great influence exerted at this time that may not have been possible otherwise. For instance, at some of the larger temples tours are conducted. Planning ahead may provide some special attention tailored to fit the need of a close family member who for one reason or another is not able to enter the temple. The disappointment and even resentment, sometimes bitterness, on the part of the nonmember parents or ineligible-member parents can be greatly softened in these ways.

The young couple must understand that their parents may have looked forward to the wedding day during the entire lives of the bride and groom. Their desire to attend the wedding, and their resentment when they cannot, is a sign of parental attachment. It is not to be resented by the young couple. It is to be understood and planned for carefully as a part of the wedding.

There are some cases of course in which the ineligible parent is offended and will not be placated. In those cases the young couple will just have to make the best of it. The question may come up: Well, then, should we be married civilly so that they can witness the marriage, then we would wait for the necessary year before entering the temple? But that would not be the ideal solution. Prayerful and careful planning in most cases can make the problem transform itself into an opportunity that ultimately will bring the family closer together than it previously had been.

Some years ago, when the General Authorities were more involved than now in performing temple marriages, a young couple from Brigham Young University called and asked if I would perform their marriage. I agreed to do so. A day or two later, they called to indicate that they were planning a double wedding. There were two young men who had been companions in the mission field and were very close to one another. They had determined that they would be married on the same day. They therefore had called to advise me that there would be two couples to be married on that occasion and they had called the temple to arrange for the largest sealing room.

I declined the invitation and said that I would prefer not to perform the double marriage. I pointed out that, while they were very close now, in the years ahead the two young men would find their separate ways as they went to seek their fortunes. They would keep in touch for the first few years, but as the children came and they became turned to normal life activities it was quite likely that their lives would find separate paths. I told them that in looking back on their wedding day they would want to remember it as a very personal and a very private matter. It should be shared only by the intimate family members and friends.

They were not responsive to that suggestion, and they called a day or so later saying that they had arranged for a second sealing room. Their idea was that, after one marriage ceremony had been performed, the wedding party could move in to be witnesses to the wedding in the other room. Again I declined, saying that I would prefer not to perform this sealing under those circumstances. I strongly recommended that each of them have a separate marriage ceremony, and that if they had it on the same morning they should not try to have one set to the time needs or to the circumstances that were important to the other. They finally agreed to comply with my counsel.

Some time ago a letter was issued from the Brethren suggesting that large groups of friends, ward members, and so on not be invited to witness a marriage. Wedding groups should be small, comprising only the members of the two families and some few who are very close to the couple. On occasions a wedding has been announced in the ward with the invitation that all should try to attend to give support and encouragement to the couple being married. That is what a reception is for. A wedding reception is to provide a time for greeting the friends and the well-wishers. The temple marriage itself should be sacred and should be shared only by those who have a very special place in the lives of those being married. In our own family, when our children have been married our wedding contingent has always been small even though we are a large family. The number of adults eligible to enter the temple has grown as our children have married. But even with our large family we have generally been able to perform our sealings in the smaller sealing rooms in the temple.

We do not quote the words of the sealing ordinance outside of the temple, but we may describe the sealing room as being beautiful in its appointment, quiet and serene in spirit, and hallowed by the sacred work that is performed there.

Before the couple comes to the altar for the sealing ordinance it is the privilege of the officiator to extend, and of the young couple to receive, some counsel. These are among the thoughts that a young couple might hear on this occasion.

"Today is your wedding day. You are caught up in the emotion of your marriage. Temples were built as a sanctuary for such ordinances as this. We are not in the world. The things of the world do not apply here and should have no influence upon what we do here. We have come out of the world into the temple of the Lord. This becomes the most important day of your lives.

''You were born, invited here by parents who prepared a mortal tabernacle for your spirit to inhabit. Each of you has been baptized. Baptism, a sacred ordinance, is symbolic of a cleansing, symbolic of death and resurrection, symbolic of coming forward in a newness of life. It contemplates repentance and a remission of sins. The sacrament is a renewal of the covenant of baptism, and we can, if we live for it, retain a remission of our sins.

"You, the groom, were ordained to the priesthood. You had first conferred upon you the Aaronic Priesthood and probably have progressed through all the offices thereof-deacon, teacher, and priest. Then the day came when you were found worthy to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood. That priesthood, the higher priesthood, is defined as the priesthood after the holiest order of God, or the Holy Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. You were given an office in the priesthood. You are now an elder.

"Each of you has received your endowment. In that endowment you received an investment of eternal potential. But all of these things, in one sense, were preliminary and preparatory to your coming to the altar to be sealed as husband and wife for time and for all eternity. You now become a family, free to act in the creation of life, to have the opportunity through devotion and sacrifice to bring children into the world and to raise them and foster them safely through their mortal existence; to see them come one day, as you have come, to participate in these sacred temple ordinances.

''You come willingly and have been judged to be worthy. This union can be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise."

Wherefore, I now send upon you another Comforter, even upon you my friends, that it may abide in your hearts, even the Holy Spirit of promise; which other Comforter is the same that I promised unto my disciples, as is recorded in the testimony of John.

This Comforter is the promise which I give unto you of eternal life, even the glory of the celestial kingdom. (D&C 88:3-4.)

"To accept one another in the marriage covenant is a great responsibility, one that carries with it blessings without measure."

A bride and groom will quite likely be so emotionally involved with the wedding that they may not listen carefully-they may not really hear the words of the sealing ordinance. While we may not repeat those words outside of the temple, we may return on occasions to witness a wedding. It is a generous Lord who has authorized us to do this. On these occasions, when we are not so personally involved, we may listen carefully to the words of the ordinance.

Come to the temple. Renew the instruction given there. This is a blessing which you may claim in the holy temple.

For he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness. (Isaiah 61:10.)
