Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

6

Dressed in White

When we do ordinance work in the temple we wear white clothing. This clothing is symbolic of purity and worthiness and cleanliness.

Upon entering the temple you exchange your street clothing for the white clothing of the temple. This change of clothing takes place in the locker room, where each individual is provided with a locker and a dressing space that is completely private. In the temple the ideal of modesty is carefully maintained. As you put your clothing in the locker you leave your cares and concerns and distractions there with them. You step out of this private little dressing area dressed in white and you feel a oneness and a sense of equality, for all around you are similarly dressed.

If you are going to the temple for the first time, counsel with your bishop. When he issues you a recommend he will explain something of the nature of the clothing that will be required in the temple. Obtaining this clothing need not be a worry to you. You can either buy it from a Relief Society Distribution Center or rent it at the temple. In the latter case a very modest fee is required which covers only the cost of laundering the clothing.

As with the ceremonies and ordinances of the temple, outside of the temple we say very little about the clothing worn inside. We can say that it, like the ceremonies, has great symbolic meaning.

There are three main considerations for you which relate to clothing and the temples. First, there is the clothing that you wear, your own clothing, going to and coming from the temple. The image you present at this time, I'm sure, is important to the Lord. Your dress and grooming are signals as to how deeply you revere the privilege of going to the temple.

The next consideration is the temple clothing itself. As I have indicated, we will not discuss that here. When you are eligible to go to the temple your bishop can counsel with you on this matter.

The third matter is the garment worn at all times by those who are endowed. This we will discuss later in the chapter.

Proper Grooming for Temple Attenders

It is a mark of reverence and respect when the Church member visits the temple dressed and groomed in such a way that he would not be uncomfortable in the presence of the Lord. Suppose for a moment that you are invited to be the guest in the home of a prominent and highly respected leader. You are given to understand that you will mingle with distinguished guests who have received similar invitations. The invitation is an indication that the host holds you in very high regard. You realize that many others would highly prize such an invitation, but for one reason or another they have not likewise been invited and therefore are not able to attend. Under those circumstances I doubt that you would arrive in old work clothes or dressed as you do for recreation. I doubt that a man would go unshaven, or a woman with her hair unkempt.

People of dignity and refinement, upon receiving an invitation to an important gathering, frequently make inquiry as to what dress would be in order. Would you not prepare carefully for such a special occasion? You might even purchase new clothing in the hope that your appearance would not detract from the dignified nature of the setting.

Care would also be shown for the pressing and cleaning of your clothes. You would feel uncomfortable if you were not properly attired.

The opportunity to visit the temple might be compared to such an invitation.

There is one occasion only when members of the Church are invited into the temple proper in "street" clothing, and that is when they witness a temple marriage. In that case only the shoes are removed, and these are replaced with white footwear. Years ago the Brethren authorized this to be so for the convenience of those family members and friends who would not be going through an endowment session immediately prior to the marriage.

I have been puzzled and a little saddened at times, when attending the temple, to find that some have come to witness marriages or to attend a session in the temple dressed as though they were going to a picnic or an athletic event.

The privilege to enter the temple deserves more from us than that. I am sure that it is pleasing to the Lord when we bathe our bodies and put on clean clothing, however inexpensive the clothing may be. We should dress in such a way that we might comfortably attend a sacrament meeting or a gathering that is proper and dignified.

Some time ago on a cold winter morning I was on my way to the airport at a very early hour. I stopped at an intersection near the Salt Lake Temple. Although the light changed to green, I waited while a very old man laboriously made his way across the slick street; because of his crippled condition, the time allowed by the signal was not sufficient to see him across the street safely. He was carrying a small suitcase. Obviously he was going to the temple. I was impressed that he was a regular attender at the temple. He came, no doubt, from a very modest room or apartment somewhere in central city. He was dressed in a dark suit with a white shirt, very carefully groomed.

As I pondered on his crippled condition I imagined how very difficult it must have been for him to get moving in the morning. I knew from experience how painful it is for some people with arthritis or other crippling limitations to clothe themselves. And yet, there he was, going at the invitation of the Lord to the temple. For him there would be no loose and informal dress. He took his invitation seriously. I will not forget what he taught me.

On occasions, when I have performed a marriage in the temple, there has been one there to witness it who obviously has paid little attention to the counsel that the Brethren have given about dress and grooming, about taking care not to emulate the world in the extremes of style in clothing, in hair length and arrangement, etc. I have wondered why it is that if such a person was mature enough to be admitted to the temple he would not at once be sensible enough to know that the Lord could not be pleased with those who show obvious preference to follow after the ways of the world.

How could a recommended member attend the temple in clothing that is immodest or worldly? How could one groom himself in such a way that the style of hair is not in keeping with refinement and dignity? The crippled old brother taught me again that even in coming to and going from the temple we may show respect in the manner of our dress.

When you have the opportunity to go to the temple to participate in the temple ceremonies or to witness a sealing, remember where you are. You are a guest in the house of the Lord. You should groom yourself and clothe yourself in such a way that you would feel comfortable should your Host appear.

The Garment

Those who hold and share in the blessings of the priesthood should have their bodies covered as was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith when the endowment ceremony was given to him.

It is interesting to note that those who officiated in the Tabernacle in Moses' time wore special garments and their bodies were anointed.

And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him [ephod is defined in the dictionary as "an official garment for the high priest"], and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him therewith. (Leviticus 8:7.)

Members who have received their temple ordinances thereafter wear the special garment or underclothing. Garments are manufactured by an agency of the Church-and are generally available to members throughout the world through a distribution program operated by the Relief Society.

The garment represents sacred covenants. It fosters modesty and becomes a shield and protection to the wearer.

The wearing of such a garment does not prevent members from dressing in the fashionable clothing generally worn in the nations of the world. Only clothing that is immodest or extreme in style would be incompatible with wearing the garment. Any member of the Church, whether he or she has been to the temple or not, would in proper spirit want to avoid extreme or revealing fashions.

There may be occasions when endowed members of the Church face questions on the garment. For instance, there are some occasions when nonmembers who perform certain services for Church members who wear the garment have a legitimate reason for showing an interest in why we wear this type of underwear.

On one occasion I was invited to speak to the faculty and staff of the Navy Chaplains Training School in Newport, Rhode Island. The audience included a number of high-ranking naval chaplains from the Catholic, Protestant and Jewish faiths. A class of chaplains then being trained were also invited to the meeting. My invitation asked me to explain the tenets of the Church and to respond to questions the chaplains might have. The idea was for them to learn more about what they might do for Latter-day Saint servicemen in their chaplaincy service, particularly in remote areas where such men were out of contact with the Church. At the time there was a need for them to be informed, because the Vietnam War was then in full fury.

In the question-and-answer period one of the chaplains asked, "Can you tell us something about the special underwear that some Mormon servicemen wear?" The implication was, "Why do you do that? Isn't it strange? Doesn't that present a problem?"

I knew of course that the matter of the garment was a concern to Latter-day Saint servicemen who had been to the temple. Since they generally were living in open barracks, on occasions their underclothing was visible to the other men. Naturally they sometimes were questioned about it, and on some occasions uncharitable fellows ridiculed them. It was also true that chaplains as well as military medical personnel had to minister to a sick or injured Latter-day Saint serviceman in circumstances wherein the matter of the patient's underclothing became part of their responsible interest in that Church member.

The same is true of morticians who prepare for burial the bodies of members of the Church who have died or have been killed, either in the military or in civilian life. If the dead person has been endowed in the temple it is the proper thing that the body be clothed in the garment and in temple clothing for burial. So there are several circumstances in which nonmembers may have a legitimate reason to take an interest in the garment or special underclothing that is worn by members of the Church who have been endowed. Those who have received their endowment know what the garment symbolizes and the sacred nature of the covenants connected with it. But it is important to satisfy the inquiry of those who are legitimately interested, to the point at least of having them understand that this is a matter of very deep significance to us in the Church.

To the chaplain who made the inquiry I responded with a question: "Which church do you represent?" In response he named one of the Protestant churches.

I said, "In civilian life and also when conducting the meetings in the military service you wear clerical clothing, do you not?" He said that he did.

I continued: "I would suppose that that has some importance to you, that in a sense it sets you apart from the rest of your congregation. It is your uniform, as it were, of the ministry. Also, I suppose it may have a much more important place. It reminds you of who you are and what your obligations and covenants are. It is a continual reminder that you are a member of the clergy, that you regard yourself as a servant of the Lord, and that you are responsible to live in such a way as to be worthy of your ordination."

The chaplains all seemed to consent to this appraisal of the value of their own clerical clothing.

I then told them: "You should be able to understand at least one of our reasons why Latter-day Saints have a deep spiritual commitment concerning the garment. A major difference between your churches and ours is that we do not have a professional clergy, as you do. The congregations are all presided over by local leaders. They are men called from all walks of life. Yet they are ordained to the priesthood. They hold offices in the priesthood. They are set apart to presiding positions as presidents, counselors, and leaders in various categories. The women, too, share in that responsibility and in those obligations. The man who heads our congregation on Sunday as the bishop may go to work on Monday as a postal clerk, as an office worker, a farmer, a doctor; or he may be an air force pilot or a naval officer. By our standard he is as much an ordained minister as you are by your standard. He is recognized as such by most governments. We draw something of the same benefits from this special clothing as you would draw from your clerical vestments. The difference is that we wear ours under our clothing instead of outside, for we are employed in various occupations in addition to our service in the Church. These sacred things we do not wish to parade before the world."

I then explained that there are some deeper spiritual meanings as well, connecting the practice of wearing this garment with covenants that are made in the temple. We wouldn't find it necessary to discuss these-not that they are secret, I repeated, but because they are sacred.

I told them that if they would accept baptism into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and live in harmony with its teachings, they too could share in all of the blessings connected with the holy temple.

They found that answer completely satisfying. They made a comment or two about it along the lines of understanding now why the Latter-day Saint men in the military service were so careful about this matter. They could then see that to ridicule that practice was, in a sense, to ridicule Christian clergy in general. I have found from making this explanation to military chaplains and to Christian ministers generally, individually and on occasions in large gatherings where the question has come up, that it is a dimension they had not previously considered. Having received this explanation, they tend to become more protective of the members of the Church who are wearing the garment.

Young Church members who are athletes sometimes have a problem in locker rooms where their style of underclothing is a matter of interest to, and sometimes comment from, their fellow players.

I have heard many of them say that, once they make a simple explanation such as the one I have given, it is usually accepted by their teammates. Not infrequently if a comment is then made that is not in good taste some of their teammates jump quickly to the defense of the Church member. Out of respect for the standards we keep they offer their protection of our right to live the covenants we have made.

The garment, covering the body, is a visual and tactile reminder of these covenants. For many Church members the garment has formed a barrier of protection when the wearer has been faced with temptation. Among other things it symbolizes our deep respect for the laws of God—among them the moral standard.

Meditation in the Temple

Consider these interesting verses from the New Testament:

After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands;

And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?

And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. (Revelation 7:9-10, 13-14.)

The Lord said in the Old Testament, and again to the Prophet Joseph Smith (Psalm 46:10 and D&C 101:16), "Be still, and know that I am God." There is such a thing as learning to listen spiritually. There is such a thing as having pure intelligence poured into the mind. In the temple the meditation and contemplation that comes from a quietly observed reverence frequently results in such a pouring-in of intelligence and spiritual learning. And no small part of the atmosphere that makes this possible is the temple clothing and the spirit in which the wearer views it.

It may seem to some to be a very bold doctrine that we talk of—a power which records or binds on earth and binds in heaven. Nevertheless, in all ages of the world, whenever the Lord has given a dispensation of the priesthood to any man by actual revelation, or any set of men, this power has always been given. (D&C 128:9.)
