Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

PART II

In Ages Past

And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name? For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was. [^1]

And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them. (Exodus 25:8.)

8

Temples in Ancient Israel

It is not too much to ask those going to the temple to acquaint themselves with the beginnings of temple work. It is important to know that the keys of authority to perform this work have been delivered to us from ancient times. We can learn much from knowing how those keys were restored. One day each of us will have to know the doctrine connected with this Work.

It will be my purpose in the next few chapters to give just an overview of that doctrine from scriptural history and from the revelations on the doctrines connected with the holy temple. I think you will find it interesting reading. First we will consider temples built in ancient times.

It is not our purpose to discuss in any detail the history of these ancient temples. Elder James E. Talmage in his comprehensive work, The House of the Lord, goes into much detail on this. His book is well worth obtaining and reading.

In a revelation the Lord spoke to the Saints in Nauvoo in these words: "I command you, all ye my saints, to build a house unto me; and I grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me." And then in sober declaration He warned, "and if you do not these things at the end of the appointment ye shall be rejected as a church, with your dead, saith the Lord your God." (D&C 124:31, 32.) President Joseph Fielding Smith explained this matter:

This passage [Sec. 124:31-35] has been misinterpreted by some, especially by enemies of the Church who profess a belief in the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, but do not accept the doctrine of salvation for the dead. A careful reading of these verses will show that it was not the failure to build a house, but the failure to perform the ordinances for the dead in the house after it was prepared for those ordinances that would cause the rejection. In the months when the saints were without a Temple the Lord granted them the privilege of baptizing for their dead in the Mississippi River, but with the understanding that this was a special privilege which would end when they had been given sufficient time to prepare a place in the Temple where this ordinance could be performed. For baptism for the dead, as well as other ordinances for the dead, are to be performed in a house built to the name of the Lord and for that holy purpose. Therefore we find the members of the Church engaging in baptisms for the dead in the river from the time the privilege was granted until the time arrived when the font in the house of the Lord was prepared for that ordinance, and when that time arrived all baptisms for the dead in the river ceased by divine command. The Lord said: [Sec. 124:32-33, quoted.]

And if ye do not these things at the end of the appointment [v. 32], obviously does not mean "if ye do not build a temple at the end of the appointment," as our critics infer it does, but it refers to the ordinances that were to be performed in the Temple, and the failure on the part of the Saints to perform these ordinances for their dead was the thing that would cause their rejection with their dead, and not the failure to build the Temple, which was merely the edifice in which the saving principles were to be performed. This is in harmony with the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said that if we neglect the salvation of our dead, we do it at the peril of our own salvation! Why? Because we without them cannot be made perfect. (D&C 128:15.) [Salvation Universal, 1912, page 22, as quoted in Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978), 4:265-66.]

The temple was to be a "holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name." There were times when the people had no way to build a temple and He demanded that they do less than He expected of them in Nauvoo. Speaking of one of the sacred ordinances, He said, "For this ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable to me, only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a house unto me." (D&C 124:30.)

Ancient Tabernacle and Temples

Anciently the Lord's covenant people were commanded to build sanctuaries-sacred places that were not regarded as ordinary places of assembly but as sacred enclosures, consecrated for solemn ceremonies. As soon as they were delivered from Egypt, the Israelites were commanded to build a tabernacle, and the design was given to them by revelation in detail. The kind of wood to be used, the design of it, the fabrics of leather and linen and other materials, and the kind of metals to be used were all explained to them. There was an outer court and an inner court; the tabernacle itself, with two rooms; an outer room called the Holy Place; and then, separated by a veil, an inner sanctuary-the Most Holy Place, or the Holy of Holies.

The tabernacle served as the center of worship and as the focal point of the Israelites' communication with God while they were in the wilderness. In due time the Holy Land was delivered to them. David, the king, sought to build a temple to the Lord but the prophet Nathan told him that he was wanting in some spiritual dimensions and that instead his son Solomon would build the temple. The temple of Solomon, finished about 1005 B.C., would be a symbol for temples for thousands of years.

The center part of the plan in the temple of Solomon beyond the various courts, the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies, was a duplicate of the design in the tabernacle, but in size just double.

It is not the building itself but the visitations of the Spirit that sanctify. When the people stray from the Spirit their sanctuary ceases to be the house of the Lord. So it was with Solomon's temple. The building was despoiled and the vessels and artifacts were carried into Egypt and into Babylon. When the Jews returned from captivity another temple was built, known in history as the Temple of Zerubbabel, remembered for the man who directed its construction. It was dedicated in 515 B.C. It did not compare in splendor with the temple of Solomon, but it was a temple nonetheless.

The purpose of the building, not the splendor of it, is the measure of whether it would qualify for the designation temple. This temple too, though it stood for five hundred years, lost its sacred purpose; and, under the corroding pressures of men and nature and time, it stood little more than a wreck at the close of the Old Testament epoch.

About sixteen years before the birth of Christ, the first Herod, the king of Judea, determined to reconstruct the decayed temple of Zerubbabel; and when the Lord pursued His earthly ministry the temple of Herod stood and was regarded by Him as a sacred structure. He taught reverence for it and drove the moneychangers from it. He prophesied the destruction of it. And like the temples that preceded it, this one too lost its purpose and in A.D. 70 was destroyed by the Romans in the conquest of Jerusalem under the emperor Titus.

There is record also of the temples being built in the western hemisphere by the Nephites. Nephi said of the first Nephite temple, "And I, Nephi, did build a temple; and I did construct it after the manner of the temple of Solomon save it were not built of so many precious things; for they were not to be found upon the land, wherefore, it could not be built like unto Solomon's temple. But the manner of the construction was like unto the temple of Solomon; and the workmanship thereof was exceeding fine." (2 Nephi 5:16.)

There is mention of a temple in Zarahemla (Mosiah 1:18) and one in Bountiful (3 Nephi 11:1). The Lord came to the area of this latter temple after His resurrection. For two hundred years or so after this visit, the people lived in total righteousness.

Then came the generations of darkness when no temples were to be found upon the earth. Men who read of ancient temples must have looked forward, yearning for that day when the morning once more would break, the shadows flee, and Zion's standard be unfurled; and the dawning of a brighter day would with majesty rise upon the world.

Much has been written by others about these ancient temples, especially those in Jerusalem. We move now from the temple of Solomon, in the Kingdom of Judah, to the court of Ahab, king of the sister nation of Israel. There began the ministry of Elijah the prophet. We will follow his ministry through to the temples in our day.

Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. (Joseph Smith.)

---
Notas:
[^1] (Words spoken by Moroni, the angel, to Joseph Smith the Prophet, while in his father's house at Manchester, New York, on the evening of September 21, 1823.)
