Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

9

Elijah the Prophet

Biblical scholars of the past have often given but passing attention to Elijah the prophet. They did not have the revelations that run a thread from his ancient ministry across the centuries to every living soul. But two of them, McClintock and Strong, who produced a great cyclopedic work of biblical history in the nineteenth century, appraised Elijah in these words:

Elijah the Tishbite, the Elias of the New Testament, a character whose rare and sudden, and brief appearances, undaunted courage and fiery zeal—the brilliance of whose triumphs—the pathos of whose despondency—the glory of whose departure, and the calm beauty of whose reappearance on the Mount of Transfiguration throws such a halo of brightness around him as is equalled by none of his compeers in the sacred history. (Cyclopedia of Biblical and Theological and Ecclesiastical Literature [New York: Harper and Bros., 1895], page 144.)

This tribute is not extreme—not when you come to know, to a degree, about Elijah. How these authors should have marveled, had they lived now and had certain testimony that Elijah returned to deliver the sacred sealing power so that the fulness of the priesthood could be held by men, so that all things could be done in order!

Elijah and his ministry are worthy of a book. Here we will give but an overview. This is important to an understanding of the temples and why we build them.

Elijah and Elias

One question about Elijah needs to be clear at the outset. The New Testament refers to Elijah by the name Elias. For example, James 5:17, "Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are." The reason we are sure that this refers to Elijah is that Elias is the Greek translation of the Hebrew name Elijah. We will be quoting other New Testament verses containing the name Elias. When they refer to an individual's name, they could not mean anyone but the Elijah of the Old Testament.

The use of Elias to describe Elijah should not be hard for moderns to understand. After all, the name John in English, goes into German as Johann; the name Roberto comes back from Spanish as Robert. Today we have two General Authorities with the same name in different languages: Howard W. Hunter of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and Jacob de Jager of the First Quorum of the Seventy. De Jager in Dutch means "the Hunter." So the Elijah of the Old Testament comes to us in the New Testament under the name Elias, just as Jeremiah comes to us as Jeremias in the New Testament. (Matthew 16:14.)

There are two other meanings to the word Elias. There was a prophet named Elias, a separate man from Elijah. We know little about him, but he himself, as a separate individual, has appeared in this dispensation, as we shall note later.

And finally there is the third meaning of the name Elias. It has become synonymous with the word forerunner, or one who prepares the way. The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "The spirit of Elias is first, Elijah second, and Messiah last. Elias is a forerunner to prepare the way, and the spirit and power of Elijah is to come after, holding the keys of power, building the Temple to the capstone, placing the seals of the Melchisedec Priesthood upon the house of Israel, and making all things ready; then Messiah comes to His Temple, which is last of all." (HC, 6:254.)

He also said that "the spirit of Elias was a going before to prepare the way for the greater, which was the case with John the Baptist. He came crying through the wilderness, 'Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths straight.' "(HC, 6:250.)

Some have become confused because the name of John the Baptist is connected with that of Elias. But that can be understood if we remember that he was an Elias, a forerunner, one who prepares the way.

It should not seem strange to us to put names together in that way, for do we not say of a budding artist with great talent, "He is a real Michelangelo"? Or do we not speak of some scientist of exceptional genius as being "an Einstein"? No one would assume from such expressions that we thought the person to be a reincarnation of Michelangelo or of Einstein. Names, at times, become something of a title. A liberator is referred to as a George Washington or as an Abraham Lincoln. It is just a common way to speak. Therefore, it should not seem unusual that John the Baptist was called an Elias.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie explains it in this way:

According to the plan and program of the Lord, the dispensation of the fulness of times is "the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21.) This restoration is to be effected by Elias. Before the winding up of the Lord's work, the promise is: "Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things." (Matt. 17:11.) With these ancient scriptures before us, these questions arise: Who is the promised Elias who was to come and restore all things? Has this work of restoration taken place? Or is it something that is yet future?

Correcting the Bible by the spirit of revelation, the Prophet restored a statement of John the Baptist which says that Christ is the Elias who was to restore all things. (Inspired Version, John 1:21-28.) By revelation we are also informed that the Elias who was to restore all things is the angel Gabriel who was known in mortality as Noah. (D. & C. 27:6-7; Luke 1:5-25; Teachings, p. 157.) From the same authentic source we also learn that the promised Elias is John the Revelator. (D&C 77:9, 14.)Thus there are three different revelations which name Elias as being three different persons. What are we to conclude?

By finding answer to the question, by whom has the restoration been effected, we shall find who Elias is and find there is no problem in harmonizing these apparently contradictory revelations. Who has restored all things? Was it one man? Certainly not. Many angelic ministrants have been sent from the courts of glory to confer keys and powers, to commit their dispensations and glories again to men on earth. At least the following have come: Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, Moses, Elijah, Elias, Gabriel, Raphael, and Michael. (D&C 13; 110; 128:19-21.) Since it is apparent that no one messenger has carried the whole burden of the restoration, but rather that each has come with a specific endowment from on high, it becomes clear that Elias is a composite personage. The expression must be understood to be a name and a title for those whose mission it was to commit keys and powers to men in this final dispensation. (Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 1, pp. 170-174.) [Mormon Doctrine, page 221; some italics added.]

In summary, then, Elias is the Greek translation of the Hebrew name Elijah and is used in the New Testament to designate Elijah, the prophet of the Old Testament. Elias is the name of another man, a prophet of whom we know little. And Elias is a title, meaning forerunner, or one who prepares the way.

Prophets "Ordinary" Men

It was about 875 years before Christ when the prophet Elijah first strode onto the stage of human history. He is introduced as simply, "Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead." (1 Kings 17:1.) Some scholars feel he may have been born in Tishbe, a place in Galilee, and that he later went to Gilead, beyond the Jordan, which was then a land of wilderness.

The few details we can glean from the record concerning Elijah's appearance, what he looks like, call up the word ordinary. It was true then, as it is true now, that the prophets were "ordinary men." Paul of Tarsus, the tent-maker, said it was true in his day, and he used words similar to those of James: "We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God." (Acts 14:15.)

Those references, and there are others we could cite, teach a lesson worth fixing in our minds. The prophets and the Apostles—for Apostles are prophets as well—are not uncommon men either in their backgrounds or in their physical appearance. They come from various walks of life. Some may be short of stature, others impressively tall, but in general appearance they are like other men.

It is said that we can learn much from history if we will move in our minds from the here and now to the then and there. We realize that the scenery and the costumes change somewhat, but beyond that everything is the same. Some of the past actors in the human drama held different titles, and the social structure of their day was not quite like ours today, but the feelings, the emotions, the relationships, the passions, and particularly the spiritual processes, were the same then as now.

Details mentioned about Elijah describe him in terms that are by no means uncommon. On one occasion the emissaries of the king reported that they had met a man and talked with him. Though they were not given a name, in reporting the encounter they described him as being "an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins." (2 Kings 1:8.) The king deduced from that that they had met Elijah. The description fits also the traditional image of John the Baptist (see Mark 1:6), who centuries later became a major participant in the early scenes of the New Testament.

As well as wearing a girdle of skin about his loins, Elijah wore a mantle, a very common article of clothing in that day. Generally it was simply a sheepskin. If rolled tightly, it would form something of a staff. In one moment of great emotion, when Elijah heard the still, small voice, he "wrapped his face in his mantle." (1 Kings 19:13.)

We could extract other details from the Old Testament, but none of them suggests that Elijah was uncommon in appearance, either in stature or in clothing.

I repeat this as a lesson worth learning: The prophets, as they walk and live among men, are common, ordinary men. Men called to apostolic positions are given a people to redeem. Theirs is the responsibility to lead those people in such a way that they win the battles of life and conquer the ordinary temptations and passions and challenges. And then, speaking figuratively, it is as though these prophets are tapped on the shoulder and reminded: "While you carry such responsibility to help others with their battles, you are not excused from your own challenges of life. You too will be subject to passions, temptations, challenges. Win those battles as best you can."

Some people are somehow dissatisfied to find in the leading servants of the Lord such ordinary mortals. They are disappointed that there is not some obvious mystery about those men; it is almost as if they are looking for the strange and the occult. To me, however, it is a great testimony that the prophets anciently and the prophets today are called out from the ranks of the ordinary men. It should not lessen our faith, for example, to learn that Elijah was discouraged at times, even despondent. (See 1 Kings 19:4.)

This calling forth of ordinary men for extraordinary purposes is as evident during the Savior's earthly mission as in former and later eras. Centuries after Elijah, when Christ called the Twelve, except for them all coming from the same nation they were so diverse that scholars have often commented on the difficulty of welding together into a united, motivated group such totally different individuals drawn from the ranks of the common folk.

Elijah Seals the Heavens

Elijah first appears in the court of Ahab, the king of Israel. "Ahab," the Old Testament tells us, "did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him." (1 Kings 16:33.)

Ahab had forsaken the faith of his fathers and had allowed the Northern Kingdom to adopt the worship of calves instead of the God Jehovah. And Ahab, "as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam" (1 Kings 16:31), married the daughter of the king of Zidon. Jezebel—a name that in modern times is a term used to describe a domineering, wicked woman—introduced into Israel the worship of the Phoenician god Baal. Baal was worshipped in high places, that is, clearings on high mountain tops. The worship of Baal is described by scholars as being festive and gay, and it is said that there were licentious and impure rites connected with it. Baal-worship turned away from the virtues of righteousness and goodness and humility to venerate power and mere strength.

Elijah condemned the wicked king, who had authority to correct all of this, and invoked the name of the Lord in sealing the heavens. "As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word."

Notice that he did not set some preliminary condition and say, "When you've done this or when you've done that, the rains will come again." He said that they would come only "according to my word." That declaration represents the fact that Elijah, who was a prophet and who was possessed of the authority of the priesthood, also was in possession of considerable power as well.

Elijah was warned to flee from the presence of the king. He went eastward and hid by the brook Cherith, and there the ravens fed him. Eventually the brook dried up. Thus Elijah himself was not immune from the trials the Lord had caused him to call forth upon the people by sealing the heavens so there would be no rain. This too illustrates a principle that members of the Church should consider. In later years the Lord counseled his disciples to stay in the world, even though they were to be not of the world. A life of righteousness does not necessarily lift from any soul the trials and difficulties, suffering and concerns of life. But the righteous do have some protection and blessings, and there is power working in their behalf.

It was the Lord who had warned Elijah to flee from Ahab, to preserve his life. And again "the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee."

This was the widow who was willing to share the last handful of meal from her barrel and the little oil from her cruse. She had intended to "dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die." But at Elijah's request she fed him first, "And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by Elijah." Later the widow's son was stricken with a sore sickness, and "there was not breath left in him." Through the power of the priesthood Elijah restored him to life. (1 Kings 17:1-24.)

Jezebel had caused Israel's prophets to be slain. The word prophet, here, might be understood in the light of what the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

If any person should ask me if I were a prophet, I should not deny it, as that would give me the lie; for, according to John, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; therefore, if I profess to be a witness or teacher, and have not the spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I must be a false witness; but if I be a true teacher and witness, I must possess the spirit of prophecy, and that constitutes a prophet; and any man who says he is a teacher or preacher of righteousness, and denies the spirit of prophecy, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; and by this key false teachers and impostors may be detected. (HC, 5:215-16.)

Obadiah, the governor in the house of Ahab, was a righteous man, and to preserve them from Jezebel he hid a hundred of the prophets in caves and supplied them with bread and water. Later, after the drouth had been plaguing the country for over three years, Obadiah finally found Elijah and arranged for a meeting with King Ahab. The king greeted Elijah with the question: "Art thou he that troubleth Israel?" And Elijah answered, "I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim."

Elijah asked Ahab to gather the people at Mount Carmel and to have the priests of Baal there also. When they were gathered, Elijah addressed the people. "How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a word."

Elijah challenged the priests of Baal to build a sacrificial altar and to place a bullock upon it, and then to have their god send down fire to consume the offering. All day long they tried, pleading and shouting to their god, leaping upon the altar, cutting themselves with knives and lancets, doing everything they could think of to cause the fire to descend. At noon Elijah mocked them. "Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked." But evening came, and neither voice nor fire had answered their exertions.

Now it was Elijah's turn. Using twelve stones he repaired the altar of the Lord which had been broken down, made a trench around it, and had it drenched three times with water. Then, at the time of the evening sacrifice, he called upon the Lord. Immediately fire came down and consumed the offering, the altar, and even the stones.

After that demonstration, the priests of Baal were taken to the brook Kishon and there slain.

Now Elijah went up to the top of Mount Carmel and sat on the ground with his face between his knees. In due time his servant reported that there was a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand. And then the rains came. (1 Kings 18:1-46.)

When Jezebel heard of her loss of the priests of Baal, she was furious. She vowed that Elijah would not live beyond the next day, and once again he fled. Again he was miraculously fed. Elijah hid in a cave to keep from being slain. He was discouraged. "I, even I only, am left," he said, "and they seek my life, to take it away."

The Voice of the Spirit

Then came an experience for Elijah that is a signal lesson for every Latter-day Saint. He was told to go and stand before the Lord upon the mountain. And there he witnessed a "great and strong wind" that rent the mountains and "brake in pieces the rocks."

"But the Lord was not in the wind."

Then came an earthquake. "But the Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire."

And then it happened! "After the fire [came] a still small voice." (1 Kings 19:1-12.)

That voice is described elsewhere in scripture:

And it came to pass when they heard this voice, and beheld that it was not a voice of thunder, neither was it a voice of a great tumultuous noise, but behold, it was a still voice of perfect mildness, as if it had been a whisper, and it did pierce even to the very soul. (Helaman 5:30.)

And it came to pass that while they were thus conversing one with another, they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven; and they cast their eyes round about, for they understood not the voice which they heard; and it was not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, and notwithstanding it being a small voice it did pierce them that did hear to the center, insomuch that there was no part of their frame that it did not cause to quake; yea, it did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn. (3 Nephi 11:3.)

Behold, thus saith the Lord unto the elders whom he hath called and chosen in these last days, by the voice of his Spirit. (D&C 52:1.)

We could come away from our study of Elijah with no more important lesson than to recognize how the Lord communicates with his children here upon the earth: through the still, small voice that is so difficult to describe to one who has never experienced it and is almost unnecessary to describe to one who has. That sweet, quiet voice of inspiration that comes more as a feeling than it does as a sound. That process through which pure intelligence can be spoken into the mind and we can know and understand and have witness of spiritual things. The process is not reserved for the prophets alone, but every righteous seeking soul who will qualify and make himself worthy can have that manner of communication, even as a gift.

In Elijah's interview he was told that he was not alone, that the Lord had left "seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him." (1 Kings 19:18.) Elijah also was instructed to anoint a new king over Syria and a new king over Israel. He was told who they were to be, and then he was told to find Elisha, the son of Shaphat, to be the prophet to succeed him.

Elijah's Prophecies Fulfilled, Successor Chosen

Elijah found Elisha plowing with twelve yoke of oxen—another demonstration that prophets come from the ranks of ordinary men. Elijah cast his mantle upon him, and Elisha followed him thereafter.

King Ahab and Queen Jezebel demonstrated their wickedness by causing Naboth to be slain in order that they could take possession of his vineyard. Through the promptings of the Spirit, news of this came to Elijah. He returned, and Ahab greeted him with these words: "Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?" And Elijah answered, "I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the Lord." (1 Kings 21:20.)

Elijah then pronounced upon Ahab a terrible penalty, for he said that he would "take away thy posterity." Naboth had been slain by a wall, and Elijah now prophesied to Ahab that the dogs would lick his blood in that self-same spot. And of the wicked queen he said, "The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel." (1 Kings 21:21, 23.)

Ahab repented for a short time, but the Old Testament carries the detailed account of the battles and of the wounding and of the death of Ahab, and describes how the chariot in which he was riding was washed at the pool of Samaria and his armor was washed, and the dogs licked the blood, and how all the detail of Elijah's prophecy was fulfilled, as was the prophecy concerning Jezebel.

Ahaziah succeeded Ahab as king and had confrontations with the prophet Elijah not dissimilar to those of his father. And the prophecies Elijah had pronounced upon Ahab and his posterity were fulfilled.

The time came when the ministry of Elijah in Israel was complete. Elijah knew that he soon would be taken, and when they were together Elijah said to Elisha, "Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me." (2 Kings 2:9.)

That request for a double portion of the spirit of Elijah provokes me to deep thought, for the spirit of Elijah, as we still may learn, is something so moving and so powerful, and something tied so closely to the most sacred authority of the priesthood, that obviously it would be glorious to be under the constant influence of even a part of that spirit, let alone a double portion.

Elijah was prompted to set a condition; for that portion, that double portion, was not, I believe, his to give. The answer to that appeal would be in the hands of the Lord, and Elijah simply replied that if Elisha should see him as he was taken, his request would be granted. "And Elisha saw it," for it happened that "as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven." (2 Kings 2:11-12.) The mantle fell from Elisha and he took up the one that had fallen from Elijah. He smote the waters of the Jordan and they parted, and he went over.

Elijah Translated

Elijah was truly remarkable. The prophecies he made, as recorded in the Old Testament, were fulfilled during his lifetime. We have no record of his making prophecies concerning these last days, as we do in the case of most of the Old Testament prophets—Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, Amos, and others—but we do have an account of what he did. In this he is quite like Moses. We have but little record of prophecies that Moses may have given concerning the last days or the ultimate fate of the earth. We know what he did in his lifetime.

Elijah and Moses were similar in another important respect. They were both translated—taken from the earth without experiencing mortal death. The Book of Mormon mentions Moses in connection with the departure of Alma: "The saying went abroad in the church that [Alma] was taken up by the Spirit, or buried by the hand of the Lord, even as Moses. But behold, the scriptures saith the Lord took Moses unto himself." (Alma 45:19.) There were things that both Elijah and Moses must pass on to others in the flesh in the generations that were still to come, and they would come back to earth to do that before experiencing the change from mortality to resurrected being.

The Prophet Joseph Smith had this to say about translated beings: "Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions." (HC, 4:425.)

On an earlier occasion he said:

Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead. (HC, 4:210.)

The recorded event requiring the later appearance of Elijah and Moses in the flesh as translated beings was the Savior's transfiguration on the mount. From President Joseph Fielding Smith we have this explanation.

When Moses and Elijah came to the Savior and to Peter, James and John upon the Mount, what was their coming for? Was it just some spiritual manifestation to strengthen these three apostles? Or did they come merely to give comfort unto the Son of God in his ministry and to prepare him for his crucifixion? No! That was not the purpose. I will read it to you. The Prophet Joseph Smith has explained it in the Church History, Vol. 3, 387, as follows:

"The priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses, and Elias [Elijah, in other words], gave the keys to Peter, James and John, on the Mount when they were transfigured before him. The Priesthood is everlasting—without beginning of days or end of years; without father, mother, etc.

If there is no change of ordinances, there is no change of Priesthood. Wherever the ordinances of the Gospel are administered, there is the Priesthood...."

From that we understand why Elijah and Moses were preserved from death—because they had a mission to perform, and it had to be performed before the crucifixion of the Son of God, and therefore it could not be done in the spirit. They had to have tangible bodies. Christ is the first fruits of the resurrection; therefore if any former prophet had a work to perform preparatory to the mission of the Son of God, or to the dispensation of the Meridian of Time, it was essential that they be preserved to fulfill that mission in the flesh. For that reason Moses disappeared from among the people and was taken up into the mountain, and the people thought he was buried by the Lord; the Lord preserved him, so that he could come at the proper time and restore his keys, on the heads of Peter, James and John, who stood at the head of the dispensation of the Meridian of Time. He reserved Elijah from death that he might also come and bestow his keys upon the heads of Peter, James and John and prepare them for their ministry. (Elijah, the Prophet and His Mission, pages 27-29.)

Malachi Prophesies Elijah's Return

Following the account of Elijah's being caught up, the name Elijah does not appear in the Old Testament again until the next to the last verse of the last chapter in that book. Four and a half centuries were to pass after Elijah's time before Malachi the prophet would speak.

Malachi's words concerning Elijah were few. But this prophecy represents the central theme of this book, for in the last verses of his message we begin to follow a golden thread that reaches to every Latter-day Saint—indeed, to every human soul.

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord:

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. (Malachi 4:5-6.)

When we consider the brevity of this last Old Testament reference to Elijah the extent of the traditions that are connected with it is remarkable.

The Old Testament closes there. In the King James version that closing is signified by the statement, "The End of the Prophets," a statement that is true only as it applies to completing the Old Testament records, because the ministry of Elijah was hardly begun.

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. (Malachi 4:5.)
