Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

10

Elijah to Return

The single reference in Malachi stating that Elijah would return was somehow reinforced with a fixed tradition that has lasted through the centuries. In the Jewish tradition there was a certain belief that he would appear again. He was expected. In the Talmud "he is recorded as having often appeared to wise and good rabbis-at a prayer, in the wilderness, or on their journeys -generally in the form of an Arabian merchant." (Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature, page 150.) At the circumcision of a child, a seat was always placed for Elijah. During certain prayers the door of the house was kept open, that Elijah might enter.

In the celebration of the Feast of the Passover, an extra place is set for Elijah. The tradition is observed even in our day.

The door is opened and the fourth and last cup of wine is filled. An additional cup, the Cup of Elijah the Prophet, is set on the table. The company rises as if to greet him. Elijah in Jewish tradition is the long expected messenger of the final redemption of mankind from all oppression. (Passover Haggadah, Christian Friends Bulletin of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, March 1954.)

At the dedication of the Orson Hyde Park in Jerusalem in 1979, Elder LeGrand Richards of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles had a conversation with the mayor of Jerusalem. Elder Richards told the mayor of having visited a synagogue that day and having observed a large armchair suspended from the ceiling above the altar. He had asked the rabbi what the chair was for. (He said he already knew what it was for, but that he asked the question to see if the modern-day rabbi still held to the tradition.) The rabbi informed him that the chair was for Elijah, and that upon Elijah's return it would be lowered from the ceding so that he might occupy it. Elder Richards then bore testimony to the mayor that the tradition was not only true but had been fulfilled.

Traditions About Elijah's Return

These and other traditions and references all center on the fact that Elijah would indeed return. There is something very significant about Elijah to the Jewish people.

Traditions about Elijah exist among the Muhammadans as well. For Elijah is said to have drunk of the fountain of life, "by virtue of which he still lives, and will live to the day of judgment." (Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature, page 150.)

Four hundred years after Malachi uttered his prophecy came the forerunner of the Savior's earthly ministry, John the Baptist. He came from Gilead, beyond the Jordan. There were some things characteristic of him that were reminiscent of Elijah. It was not surprising that the people should ask if he were Elijah. They expected Elijah to return.

John replied that he was not Elijah, nor was he the Messiah. He was later referred to as an Elias. This is in the frame of meaning mentioned earlier, a forerunner, or one who prepares the way. Although John the Baptist was not Elijah or Elias, he was like them in some ways. He was an Elias; a messenger, a forerunner.

In the Inspired Version of the Bible, the Prophet Joseph Smith translated Matthew 17, verses 10 to 14, in this way:

And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things, as the prophets have written.

And again I say unto you that Elias has come already, concerning whom it is written, Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; and they knew him not, and have done unto him, whatsoever they listed.

Likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them.

But I say unto you, Who is Elias? Behold, this is Elias, whom I send to prepare the way before me.

Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist, and also of another who should come and restore all things, as it is written by the prophets.

Elijah did come again in that day. Peter, James and John went up onto the mountain with the Lord and there He was transfigured before them. And then they saw, with the Lord, two personages whom they knew to be Moses and Elias (Elijah). It is significant indeed that these two ancient prophets who had so much in common, who held keys, whose ministries were of great moment to us, should appear together transfigured with the Lord.

This appearance, however, did not fulfill completely the prophecy of Malachi. The prophecy stated that Elijah would come before the great and dreadful day of the Lord should come, before the world should be burned as an oven, before all the proud and all that do wickedly should be burned up.

So the waiting was not over and the traditions were not fulfilled. We have evidence of this, for after the Crucifixion, in A.D. 34, the Lord appeared on the American continent. He ministered to the Nephites and taught them of the prophecy and tradition that Elijah would return. In the twenty-fourth chapter of 3 Nephi we find a record of the Lord dictating to them the words of Malachi, commanding them that they should write those words, and expounding the prophecies to them.

And it came to pass that he commanded them that they should write the words which the Father had given unto Malachi, which he should tell unto them. And it came to pass that after they were written he expounded them. And these are the words which he did tell unto them, saying: Thus said the Father unto Malachi. (3 Nephi 24:1.)

And He gave them the third and the fourth chapters of Malachi as they are contained in the King James Version of the Bible, concluding with the prophecy:

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord;

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. (3 Nephi 25:5-6.)

We have, then, these records concerning the return of Elijah:

Malachi the prophet had prophesied clearly, four hundred years before Christ, that Elijah would be sent before the great and dreadful day of the Lord came, and that his ministry would include the turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers.

When John the Baptist appeared on the scene, some thought him to be Elijah. When the Lord asked his disciples at Caesarea Philippi what people were saying about Him-"Whom do men say that I . . . am?"-the response was, "They think you are John the Baptist" [who by then was beheaded], or, "that you are Elias." (See Matthew 16:13-14.) Other references in the New Testament touch upon the subject.

And when the Lord appeared to the Nephites, He wove this thread-the coming of Elijah and the turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children and of the children to their fathers-into the fabric of their scripture.

In addition to scriptural records and inferences, the traditions of the Jews and those of the Muhammadans and some references in the Talmud kept very much alive the expectation that Elijah would return. In the Muhammadan tradition, Llyas is said to have drunk of the fountain of life, "by virtue of which he still lives, and will live to the day of judgment." He is, by some, confounded with St. George, and with the mysterious el-Khidr, one of the most remarkable of the Moslem saints. (See Lane's Arabian Nights, introduction, note 2; also Lane's Selections from Kuran, pages 221-22.)

But it does not end there. In both the Greek and the Latin churches, Elijah has been canonized. Among the Greeks he is the patron of elevated spots, and many mountains in Greece are called by his name. And in the early church there was a commemoration and a service for his day, observed on July 20, in both the Greek and the Latin churches. And in the Latin church the order of the Carmelites has celebrated Elijah as the founder of their order.

In modern-day Jerusalem, Temple Hill, or the Place of the Rock, is a religious shrine to Islam, to Christianity, and to Judaism. All three great religions hold tie to this place. All three, likewise, have a common thread in a tradition that Elijah the prophet would return.

The biblical scholars would wrestle with the question of Elijah the prophet and his return to the earth. Their common answer, which seemed to them the only possible one, was that he did return-on the Mount of Transfiguration. But, as mentioned before, that did not satisfy completely the prophecies of Malachi. Thus for centuries it was to remain an enigma.

The fulfillment of the prophecies concerning Elijah would await the Restoration.
