Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

PART III

The Power Restored

From window in the Salt Lake Temple

And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets—the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca county, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book! . . . The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times! And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times, and in divers places. . . . And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept. [^1]

So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. (Joseph Smith.)

11

The Morning Breaks

Elijah was to return "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." That very expression suggests the latter days of the earth. And it would be in the latter days, as Nebuchadnezzar's dream and the prophet Daniel's interpretation indicated, that the Lord would set up his kingdom for the last time. (See Daniel 2.)

The Lord made careful preparation for this event. After centuries of darkness and error, the gloom began to lift gradually as questioning minds and courageous hearts asserted themselves in the Reformation, which was to break the hold of Christendom's monopolistic church. Concurrently the newly discovered land of America was being colonized. Within two or three centuries, the yearnings for freedom affected every Western country, finding their greatest flowering in America and their sublimest written expression in the inspired Constitution of the United States of America. Now there was a new nation specifically founded in political, personal, and religious freedom. The time was ripe and the place was ready.

The First Vision

The Reformers had done well with their limited resources, but naturally the differing interpretations of their common authority-the Bible-produced disagreement and doctrinal diversity. When a religious revival hit the region of Manchester, New York, in the early nineteenth century, the clamor and contention of the various ministers left the fourteen-year-old Joseph Smith in confusion as to which church was right. He recorded:

While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture. (Joseph Smith-History: 11, 13; hereafter cited as JS-H.)

Thus it came that on a spring day in 1820 he knelt in prayer in the woods near his home to ask the crucial question-Which church is right? When he began to offer up his petition, the first thing that happened was that he was overwhelmed by a great power of darkness. He described this as not an imaginary force but the influence of a real being from the unseen world which had such marvelous power as he never before had felt in any being. So total was this power that he was about to abandon himself to it, when he, in a sense, turned a key of deliverance, for he called upon the name of the Lord. As soon as he had done-so a light descended; and as soon as the light was there, he was released from the power of darkness.

To me there has always been a lesson in that experience. While light and virtue and truth at times will not endure the presence of darkness and evil and will not, by choice, stay in their presence, ultimately the powers of darkness cannot endure the presence of light.

By analogy, this can be demonstrated to a degree with electricity. We are able to run a wire into a room and through a system of connections and switches turn on a light. The instant that happens, the darkness is gone. Some little of it may hide as shadows under the furniture; but, wherever the light can penetrate, the darkness must vanish.

In other words, we have the capacity to introduce light into a room; and, as we do, darkness must dissipate. I do not know of anyone who can do the opposite-that is, introduce such darkness into a room that light will vanish.

The ultimate power rests with the Lord and with His priesthood, with His servants. That idea should be an encouragement to members of the Church when they are intruded upon by forces that are evil and dark. Ultimately the power of light can hold them in abeyance.

Joseph Smith tells us:

When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other-This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! (JS-H: 17.)

From the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, the young Joseph received his answer: He was to join none of the existing churches because "they teach for doctrines the commandments of men." He was told that the fullness of the gospel would at some future time be made known to him.

The Gospel Restored

This glorious visitation was the first of many heavenly manifestations to the Prophet Joseph Smith. A few years later, in September 1823, in response to another fervent prayer he was visited by an angel, Moroni, who in four visits over a period of a few hours instructed him on the coming forth of the kingdom. In particular he told Joseph of the Book of Mormon plates hidden in the nearby Hill Cumorah and of his calling to translate them under direction of the Spirit. He received these plates four years later, in September 1827; and after many vicissitudes he completed the translation in June 1829.

That translation sparked another angelic ministration. As Joseph and his scribe, Oliver Cowdery, came across references to baptism in the plates, they wanted to know more about it. Inquiring of the Lord in prayer on the banks of the Susquehanna River near Harmony, Pennsylvania, on May 15, 1829, they were visited by the resurrected John the Baptist, who laid his hands on their heads and conferred upon them the Aaronic Priesthood, as follows:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. (D&C 13.)

Now they had authority to baptize-and under the angel's instruction they proceeded to baptize each other.

The two men had not long to wait for a further addition of priesthood authority, for a week or two later Peter, James, and John appeared to them and conferred upon them the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood including the holy apostleship. Thus ordained, they were now qualified to set up the kingdom of God on earth when the Lord should so direct them.

So it was that, on April 6, 1830, they gathered in the log house of Peter Whitmer, Senior, in Fayette, New York, and established the Church of Jesus Christ under divine direction. They prayed; they confirmed and bestowed the gift of the Holy Ghost upon those who had previously been baptized; they partook of the sacrament; and they ordained men to priesthood offices. There was a great outpouring of the Spirit, so that all rejoiced and some prophesied.

Others present at the meeting received baptism shortly after this, and from then on the new church grew continually. The great latter-day work had been launched, and none would be able to halt its progress.

There was more to be given. Much more. The Lord told Peter that he would build his church upon the rock of revelation, and that the gates of hell would not prevail against it. He said to Peter, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matthew 16:19; italics added.) The word will makes it clear that the Savior had not given those keys to Peter at the time he spoke. That would come in the future.

It was six days later that He took Peter, James, and John "up into an high mountain apart, and was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light. And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias [Elijah] talking with him." (Matthew 17:1-3.)

Peter proposed the building of three tabernacles-indicating that he sensed a visitation of that kind to be of the most sacred nature.

A bright cloud overshadowed them and they heard the voice of God the Father, Elohim, responding as He would later to Joseph in the grove: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." (Matthew 17:5.)

In 1830, much was yet to be given to Joseph and his followers. The most sacred of these additions were worthy of a "tabernacle" or a "temple."

That little band of followers was to grow. While yet but few in number, they began-in spite of trials in the extreme-to build, for the first time in the dispensation of the fullness of times, a holy temple.

For thou knowest that we have done this work through great tribulation; and out of our poverty we have given of our substance to build a house to thy name, that the son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his people. (D&C 109:5)

---
Notas:
[^1] (Words spoken by Moroni, the angel, to Joseph Smith the Prophet, while in his father's house at Manchester, New York, on the evening of September 21, 1823.)
