Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

12

A Place Prepared

Kirtland, Ohio, and the surrounding area occupies a prominent and honored position in the history of the Restoration.

Embarking on the first mission outside of the state of New York, Oliver Cowdery and the recently baptized Parley P. Pratt and two others proselyted the area in late 1830 on their way to Missouri. Many received baptism with gladness, among them future leaders Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge. In response to the Lord's commandment the body of the Saints from New York state moved there early in 1831, and it became the center of Church activity for about seven formative years until the end of 1837, when the center of Church activity moved to the Missouri settlements.

Many scenes that enrich our history, both inspiring and otherwise, were enacted in and around Kirtland. Here Joseph Smith produced his inspired translation of the Bible. Here the School of the Prophets met in an eleven-by-fourteen foot room above the Whitney store. In Hiram the Prophet was dragged from his bed by a mob and tarred and feathered. From Kirtland the Zion's Camp march set off on its thousand-mile trek to Missouri. Here the first Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was called and ordained and the Quorum of the Seventy was organized. And here apostasy took shape and spread with such power as to eventually compel the Prophet and other leaders to flee to Missouri.

An important measure of the contribution of the Kirtland period is the wealth of doctrine and instruction the Lord revealed there through the Prophet Joseph Smith. No less than sixty-five of the sections in our current Doctrine and Covenants were received in the Kirtland area, plus ten or eleven others received in other places during the Kirtland years. They include the revelation on health, known as the Word of Wisdom (section 89), two major revelations on priesthood (84 and 107), several on the temporal welfare of the Saints, the glorious truths of the "Olive Leaf" (88), and the magnificent vision of the three degrees of glory (76).

The Kirtland Temple

But Kirtland's most significant contribution to our present consideration is the house of the Lord the Saints built there out of their poverty and sacrifice-the Kirtland Temple. This was the first temple of the present dispensation. The command to build it came at the end of 1832:

Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God. (D&C 88:119.)

Verily I say unto you, it is my will that you should build a house. If you keep my commandments you shall have power to build it. (D&C 95:11.)

It appears that serious construction work on the temple began on June 5, 1833, when "George A. Smith hauled the first load of stone for the Temple, and Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon commenced digging the trench for the walls of the Lord's house, and finished the same with their own hands." (HC, 1:353.) The temple committee and others were soon busily occupied in obtaining stone, brick, lumber and other materials; funds were solicited; labor was donated for the construction; and the sisters provided food and clothes for the workers. The cost of the temple is estimated at $200,000, a very large sum in those days. Almost all of it was given at considerable sacrifice. At the last, many of the women donated precious china to be ground up and added to the surfaces of the stuccoed plaster walls to give them sparkle.

The design and construction of the Kirtland Temple was different from that of all other latter-day temples because its purpose was different. While already in 1836 certain ordinances had been introduced in a limited way which later would form part of the regular temple ordinances, the sacred ordinances and ceremonies performed in today's temples were not done in this first temple. The priesthood keys necessary for this work were yet to be restored. This temple was built as a holy place in which that restoration was to take place.

In addition this temple had another special but connected purpose. The sacrifice the Saints had made to build it, the spiritual power they had built in the process, and their continued ardent desires to do the Lord's will had fitted them for the spiritual manifestations which would "endow [them] with power from on high" (D&C 95:8). When the Saints were empowered by those manifestations, the missionaries would go forth with new zeal and success to spread the gospel, and their womenfolk at home would have the strength and endurance to match those efforts.

The main floor of the Kirtland Temple was basically a house of worship. The Saints met there for Sabbath services, general conferences of the Church, fast meetings (then held on the first Thursday of the month), and so on.

There were other refinements, to take account of the special nature of this building. At both the east and west ends of the main floor were three ascending rows of three pulpits, one row behind the other, the Melchizedek Priesthood pulpits at one end and Aaronic Priesthood pulpits at the other. The seats in the hall were reversible, so that the audience could face either way. Further, white canvas curtains (referred to as veils) could be dropped which divided the room into four areas for separate meetings as desired. All this was in accord with the Lord's instructions to Joseph Smith.

And let the lower part of the inner court be dedicated unto me for your sacrament offering, and for your preaching, and your fasting, and your praying, and the offering up of your most holy desires unto me, saith your Lord. (D&C 95:16.)

It was following a sacrament meeting that the glorious event for which the building was erected took place. Fittingly it occurred on a Sunday.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber. (D&C 110:2.)
