Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

13

"We Saw the Lord...."

The day of the returning came! It was on a Sunday afternoon, April 3, 1836. A sacrament meeting had been held in the Kirtland Temple. The first temple of this dispensation was not like those to be built later. It was not arranged to accommodate the sacred ordinances that would be revealed once the temple had been dedicated. The Saints had extended themselves and sacrificed to build a temple, without fully comprehending the monumental contribution they were making to the history of mankind. They built to the extent of the light and knowledge that had been given to them at that point. Another line, another precept, and they had provided a building sufficient for the restoration of those keys which, when held, would open the heavens so that the revelations on the sacred ordinances might be poured out upon them.

The temple had been dedicated, the solemn assemblies had been held, the faithful had attended in numbers beyond expectation. The Saints perhaps approached the spring of 1836 as though events of sufficient power and inspiration had already been poured out upon them to last through the years ahead. But there was more to come, much more.

The Prophet described that afternoon, April 3, 1836, in these simple terms:

In the afternoon, I assisted the other Presidents in distributing the Lord's Supper to the Church, receiving it from the Twelve, whose privilege it was to officiate at the sacred desk this day. After having performed this service to my brethren, I retired to the pulpit, the veils being dropped, and bowed myself, with Oliver Cowdery, in solemn and silent prayer. (HC, 2:435.)

The Savior Introduces Three Heavenly Beings

From the previous description of the temple we can visualize the veils having been dropped to cover the end of the large room where the pulpits of the Melchizedek Priesthood stand. Joseph and Oliver were behind the veil, separated in privacy from any others who may have been in the building. They completed their "solemn and silent prayer." The Prophet recorded, "After rising from prayer, the following vision was opened to both of us." (D&C 110, introduction.)

I remind you that they were standing in full capacity, alert and present, when these remarkable events unfolded in such a succession that as one glorious vision faded, another burst upon them. All of this is described in the sixteen short verses of section 110 of the Doctrine and Covenants as follows:

The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our understanding were opened.

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father.

Behold, your sins are forgiven you; you are clean before me; therefore, lift up your heads and rejoice.

Let the hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name.

For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house.

Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak unto them with mine own voice, if my people will keep my commandments, and do not pollute this holy house.

Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house.

And the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands; and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured out upon the heads of my people. Even so. Amen.

After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto us; and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.

After this, Elias appeared and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.

After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us; for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting death, stood before us, and said:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi-testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come-

To turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse-

Therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors.

And so it had happened. Elijah had returned. Or we might say it had happened again. For, as we have related, some eighteen hundred years previously Moses had appeared with Elijah on the Mount of Transfiguration. They had conveyed the keys of the priesthood to Peter, James, and John. The Lord Himself had made the introduction, as he now had in the Kirtland Temple.

President Joseph Fielding Smith commented on the coincident observance by the Jews on this day:

It was, I am informed, on the third day of April, 1836, that the Jews, in their homes at the Paschal feast, opened their doors for Elijah to enter. On that very day Elijah did enter-not in the home of the Jews to partake of the Passover with them-but he appeared in the house of the Lord, erected to his name and received by the Lord in Kirtland, and there bestowed his keys to bring to pass the very thing for which these Jews, assembled in their homes, were seeking. (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:101.)

Now, once again the Lord Himself appears, leaving no doubt as to His identity. "I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father."

What would it be worth to have announced to you, as was announced to Joseph and Oliver on this occasion, "Behold, your sins are forgiven you; you are clean before me; therefore, lift up your heads and rejoice"?

The rejoicing the Lord referred to was extended beyond those two brethren to His people in the thousands and tens of thousands who would rejoice in consequence of what would be accomplished that Sabbath day.

"Yea the hearts of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this house." Consider these other references to endowment, or the conferring of spiritual power: D&C 38:32, 38; 39:15; 43:16; and 95:8-9.

At this time the Lord prophesied that the "fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands." (D&C 110:10.) That, under the circumstances then existing, was at best improbable. The Church members were but a handful of Saints living and scattered in the rural areas of a new land. But despite the persecution and struggles and trials of those early days, there are congregations now spread literally across the world, and tens of thousands of missionaries bear witness at every door where they are welcome.

Significance of Elijah's Return

As provoking to scholars as the prophecy was that Elijah would return, an even greater mystery to them concerns what Malachi said Elijah was to do, and what would take place if he did not in fact return. "And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." (Malachi 4:6.)

What does it mean to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to their fathers? Why should that be so significant that, if it failed to be brought about, the Lord would "smite the earth with a curse"?

Those verses have intrigued the clergymen and scholars for centuries. They have not known where to turn to find the answer.

The answer came when the dispensation of the fulness of times was ushered in.

We can turn back to the history of the Prophet. During the three and a half years following the First Vision he experienced a testing, a tempering, a preparation. And then, on September 21, 1823, he sought the Lord in fervent prayer. He was in his small bedroom in the modest farm home in rural Palmyra, New York. He opened the record of this experience with these words:

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor. (JS-H: 30.)

The angel introduced himself by name. He was Moroni, who had lived anciently on the American continent. He told Joseph Smith of a work that Joseph was to do, and of the existence of the Book of Mormon plates and the Urim and Thummim, and he showed him where they were.

The angel Moroni then commenced quoting prophecies from the Old Testament.

He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus:For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. (JS-H: 36-39.)

He quoted also the eleventh chapter of Isaiah and the third chapter of Acts, the twenty-second and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in the New Testament. He told Joseph Smith that Christ was the prophet referred to, "but the day had not yet come when 'they who would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the people,' but soon would come." (JS-H: 40.)

he angel also quoted Joel, the second chapter, verses 28 through 32. And then, the Prophet tells us, "he quoted many other passages of scripture, and offered many explanations which cannot be mentioned here." (JS-H: 41.)

The statement of Malachi concerning Elijah was treated differently from all the others given him on that occasion. It was separated out, considered of unique importance, and registered in a way different from all the rest. The Prophet did not, perhaps, understand the full significance of Moroni repeating the prophecy of the coming of Elijah. It was to be thirteen years later that the next major chapter would open in this thread of scriptural and doctrinal history, and nearly twenty years would pass before the revelations would come which would give a greatly expanded explanation.

Section 2 of the Doctrine and Covenants is the Moroni rendering of Elijah's prophesied coming.

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers.

If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. (D&C 2:1-3.)

There seems to have been guidance in the selection and placement of that quotation as a section in the Doctrine and Covenants. Other references that Moroni quoted, from Isaiah or Joel or Acts or the "many other passages of scripture," were not thus honored.Revelation Continuous

Revelation is a continuous principle in the Church. In one sense the Church is still being organized. As light and knowledge are given, as prophecies are fulfilled and more intelligence is received, another step forward can be taken. Consider this illustration:

When a contractor is to construct a building, he has beforehand, for careful study and then for bidding, the plans and specifications. It is common procedure for these to be complete in great detail. They show the elevation, or the drawing of the building, to indicate how it will appear from the front, and the sides, and the back. Not infrequently a colored elevation or painting of the building also is available to the contractor. He can then see how the architect envisions the building will look when it is completed. The plans are carefully and minutely drawn, with details included, as careful drawings or as symbols, for electrical outlets, parts of the plumbing and heating systems, etc. And then the book of specifications (which on a large building can be a heavy volume) also gives descriptions in detail of the kinds of material to be used, all that the architect and the owner will require of the contractor. With these details before him, the contractor then can see the end from the beginning, as it were. He can see the building as a whole, or can search out any detail of it to know what is expected of him.

This is not so with the prophets. When the Lord called Joseph Smith, He gave him line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little. Step by step Joseph was led with revelations and direction. Ordinarily these came in answer to inquiries by the Prophet. They came as answers to prayers. The First Vision was in response to a fervent prayer on the part of the boy prophet.

The theme that is more prominent in the scriptures perhaps than any other one is given in the Savior's words: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for everyone that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." (Matthew 7:7-8.) It is said in more ways in holy writ than almost any other message. "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." (Revelation 3:20.)

It was in response to the asking that Joseph Smith the Prophet received each line of the plans for the Church, each detail and each specification. Nor was it fully revealed in his lifetime. Nor has it been yet. The Restoration continues.

President Wilford Woodruff said: "The Church of God could not live twenty-four hours without revelation." (The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, ed. G. Homer Durham [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], page 61.) Speaking on the subject of redemption for the dead, he plainly said:

I want to say, as the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that we should now go on and progress. We have not got through revelation. We have not got through the work of God. But at this period we want to go on and fulfill this commandment of God given through Malachi-that the Lord should send Elijah the prophet, "and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." Ye sons of men, I say unto you, in the name of Israel's God, those very principles that God has revealed are what have stayed the judgment of the Almighty on the earth. Were it not for these principles, you and I would not be here today. We have had prophets and apostles. President Young who followed President Joseph Smith, led us here. He organized these Temples and carried out the purposes of his calling and office. He laid the foundation of this great Temple on this block, as well as others in the mountains of Israel. What for? That we might carry out these principles of redemption for the dead. He accomplished all that God required at his hands. But he did not receive all the revelations that belong to this work; neither did President Taylor, nor has Wilford Woodruff. There will be no end to this work until it is perfected. ("The Law of Adoption," The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 13 [October 1922]: 147-48; italics added.)

In our day there has been a marvelous outpouring of revelations, setting in order this matter or that, and showing the way ahead as the fulness of the everlasting gospel is progressively restored to the earth.The Turning of the Hearts

Elijah would return. Why? If that turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to the fathers were not accomplished, the Lord would "smite the earth with a curse," as the King James Version of the Old Testament says, or "the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming," as Moroni quoted it to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

We will follow that theme of the turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to the fathers, for it emerges again and again in the revelations. It draws us toward the day of transcendent importance when Elijah did at last appear.

The next recorded angelic appearance to follow Moroni's visits came in August of 1830. Four months after the Church was organized, the Prophet Joseph Smith was making arrangements for a meeting at which the sacrament was to be administered. When he went to procure the bread and wine he was met by a heavenly messenger from whom he received a commandment that he should "not purchase wine neither strong drink of your enemies." (D&C 27:3.) He learned that "it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory -remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins." (D&C 27:2.)

These words began section 27 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The following month, in September, the Prophet received the balance of that section. It speaks of Moroni having come to reveal the Book of Mormon. It tells of "Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days." (D&C 27:6.) It tells of John the Baptist, who had been sent as an Elias.

And also John the son of Zacharias, which Zacharias he (Elias) visited and gave promise that he should have a son, and his name should be John, and he should be filled with the spirit of Elias;Which John I have sent unto you, my servants, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery, to ordain you unto the first priesthood which you have received, that you might be called and ordained even as Aaron. (D&C 27:7-8.)

And then this golden thread again appears:

And also Elijah, unto whom I have committed the keys of the power of turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, that the whole earth may not be smitten with a curse. (D&C 27:9.)

Elijah would return, and he would turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers; and again comes the statement which carries some prophetic hope that, if this could be accomplished, "the whole earth may not be smitten with a curse."President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "Why would the earth be wasted? Simply because if there is not a welding link between the fathers and the children-which is the work for the dead-then we will all stand rejected; the whole work of God will fail and be utterly wasted. Such a condition, of course, shall not be." (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:122.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing; but the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. "And I will send Elijah the Prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord," etc., etc. Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness. (HC, 4:211; italics added.)

It happened! This signal event went unheeded by the world, but it would influence the destiny of every soul who has ever lived or will live. Things began quietly to happen. The Church became a temple-building church.In the world there emerged here and there, in a way thought to be spontaneous, people and organizations and societies interested in tracing genealogies. This has all taken place since the appearance of Elijah in the Kirtland Temple. I quote from President Joseph Fielding Smith:

Before the year 1836 there was very little, if any, research being made anywhere in this world in behalf of the dead. It is true that here and there some man may have been searching out a genealogical record, but what was his object? To prove title to some estate.

There were no genealogical societies; them were no genealogical organizations; there were no genealogical researches of any systematic character anywhere in the world....

. . . One year after this revelation was given and these keys were bestowed, we find in Great Britain the government passing laws compelling the preservation of duplicate records of the dead on the part of those who kept them....

In the year 1844, the year of the martyrdom, the first organization for the purpose of gathering together the records of the dead, and compiling genealogical records, was formed in the city of Boston. It was the New England Historical and Genealogical Society. In 1869, in the city of New York, another society, the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society, was organized.

Since that day societies have sprung up all over the land.... The hearts of the children have since that day turned to their fathers, and they are searching out the records of their dead....

In the year 1902 the Legislature of the State of Massachusetts passed a measure providing for the compiling of the vital records of all the towns of the state, from their settlement down to the year 1850, and the genealogical organizations have the privilege of making these compilations....Following this the people in Rhode Island, and I understood also Connecticut and other states, have followed the lead of Massachusetts and are providing for the publication of the vital records of all towns in those states, from the beginning to the year 1850....

In Great Britain, genealogical societies have been organized in practically every county in that land and in Scotland. These records have been kept and filed also in other countries in Europe, the countries from which the Latter-day Saints have come. The spirit has taken hold of the people, not only in the Church, but also of many who are not of the Church, and they too are searching the records, and compiling them, of the dead. (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:124-26).

From that very day, April 3, 1836, the hearts of the children began to turn to their fathers.

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion. (D&C 132:8)
