Boyd K. Packer, Holy Temple ( 1980)

14

All Done in Order

Following the dramatic events at the Kirtland Temple, difficulties and persecutions required that the Saints move. Wherever they located, they made plans to build a temple. This was true in both Independence and Far West, Missouri. In this period persecution fell upon the Saints with unprecedented rage and eventually they fled to Nauvoo, Illinois. Here the revelation came again and the commandment to build a house of the Lord. The Lord gave the reason "for there is not a place found on the earth that he may come to and restore again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the fulness of the priesthood." (D&C 124:28.)

In describing some of the work that would be accomplished in the temple He further said, "for therein are the keys of the holy priesthood ordained, that you may receive honor and glory." (D&C 124:34.)

The Lord explained that the purpose of the building of the house was to reveal the ordinances. "And verily I say unto you, let this house be built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein unto my people. For I deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times." (D&C 124:40-41.)

He had mentioned that the temple would be a place for them to conduct "your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices by the sons of Levi, and for your oracles in your most holy places wherein you receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, . . . by the ordinance of my holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name." (D&C 124:39.)Order, Ordain, Ordinance

To explain something of the significance of the ordinances I begin with the Third Article of Faith. This states: "We believe that through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel."

The word ordinance means, "a religious or ceremonial observance"; "an established rite."The Oxford English Dictionary (Oxford, England, 1970) gives as the first definition of the word order, "arrangement in ranks or rows," and as the second definition, "arrangement in sequence or proper relative position." At first glance that may not strike a person as having much religious significance, but indeed it has.

Among the ordinances we perform in the Church are these: baptism, sacrament, naming and blessing of infants, administering to the sick, setting apart to callings in the Church, ordaining to offices. In addition there are higher ordinances, performed in the temples. These include washings, anointings, the endowment, and the sealing ordinance, spoken of generally as temple marriage.The word ordinance comes from the word order, which means, "a rank, a row, a series." The word order appears frequently in the scriptures. Some examples are: ". . . established the order of the Church" (Alma 8:1);" . . . all things should be restored to their proper order" (Alma 41:2);" . . . all things may be done in order" (D&C 20:68); "mine house is a house of order" (D&C 132:8). Mormon even defined depravity as being "without order" (Moroni 9:18).

The word ordain, a close relative to the other two words, has, as its first definition, "to put in order, arrange, make ready, prepare"; also, "to appoint or admit to the ministry of the Christian church. . . by the laying on of hands or other symbolic action."From all of this dictionary work there comes the impression that an ordinance, to be valid, must be done in proper order.

Order, Ordain, Ordinance

Order—To put in ranks or rows, in proper sequence or relationship.

Ordain—The process of putting things in rows of proper relationship.

Ordinance—The ceremony by which things are put in proper order.Authorized Gospel Ordinances Crucial

Now, what about the ordinances of the gospel? How important are they to us as members of the Church?

Can you be happy, can you be redeemed, can you be exalted without them? Answer: They are more than advisable or desirable, or even than necessary. More even than essential or vital. They are crucial to each of us.

We learn from the revelations:

And this greater [Melchizedek] priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God.Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh. (D&C 84:19-21; italics added.)

This chapter is not intended as a merely theoretical discussion. Rather I address it directly to you, the reader, with the intent, if I can, to induce in your mind and heart so serious an interest in the ordinances of the gospel that, if you have not yet received them, you will seek to qualify for each of the ordinances in proper sequence and to make and keep the covenants that are connected with each of them. If you have already received the ordinances, I hope these words stimulate within you a new resolve to observe strictly the covenants they embody. Make sure, in other words, that valid ordinances become a part of your life; that everything in this regard, for you, is in proper order.

Consider this illustration: Suppose that an agent comes to you offering a big bargain on insurance. He claims that his policy offers complete protection. He talks of generous coverage, very low premiums, no penalties for making a claim-even a heavy claim. Other features too make the policy look better than any you have considered before.

You are impressed by the insurance company the salesman names. You have heard of it as being completely reputable. As you study the policy your interest grows, for you find that it offers more to you, with less required of you, than any policy you have considered before.

Now you check carefully on the company and come away satisfied that they are reputable indeed. They do stand behind their policies. Some of your friends have dealt with them for years, and have always been satisfied. It appears, then, that you have found a real bargain. So you start paying premiums and you receive the completed policy.

But in this imaginary account there is one thing that you did not discover-there is, in fact, a hitch. The snag is that this salesman was never hired by that company. They have not authorized him to represent them. The company is not aware that he is using their name. He obtained copies of the policy and letterhead and adjusted the policy to give it wider appeal. He had some forms and letterheads printed and set himself up in business.

When he writes a policy and collects the premiums, they do not go to the head office. His copy of the policy goes into a drawer somewhere, the premium money into his pocket. Chances are, he figures, there will be no claim against the policy anyway-at least not while he is around. Since it is life insurance, certainly there will be no claim while the insured person is around. As the expression goes, you have been sold a bill of goods.

Meanwhile, you are comfortable with the thought that you are well insured. You feel content and suppose that, when the day comes, as it surely will, your claim will be paid. Too bad for you! Obviously the company will reject the claim. They cannot be compelled to honor policies except those written by authorized agents whom they have hired and certified. No matter how convinced you were that this man was a bona fide agent, he was not, and none of his agreements made in the company's name are valid.

Will you get sympathy? Yes. Full value of the policy? Not a chance! Would you not receive anything? Well, perhaps a little. As long as you didn't know the difference, you had the peace of mind for that period of time when you thought you were well insured-for whatever that is worth.

My wife has an aged aunt. She was one of fourteen children. Perhaps seventy-five years ago Millicent, in Brigham City, Utah, took her little brothers and sisters to town to see the Peach Days Parade.

With wonder and excitement they walked the long way to town. They hadn't been there long when a horse-drawn water wagon came along, sprinkling the streets to settle the dust. They watched it in awe; and when it had passed they went home, very impressed. They thought the parade was over. They were quite satisfied, until a year later they learned the difference.

If you had been sold the insurance policy we talked about, you too might be satisfied, even complacent, thinking you were well insured. What a shock when you discovered the truth! Somewhere in later conversations would come the sermon: "You ought to have been more careful about where you put your trust. You should have checked more carefully."

Now let me apply this illustration to the ordinances of the gospel.

With these ordinances there are no discounts. There is no credit buying. Nothing is ever put on sale at special reduced prices. There is never something for nothing. There is no such thing as a "bargain." You pay full value. Requirements and covenants are involved. And in due time you will get full value. But to obtain this full value you must, positively must, deal with an authorized agent.

Let me quote this meaningful scripture from section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants:

And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law are these: All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations, that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all eternity, and that too most holy, by revelation and commandment through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead; for all contracts that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead.

Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment-that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord.

And everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be, that are not by me or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God.For whatsoever things remain are by me; and whatsoever things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed. (D&C 132:7-14; italics added.)

That scripture is very clear. He will not, "saith the Lord," accept of an offering that is not made in His name. Nor will He receive at our hands that which He has not appointed. And things that are "ordained of men . . . shall not remain . . . in nor after the resurrection."

With these solemn words in mind, each Latter-day Saint needs to take inventory of his spiritual progress, and to ask himself the questions: Is my life in order? Do I have all of the ordinances of the gospel that I should possess by this time in my life? Are they valid?

If you can answer these questions affirmatively, and if the ordinances come under the influence of the sealing power and authority, they will remain intact eternally. In that case your life, to this point, is in proper order. You then would do well to think of your family, living and dead, with the same questions in mind.

Limits to Delegated Authority

Now I make another comparison as I explain something that is understood by relatively few. It is common in the world for institutions to delegate authority and at once strictly limit the extent of what is being delegated. For instance, in a branch bank the manager may have authorization to make loans up to a certain amount. If someone requests a loan larger than that amount, then a supervisor must approve it. For even larger amounts the regulations of the bank may require that only the president and chief executive officer himself may approve the loan.

If a commitment for a loan is made by a branch manager within the policy, the bank will honor it, even though that manager may later quit and go to work for a competing bank.

On one occasion I attended a meeting of the board of directors of a corporation. The board decided to give a certain employee authority to commit the company on some important matters. A motion was passed to this effect. One director then observed that a motion was not enough; it should have been a resolution, a formal one duly entered in the minutes. So the motion was replaced by a resolution, because delegating authority is serious business.

The practice of delegating authority, and at once limiting it, is so commonly demonstrated in business and education, in government, in cultural organizations, that we should not have difficulty in understanding that principle in the Church.

A missionary is given authority to teach and to baptize. Given certain approval, he can ordain someone to a priesthood office. If he is an elder, however, he cannot ordain someone to be a seventy or a high priest, for his authority is limited. Similarly, a bishop can call and release within the limits of his jurisdiction. But he could not, for instance, set apart a stake high councilor. Likewise a stake president can set apart a stake high councilor, but he cannot ordain a patriarch.

Those who hold the Aaronic Priesthood, or the preparatory priesthood, hold the authority, when specifically directed, to perform those ordinances that belong to that priesthood. They can baptize. They can bless the sacrament and perform every service relating to the lesser priesthood. They cannot confirm someone a member of the Church, however, for that takes a higher authority.

On the same principle, those who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood can perform the ordinances relating to the higher priesthood.

But unless they are given special authorization they cannot endow, nor seal, nor perform those ordinances that pertain to the temple. There are limits.

I heard President Kimball say on one occasion, as other Presidents of the Church have said, that, while he holds all of the keys that are held upon the earth, there are keys that he does not hold. There are keys that have not been given to him as President of the Church, because they are reserved to higher power and authority. For instance, he said that he does not hold the keys of the resurrection. The Lord holds them, but He has not delegated them-neither anciently, nor to modern prophets. President Kimball mentioned also the authority to command the elements, to walk on the water. The Lord has this power, but He has not given it to mortals, although there are times when righteous men have been inspired to command the forces of nature and have been obeyed.

Authority for All Ordinances

Nevertheless, in the Church we hold sufficient authority to perform all of the ordinances necessary to redeem and to exalt the whole human family. And, because we have the keys to the sealing power, what we bind in proper order here will be bound in heaven. Those keys-the keys to seal and bind on earth, and have it bound in heaven-represent the consummate gift from our God. With that authority we can baptize and bless, we can endow and seal, and the Lord will honor our commitments.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said he was frequently asked the question

"Can we not be saved without going through with all those ordinances, etc.?" I would answer, No, not the fullness of salvation. Jesus said, "There are many mansions in my Father's house, and I will go and prepare a place for you. House here named should have been translated kingdom; and any person who is exalted to the highest mansion has to abide a celestial law, and the whole law too. (HC, 6:184.)

On another occasion, talking on the same subject, he said:

There are mansions for those who obey a celestial law, and there are other mansions for those who come short of the law, every man in his own order. There is baptism, etc., for those to exercise who are alive, and baptism for the dead who die without the knowledge of the Gospel.

I am going on in my progress for eternal life. It is not only necessary that you should be baptized for your dead, but you will have to go through all the ordinances for them, the same as you have gone through to save yourselves. . . . Oh! I beseech you to go forward, go forward and make your calling and your election sure. (HC, 6:365.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

I do not care what office you hold in this Church, you may be an apostle, you may be a patriarch, a high priest, or anything else, and you cannot receive the fulness of the priesthood unless you go into the temple of the Lord and receive these ordinances of which the prophet speaks. No man can get the fulness of the priesthood outside of the temple of the Lord.

He then said that there was a time when the Saints were unable to construct temples, when there was no house prepared in which to receive the ordinances, particularly when the persecutions were intense.

But now we have got temples, and you cannot get these blessings on the mountaintops, you will have to go into the house of the Lord, and you cannot get the fulness of the priesthood unless you go there. Do not think that because anybody has a higher office in the church than you have, that you are barred from blessings, because you can go into the temple of the Lord and get all the blessings there are that have been revealed, if you are faithful, have them sealed upon you as an elder in this Church, and then you have all that any man can get. There have to be offices in the Church, and we are not all called to the same calling, but you can get the fulness of the priesthood in the temple of the Lord. (Elijah, the Prophet and His Mission, pages 46-47.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith stated, "If there is no change of ordinance, there is no change of priesthood. Wherever the ordinances of the gospel are administered, there is the priesthood." (Elijah, the Prophet and His Mission, page 28.)

The Temple Ordinances

As mentioned previously, the ordinances of the temple include baptism, ordinations, endowments, marriages, and other sealing ordinances. I said earlier that in this book we would not discuss the ceremonies and ordinances of the temple beyond that which has previously been published by the Church. I include here a brief summary of the information that is available in print with reference to the temple ordinances.

To endow is to enrich, to give to another something long lasting and of much worth. The temple endowment ordinances enrich in three ways: (a) The one receiving the ordinance is given power from God. "Recipients are endowed with power from on high." (b) A recipient is also endowed with information and knowledge. "They receive an education relative to the Lord's purposes and plans." (Mormon Doctrine, page 227.) (c) When sealed at the altar a person is the recipient of glorious blessings, powers, and honors as part of his endowment.

There are two published definitions or descriptions of the endowment, the first by President Brigham Young:

Let me give you a definition in brief. Your endowment is to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being able to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell. (Discourses of Brigham Young, comp. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971], page 637.)

Elder James E. Talmage described the endowment thus:

The Temple Endowment, as administered in modern temples, comprises instruction relating to the significance and sequence of past dispensations, and the importance of the present as the greatest and grandest era in human history. This course of instruction includes a recital of the most prominent events of the creative period, the condition of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, their disobedience and consequent expulsion from that blissful abode, their condition in the lone and dreary world when doomed to live by labor and sweat, the plan of redemption by which the great transgression may be atoned, the period of the great apostasy, the restoration of the Gospel with all its ancient powers and privileges, the absolute and indispensable condition of personal purity and devotion to the right in present life, and a strict compliance with Gospel requirements. (The House of the Lord, pages 99-100.)

This statement from Brother Talmage makes it clear that when you receive your endowments you will receive instruction relative to the purpose and plans of the Lord in creating and peopling the earth. You will be taught what must be done for you to gain exaltation.

The Lord chastened the people for their hesitation in building the temple in Kirtland and said: "Yea, verily I say unto you, I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high; for this is the promise of the Father unto you." (D&C 95:8-9.)

The blessing of the endowment is required for full exaltation. Every Latter-day Saint should seek to be worthy of this blessing and to obtain it.

The ordinances of washing and anointing are referred to often in the temple as initiatory ordinances. It will be sufficient for our purposes to say only the following: Associated with the endowment are washings and anointings-mostly symbolic in nature, but promising definite, immediate blessings as well as future blessings. Concerning these ordinances the Lord has said: "I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?." (D&C 124:37.)

And again: "I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings . . . are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house." (D&C 124:39.)

In connection with these ordinances, in the temple you will be officially clothed in the garment and promised marvelous blessings in connection with it. It is important that you listen carefully as these ordinances are administered and that you try to remember the blessings promised and the conditions upon which they will be realized.

The sealing ordinance is that ordinance which binds families eternally. Temple marriage is a sealing ordinance. When a couple is sealed in the temple following a civil marriage the children born to them previous to that time, and therefore not born in the covenant, are sealed to them in a brief and sacred ordinance.

I have always been impressed that the ordinances of the temple are reverently and carefully administered. They are not complicated or extravagant, but are typical of the simplicity of the principles of the gospel.

Please be certain that your life is in complete order. This only comes from receiving your temple blessings, your ordinances, for "in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest." (D&C 84:20.)

Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests and an holy nation. (Exodus 19:5-6)
